- MARKET ACCESS CHALLENGES IN CHINA
[Senate Hearing 115-624]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-624
MARKET ACCESS CHALLENGES IN CHINA
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE, CUSTOMS, AND GLOBAL
COMPETITIVENESS
of the
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
APRIL 11, 2018
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the Committee on Finance
_________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-645 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
ORRIN G. HATCH, Utah, Chairman
CHUCK GRASSLEY, Iowa
RON WYDEN, Oregon
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
BILL NELSON, Florida
JOHN CORNYN, Texas
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
JOHN THUNE, South Dakota
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
RICHARD BURR, North Carolina
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
JOHNNY ISAKSON, Georgia
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
MICHAEL F. BENNET, Colorado
PATRICK J. TOOMEY, Pennsylvania
ROBERT P. CASEY, Jr., Pennsylvania
DEAN HELLER, Nevada
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
CLAIRE McCASKILL, Missouri
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
A. Jay Khosla, Staff Director
Joshua Sheinkman, Democratic Staff Director
______
Subcommittee on International Trade,
Customs, and Global Competitiveness
JOHN CORNYN, Texas, Chairman
CHUCK GRASSLEY, Iowa
ROBERT P. CASEY, Jr., Pennsylvania
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
JOHNNY ISAKSON, Georgia
BILL NELSON, Florida
JOHN THUNE, South Dakota
CLAIRE McCASKILL, Missouri
DEAN HELLER, Nevada
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Cornyn, Hon. John, a U.S. Senator from Texas, chairman,
Subcommittee on International Trade, Customs, and Global
Competitiveness, Committee on Finance..........................
1
Casey, Hon. Robert P., Jr., a U.S. Senator from Pennsylvania.....
3
WITNESSES
Garfield, Dean, president and CEO, Information Technology
Industry Council, Washington, DC...............................
5
Bliss, Christine, president, Coalition of Services Industries,
Washington, DC.................................................
6
Dempsey, Linda Menghetti, vice president, international economic
affairs, National Association of Manufacturers, Washington, DC.
8
Lee, Thea M., president, Economic Policy Institute, Washington,
DC.............................................................
10
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL
Bliss, Christine:
Testimony....................................................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
29
Casey, Hon. Robert P., Jr.:
Opening statement............................................
3
Prepared statement...........................................
34
Cornyn, Hon. John:
Opening statement............................................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
35
Dempsey, Linda Menghetti:
Testimony....................................................
8
Prepared statement...........................................
37
Garfield, Dean:
Testimony....................................................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
42
Lee, Thea M.:
Testimony....................................................
10
Prepared statement...........................................
47
Communication
United Steelworkers (USW)........................................
51
(iii)
MARKET ACCESS CHALLENGES IN CHINA
----------
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 11, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee on International Trade,
Customs, and Global Competitiveness,
Committee on Finance,
Washington, DC.
The hearing was convened, pursuant to notice, at 2:30 p.m.,
in room SD-215, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. John
Cornyn (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Senators Grassley, Roberts, Thune, Scott, Casey,
McCaskill, and Cardin.
Also present: Republican staff: Madison Smith, Legislative
Assistant for Senator Cornyn. Democratic staff: Livia
Shmavonian, Legislative Assistant for Senator Casey.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN CORNYN, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
TEXAS, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE, CUSTOMS,
AND GLOBAL COMPETITIVENESS, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
Senator Cornyn. Good afternoon, and thank you for being
here today.
I was just telling Senator Casey I was struck by a recent
article in The Economist which refers to Bill Clinton's
statements back in March of 2000, where he said American
opinion on China was divided into two camps, one he called the
optimists who would see China becoming the next great
capitalist tiger with the biggest market in the world, and then
he said there were the hawks and pessimists who saw China
stubbornly remaining the world's last great communist dragon
and a threat to stability in Asia. They conclude that China, Xi
Jinping, is a great mercantilist dragon under strict communist
party control using the power of its vast markets to cow and
co-opt capitalist rivals, to bend and break the rules-based
order, and to push America to the periphery of the Asia-Pacific
region. And they conclude that this has led to one of the
starkest reversals in modern geopolitics.
The focus of today's hearing is on an important
international market, the second-largest economy, and that is,
of course, the country of which I was just speaking, China,
also the United States' largest trading partner and the third-
largest export market for U.S. goods abroad. While the
legitimate flow of goods and services between the United States
and this nation has increased over the years, the statistics
alone do not tell the whole story. We must also consider the
national security context. Within 7 years, China will pose the
greatest threat to U.S. national security of any nation,
according to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
As China's population grows and as its economy continues to
modernize, the Chinese market will continue to emerge as an
attractive one for U.S. businesses seeking the opportunity to
serve the Chinese consumer in all sectors. But unfortunately,
while Chinese companies enjoy largely unfettered access to the
United States market and an economy that is open to investment,
U.S. companies are not afforded with reciprocity in this
regard.
In order to paint a picture of the persisting problem, we
have to review the historical context. In the 1980s, China
first sought entry to the rules-based global trading system
known as the World Trade Organization. After years of
deliberation and negotiation, an agreement was reached in 2001.
This agreement allowed for China's accession to the World Trade
Organization if it agreed to comply with a number of free
market principles: tariff reductions, equal footing for foreign
businesses, and the removal of implicit and explicit barriers
to trade. Moreover, China would have to adhere to global
principles under the TRIPS agreement to protect and enforce
intellectual property rights.
Fast forward to 2018, 17 years later, and China has still
not lived up to those promises and commitments it made under
WTO. China's authoritarian regime, its One Belt, One Road
Initiative, and its Made in China 2025 plan are part of a
comprehensive agenda to promote state-driven industrial
policies that distort and disadvantage U.S. firms that are
simply seeking free market competition with Chinese companies.
U.S. companies seeking to do business in China often
encounter--I would say always encounter--a protectionist
system, one that employs predatory practices and promotes
domestic subsidized industries over foreign competitors. The
U.S. Trade Representative's 2017 report on China's WTO
compliance explains that today's situation in China is even
worse than it was 5 years ago, as the state's grip on the
economy continues to increase. But even more alarming is the
fact that U.S. technology companies often report China's
blatant attempts to steal sensitive and proprietary
intellectual property.
In many instances, China has simply used trade as a weapon,
coercing U.S. companies to enter into joint ventures and other
business agreements that require the company to hand over key
technology and know-how--the so-called ``secret sauce''--simply
in order to gain market access. This practice has already begun
to erode America's technological advantage and undermine our
defense industrial base. That is why I have introduced
legislation, along with Senator Feinstein, called the Foreign
Investment Risk Review Modernization Act to combat this
epidemic and modernize the Committee on Foreign Investment in
the United States.
It is also my understanding that President Trump and his
administration are currently considering potential temporary
actions under existing authority to ensure investment
reciprocity and protect U.S. national security, in part because
CFIUS, as it currently is enacted, lacks adequate authority
under its current statute.
China's restrictive market is highly concerning. And
multiple administrations have attempted to engage China's
leaders on their trade practices. China will even send students
to American colleges and universities for STEM-related degrees,
only to have them return to China and further advance their
goals. It is part of their comprehensive strategy.
Unfortunately, many rounds of high-level diplomatic talks
have not yielded progress, often resulting in commitments made
with zero action. Take the latest comprehensive economic
dialogue, for example. The 100-day plan on trade yielded
commitment from China, most of which has not been followed up
on.
Discussions may continue in the future, but one thing is
clear: China's market access reforms are too slow, and barriers
still exist. Reciprocal treatment for U.S. companies should not
be too much to ask; indeed, it is the bare minimum of what we
demand.
It is my hope that today's hearing will paint a clear
picture of the problems that persist with access to China's
market and that significant reforms will follow. With that, let
me turn it over to Ranking Member Casey.
[The prepared statement of Senator Cornyn appears in the
appendix.]
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT P. CASEY, JR.,
A U.S. SENATOR FROM PENNSYLVANIA
Senator Casey. Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank Senator Cornyn for this hearing and for our witnesses.
Whether it is steel or tires or high technology, industries
across a State like Pennsylvania, and indeed across the
country, face significant challenges when it comes to China.
Whether through forced technology transfer or joint ventures,
theft of intellectual property or straight-up barriers to
entry, U.S. firms and manufacturers have been fighting for
decades to get the same treatment for American products in
China as Chinese exports see in the United States.
When Ambassador Lighthizer came before this committee just
a couple of weeks ago, he stated in part of his testimony,
quote: ``The costs of globalization are falling most heavily on
workers.'' I will repeat the last five words: ``falling most
heavily on workers.'' I could not agree more. And this is
backed up by studies by the Economic Policy Institute, and not
too long ago by a study done at MIT by economist David Autor
and his coauthors, David Dorn and Gordon Hanson. All of these
studies lend credence and lend data to that assertion.
Just in short, summary fashion, the MIT study said that
roughly 40 percent--40 percent--of the decline in U.S.
manufacturing just between 2000 and 2007 was due to a surge in
imports from China.
That has been the experience of Pennsylvania. We have had a
record loss in manufacturing jobs over the last generation,
economic devastation that none of us could even begin to
describe or fully understand, lives that have been completely
destroyed, communities wiped out, trauma and suffering that
flow from the job loss: suicides, family breakups, opioid
addiction, all kinds of traumas in the aftermath of that kind
of job loss.
It started to present itself in the 1980s. There was a 4-
or 5-year period in the early 1980s when tens of thousands of
steelworker jobs were lost in southwestern Pennsylvania. By one
estimate, in 5 years or less, half of the steelworker jobs in
that region were lost, from about 90,000 to 45,000. And it just
continued from there.
I have to say, I do not think that in the last 40 years at
least, either party here in Washington has done nearly enough.
Neither party, in my judgment, has had a strategy, and neither
party has focused on a way forward. And this applies, of
course, to multiple presidential administrations and many
sessions of Congress.
Workers need an answer for what happened to them--and
continues to happen to them. U.S. industries have been under a
sustained attack from China--our steel, our aluminum,
manufacturing--in the past decade. And now China has given us
the playbook for their next line of attack: robotics, rail
equipment, advanced medical products, just to name a few.
Pennsylvania knows all too well what may be in store for the
rest of the country if we do not address the systemic threat
that China presents.
After the collapse of the steel industry, the city of
Pittsburgh found its way back, reinventing itself with the help
of civic leaders, foundations, universities that are on the
cutting edge in robotics and advanced technology. China, in its
2025 plan that Senator Cornyn referred to, is coming after all
of that too.
So I am glad we are having this hearing today, and I hope
it begins a much-needed conversation on the type of
comprehensive strategy we need to address the threat posed by
China. If you do not have a strategy that undergirds the
development of an answer, you will not get the results that we
all agree on: ensuring U.S. workers have the skills they need
to compete, insulating our communities from economic shock, and
preventing China from literally stealing our future.
Part of that is making sure our communities have access to
immediate economic assistance when large job loss or a
localized recession occurs, which can happen for any number of
reasons outside of trade. The goal is always to prevent
economic shocks from happening, but if they do occur, we must
respond, and respond quickly. I have put forward a bill on this
issue and would welcome the insights of the panel on a future
date.
China has made no secret about its strategy to push the
rules to their limit and, when advantageous, break those rules
outright. They know that by the time a trade case reaches its
conclusion, the damage to an industry has been done.
The U.S. needs a sustained and coordinated strategy to
address the threat posed by China, and the United States should
work with our allies to execute it. This is not a problem
unique to the United States, and there is no need to treat it
as such. We must address the barriers China puts up that
prevent our companies from competing on a level playing field.
So I am glad to be working with Senator Cornyn and others
on these critical issues. It is clear that he and so many
people in both parties care deeply about this issue. We
appreciate our witnesses being here today to help us shed light
on this challenge. Thank you.
Senator Cornyn. Thank you, Senator Casey.
[The prepared statement of Senator Casey appears in the
appendix.]
Senator Cornyn. I want to take a moment to introduce our
witnesses. The first is Mr. Dean Garfield. Mr. Garfield serves
as the president and CEO of the Information Technology Industry
Council. Our second witness is Ms. Christine Bliss, who is
president of the Coalition of Services Industries. The third
panelist is Ms. Linda Dempsey. She is vice president of
international economic affairs at the National Association of
Manufacturers. And our final witness today is Thea Lee. Ms. Lee
serves as president of the Economic Policy Institute.
Let me join Senator Casey in thanking each of you for being
here today and sharing your thoughts with us. I will start with
Mr. Garfield. If each of you would limit your initial
presentation to about 5 minutes, we promise you that any
additional remarks you have will be made part of the record.
But we would like to get to ask questions and exchange ideas.
So, Mr. Garfield, I will recognize you, sir.
STATEMENT OF DEAN GARFIELD, PRESIDENT AND CEO, INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY COUNCIL, WASHINGTON, DC
Mr. Garfield. Thank you, Chairman Cornyn, Ranking Member
Casey, members of the subcommittee. On behalf of 63 of the
world's most dynamic and innovative companies that are members
of ITI, we thank you for holding this hearing.
I can think of no issue more important to America's
economic and technological future than the bilateral
relationship between China and the United States.
We have submitted my testimony for the record, so for
purposes of this hearing, I would like to focus on three
things: one, what is at stake and the obstacles we face in
China; two, why we continue to compete in that market; and
three, what the U.S. Government, Congress, and the
administration can do to help.
With regard to the first, which is, what is at stake, it is
America's economic and technological future. We are
experiencing now innovations like AI, 5G, quantum computing
that are some of the most historic in human history. China
recognizes that and is doing things that are both legitimate
and illegitimate to put its thumb on the scale in favor of its
local champions so they can corner the market on the frontier
innovations of the future.
The list of pernicious protectionist measures is long; many
have even called it a tapestry. So for purposes of this
hearing, I will focus on three elements of the quilt.
China has become expert in foreclosing strategic elements
of its market from foreign competition. A case example of that
is in cloud services. Eighteen of the 20 largest cloud service
providers in the world are U.S.-based. Unfortunately, those
cloud service providers do not have free and reciprocal access
to the Chinese market.
In fact, those companies cannot directly engage in cloud
services in China. They cannot engage in contracts with Chinese
customers. And they cannot directly operate cloud services in
China. In fact, China has the most restrictive cloud services
rules in the world. In contrast, Chinese companies that provide
cloud services have unfettered access to the rest of the world.
A second element of the quilt that gives you a sense of the
norm in China is China also has become expert in overwhelming
companies with an avalanche of vague rules, regulations,
standards, and practices that create opportunities for
mischief. For example, the 2016 cybersecurity law in China was
complemented by an array of rules and regulations that
culminate in a cybersecurity review regime that empowers
agencies and municipalities to pressure companies to provide
access to their source code and, as well, to transfer sensitive
technologies. Our companies have become adept at navigating the
straits and avoiding turning over their seed corn to the future
to China. Nonetheless, in facing those pressures, they
certainly operate in that market at a disadvantage.
The trifecta in the quilt in China is what you alluded to,
Senator Casey, which is the practice in China of making
commitments that they do not ultimately keep.
China, when it ascended to the WTO, committed to opening up
the Chinese market to financial services. Thereafter, China
lost a WTO case on electronic payment services. And in 2013, it
committed to opening up the market. Again, in Mar-a-Lago in
2017 they committed to doing the same and still have not.
That may raise the question as to why our companies
continue to compete in China. The answer is, you cannot be a
global company and ignore one-fifth of the world's population.
It would be akin to Starbucks saying they are going to have a
store on every corner with the exception of California,
Pennsylvania, and Texas. It just does not make sense. As well,
in the tech sector, in order to acquire customers, you must
compete globally, which means also competing in China. So the
choice for our companies is competing in China or not competing
at all. Our companies have chosen to compete, and that is in
part why we need the assistance of both Congress and the
administration.
What we recommend is twofold, which fits in a singular
basket, which both Senator Cornyn and Senator Casey raised,
which is, we need a broader strategy that has two pillars. One
is making sure that we are working with our allies to advance
our interests with China. And what that means at this moment is
focusing more on building that coalition, getting to the
bargaining table with China, and putting in place timelines and
accountability mechanisms to make sure that we are changing
their behavior--so, focusing more on that and less on tariffs.
Finally, what it means is investing more here in STEM and
the other essentials for being successful in those areas of
frontier innovation.
Thank you for this opportunity, and I look forward to your
questions.
Senator Cornyn. Thank you, Mr. Garfield.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Garfield appears in the
appendix.]
Senator Cornyn. Ms. Bliss?
STATEMENT OF CHRISTINE BLISS, PRESIDENT,
COALITION OF SERVICES INDUSTRIES, WASHINGTON, DC
Ms. Bliss. Chairman Cornyn, Ranking Member Casey,
subcommittee members, I appreciate the opportunity to present
the views of the Coalition of Services Industries, which
represents a wide spectrum of services sectors, from financial
services to IT services to professional services, media and
entertainment, logistics, just to give you a sense of the
breadth of whom we represent.
China was the United States' second-largest export market
in 2017 and is one of the fastest-growing markets for U.S.
services. But we need to make sure that we can take advantage
of those opportunities, so I want to highlight some particular
areas of concern, and they are going to overlap with a couple
of the areas, if not all the areas that Dean mentioned in his
testimony as well, just to demonstrate how incredibly important
digital trade is for the economy as a whole and certainly the
services sector.
In information and technology services, China fails to
provide nondiscriminatory market access for a broad range of
online services, requiring joint venture partners for online
services and then failing to issue the necessary licenses to
provide those services.
On cloud services--which, again, you just heard
highlighted--the United States should secure China's commitment
that it will allow U.S. cloud service providers to provide all
the necessary licenses for the operation and provision of cloud
services, remove existing investment restrictions, permit U.S.
cloud services to use their trademarks and brands and to sign
contracts for the provision of cloud services, and enable U.S.
cloud services providers to procure telecommunications services
for the provision of cloud services on a nondiscriminatory
basis.
China also maintains barriers to cross-border provision of
video and music services as well as cross-border data services,
including virtual private networks. And more broadly, and of
great concern, China blocks a wide range of legitimate U.S.
websites and services.
China's cybersecurity law is another area of concern that
has the potential to create additional discriminatory barriers
and, particularly with respect to its requirement that personal
data be stored domestically and the fact that it is as vague
and broad as it is, has created confusion and uncertainty as to
how it will exactly apply and to what types of data it will
apply.
Before highlighting China's financial services barriers, I
just want to thank Finance Committee members, including
Senators Cornyn, Scott, Heller, Crapo, Portman, Cassidy,
Isakson, and Thune, for your September 17th letter to the
administration highlighting the barriers to trade and
investment that financial services face.
Currently, to illustrate, there is a 50-percent cap on
foreign equity in life, health, and pension companies that has
existed since China entered the WTO in 2001. China's 2017
announcement that it would allow 51-percent foreign ownership
in Chinese life insurance companies in 3 years and lift that
restriction entirely in 5 years is very welcome. But the key
here is implementation and
follow-through. China has not authorized any U.S. investment in
the enterprise annuities sector. And there is a 33-percent cap
in the securities sector.
There is also an unlevel playing field in the banking
sector, as U.S. banks are subject to a 20-percent investment
ceiling for single foreign shareholders and a 25-percent
investment limit for multiple foreign shareholders in local
Chinese banks. China has announced that it will increase
foreign direct investment in domestic securities firms from 49
to 51 percent, with a commitment to remove that 51-percent cap
within 3 years.
Electronic payment services--another area that we share in
common with the comments made by ITI--is a very important area.
In May 2017 in the U.S.-China 100-Day Action Plan, one of the
commitments China made was to open the domestic market for U.S.
electronic payment services. There are several U.S. EPS
suppliers that have filed license applications; they remain
pending. And we urge China's commitment to full and prompt
market access for U.S. EPS suppliers.
In conclusion, we believe that fully realizing the
tremendous potential the Chinese market represents requires not
only that specific services and investment barriers be
addressed, but we think there must be systemic changes across
the Chinese economy. And CSI believes this can be best achieved
by ensuring that the U.S. establishes a clear framework for
engaging in bilateral negotiations with China with defined
objectives, a timetable, and close coordination with our
allies.
I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to
present our testimony.
Senator Cornyn. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bliss appears in the
appendix.]
Senator Cornyn. Ms. Dempsey?
STATEMENT OF LINDA MENGHETTI DEMPSEY, VICE PRESIDENT,
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
MANUFACTURERS, WASHINGTON, DC
Ms. Dempsey. Chairman Cornyn, Ranking Member Casey, members
of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today on manufacturers' views on market access challenges in
China. The National Association of Manufacturers, NAM, is the
largest and oldest manufacturing association in the United
States, representing over 14,000 manufacturers in every
industrial sector in all 50 States.
Manufacturing employs 12.6 million women and men across the
country, contributing a record $2.25 trillion to the U.S.
economy in 2017. U.S.-China commercial relations are a top
priority, given both the challenges and the opportunities this
relationship presents. It is fair to say that our Nation's
relationship with China is complicated--very complicated.
On the one hand, there are few places in the world where
manufacturers in the United States export more or have
increased sales more. As a result of China's lowering of
tariffs and implementation of many of the rules of the WTO
system, manufacturers in the United States have been able to
export more goods to China than to any other country outside of
our NAFTA partners, Canada and Mexico. Manufacturers exported
nearly $96 billion in goods in 2017, which in turn supports
hundreds of thousands of U.S. manufacturing jobs.
Exports of ``Made in the USA'' manufacturing goods to China
have grown by more than $76 billion since 2002, more than to
any other country besides Canada and Mexico. Similarly, our
friends in the agricultural sector have seen similar levels of
growth, which help manufacturers sell to our domestic farmers,
in terms of equipment, fertilizer, seed, cold storage, and the
list could go on. This is especially important for
manufacturers, because more than half of the manufacturing
workforce depends for their paychecks on exports overseas.
But on the other hand, there are few places in the world
where trade has proven more challenging for American
manufacturing. We face substantial unfair, discriminatory, and
distortive practices in China that are harming U.S.
manufacturing and manufacturing workers and are holding our
country back.
Among the most troublesome issues on which I expanded in my
written testimony are localization policies, such as Made in
China 2025, that discriminate against U.S. companies;
intellectual property rights and enforcement that are
insufficient for the 21st century; standards, technical
regulations, and conformity assessment procedures that limit
our ability to compete on a fair and equal basis in China;
subsidies and other measures that distort the market and create
damaging and unsustainable overcapacity; investment
restrictions that depress market access and foster harmful
technology transfer; state-owned enterprises that create unfair
and uncompetitive conditions of competition; tariffs and other
import regulations that block U.S. exports; and transparency
and the rule-of-law issues. While some of these challenges can
be addressed through the existing WTO rules, others require new
approaches. The question is how best to address them.
We at NAM believe it is time, long past time, to undertake
a truly comprehensive and focused strategy designed to achieve
the best outcomes for American workers and enterprise. That
means pursuing a modern, innovative, and comprehensive
bilateral trade agreement with China that wholly restructures
our economic relationship.
As NAM president and CEO Jay Timmons explained in a letter
to the President on January 8th, ``To be successful, such a
free and fair trade agreement must eliminate barriers that
unfairly block American companies and American manufacturing
exports from full access to the Chinese market, raise standards
in China and create new rules to prevent the wide range of
market-distorting practices that violate free markets and fair
competition and hurt American businesses and workers, and
create clear mechanisms to mandate strong and binding
enforcement of the agreement, providing channels for the
government and industry alike to address cheating and
violations.''
This is at once both a radical and, in our view, the most
effective and pragmatic way forward. This approach must also be
combined with ongoing enforcement of the WTO rules to which
China has committed, usage of U.S. trade remedy rules to
address unfair trade practices that are harming our industries
and workers, and intensive work with our trading partners to
address systemic challenges that are undermining trade
globally. Targeted actions, such as tariffs, can provide some
relief in the short term to some manufacturing industries, but
they harm others in the form of significant added costs or
provoke China to take further destructive actions.
Ultimately, we think it is best to address directly the
systemic issues that have given rise to the underlying
challenges in the first place. The U.S.-China commercial
relationship has provided significant opportunities for the
American economy and manufacturers. As a massive and growing
market, it holds the promise of continuing to do so, but to
achieve that, to be sustainable, the trading relationship
simply must be more fair and more open. That is exactly what a
comprehensive bilateral trade agreement with China would help
achieve.
Thank you.
Senator Cornyn. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Dempsey appears in the
appendix.]
Senator Cornyn. Ms. Lee?
STATEMENT OF THEA M. LEE, PRESIDENT,
ECONOMIC POLICY INSTITUTE, WASHINGTON, DC
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Chairman Cornyn, Ranking Member Casey,
members of the subcommittee, for the invitation to participate
in this important hearing today. I am the president of the
Economic Policy Institute, the Nation's premier think tank
analyzing the effects of economic policy on America's working
families.
Seventeen years after China acceded to the WTO, the
bilateral economic relationship between our two countries is
enormously lopsided and problematic. The U.S. goods deficit
with China is the
single-largest bilateral deficit between any two countries in
the history of the world, and it continues to trend upward,
despite more than 20 U.S. challenges to China at the WTO,
despite earnest annual bilateral talks and commitments, and
despite all the reform commitments China made upon accession.
Furthermore, it is not just the sheer size of the trade
imbalance with China that is of concern. It is the composition.
The U.S. ought to be a leader in advanced technology products.
A wealthy, technologically savvy, high-skilled, capital-
intensive country like the United States would be presumed to
have a comparative advantage in ATP. However, the U.S. runs
annual deficits in advanced technology products of over $100
billion, and that is entirely accounted for by China. That is
to say, we have a trade surplus in ATP with the rest of the
world.
This one fact alone should be a signal that there are
significant anomalies in the U.S. trade relationship with China
that cannot be explained by market forces. Overall, top U.S.
exports to China include raw materials, agricultural products
and waste materials, as well as aerospace, while our imports
are concentrated in computers, electronics, miscellaneous
manufactured commodities, and apparel. This is not the profile
of imports and exports that would be expected between countries
at the respective economic development levels of China and the
U.S.
According to USTR, China is still not fully compliant with
the commitments it made during the WTO accession process, as
has been talked about today. American companies trying to do
business in China face theft of trade secrets, counterfeiting,
inadequate protection of intellectual property, online piracy,
industrial policies that promote domestic goods at the expense
of U.S. products, subsidies, discriminatory product standards,
the dumping of excess capacity, and restricted access for
American services.
Seventeen years after accession, China has not even listed
all of its restricted export subsidies, let alone eliminated
them, as was promised. In addition, China has used currency
policies to gain an unfair competitive advantage over American
business and labor.
This litany of unfair trade practices, together with
currency manipulation, has had a serious negative impact on
American jobs and wages. As my colleague Rob Scott has shown,
the U.S. trade deficit with China cost jobs in all 50 States
and the District of Columbia while also putting downward
pressure on the wages of manufacturing workers and, in fact,
all non-college graduates.
It is no secret that the Chinese government has a long-term
economic strategy to build certain sectors through subsidies as
well as through purchasing, tax, and regulatory policies. These
plans set targets for indigenous production, use of technology,
favorable treatment for state-owned enterprises, and
discriminatory treatment of foreign brands and companies, among
other things. These practices are deep and pervasive.
There are two problems here, and we should be careful to
distinguish them. On the one hand, many of the Chinese
government's practices are inconsistent with international
rules and norms, not just the WTO, but also international
conventions on workers' rights, public health, human rights,
environmental protections, intellectual property rights, and
consumer safety. The U.S. touts the importance of a rules-based
system, but if some players, like China, flout the rules with
impunity over decades, then the rules-based system becomes a
trap for those who comply.
The U.S. Government's piecemeal and scattershot enforcement
strategy has been time-consuming and ineffective, as well as
uneven. For example, our government has not even raised in any
significant or meaningful way China's failure to comply with
its obligations as a member of the International Labor
Organization. This means that American workers and businesses
are competing on a tilted playing field, since Chinese workers
cannot exercise their rights to form independent and democratic
unions.
The Chinese government is clearly playing a long game,
while the U.S. is egregiously shortsighted. Our trade policies
have been so inadequate in scale and slow in implementation
that by the time we take action, it is often a decade too late,
with the result that our trade actions are ineffective, if not
counterproductive.
We need to reform our domestic trade laws so we can act
expeditiously. Going forward, we must address new barriers to
trade in services and e-commerce. We need to make sure that we
have and are willing to use measures to address currency
misalignment.
Our trade enforcement measures should prioritize good jobs,
workers' rights, democracy, environmental compliance, and
consumer safety over outsourcing and short-term profits.
In summary, the U.S. Government needs to develop and
articulate its own long-term economic development strategy. It
needs to use domestic tax, infrastructure, and workforce
development policies to ensure that American workers and
businesses have the tools and the skills they need to compete
successfully.
But our government also needs to strengthen our trade
compliance and enforcement measures and be willing to use them
aggressively and consistently and in a timely manner to ensure
that our trade relationship with China is both reciprocal and
fair.
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to any
questions you may have.
Senator Cornyn. Thank you very much, Ms. Lee.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lee appears in the
appendix.]
Senator Cornyn. We will be doing 5-minute rounds with
questions, and I will start.
Maybe, Mr. Garfield, I will start with you. It strikes me
that most Americans, when they look at China, do not fully
appreciate the fact that this is a country under communist
party control and that one of the motivations of the party and
of the country is to grow their economy, for obvious reasons,
but also to control their people and to further their
surveillance on their own people by, for example, maintaining
data on their people in their country and not making it
available more broadly because that undermines their goal of
control.
But also, in their approach to stealing intellectual
property or, through creative investments, getting access to
not only the intellectual property, but the know-how in order
to build a product maybe that has been invented here in the
United States, they do threaten American jobs, because they
undermine the industrial base here. And if they can make it in
China using Chinese workers, obviously that is to the detriment
of American workers.
So when you think about how we look at China, is that an
accurate description? Or do you see some differences?
Mr. Garfield. I think it is fair. Even when you are on the
ground in China, which I have been double-digit times, it is
often easy to forget that you are in a market that is state-
operated and -controlled, with that as a fundamental pillar of
their existence.
I do not think that difference alone suggests that we
should not be engaging with China. I think what it suggests is,
given the level of state control and their desire to maintain
control over their population, the United States also has to
play the long game and develop a strategic outlook that has in
mind leveraging our strategic advantages.
Senator Cornyn. Well, Ms. Bliss, let me ask you this. Given
what Mr. Garfield has said--and I do not disagree with him at
all--how do we get China to embrace a rules-based regime where
the rule of law is applied impartially no matter who is
involved, when it seems so committed to its overall goal of
economic growth and undermining any advantage of the United
States?
For example, the USTR's 2017 report on China's WTO
compliance track record said the U.S. erred in supporting
China's entrance into the WTO on terms that have been proven
ineffective.
I mean, the reason why China was accepted in the WTO was
the idea that they would then have to comply with WTO policies
and decisions and rules. If they do not recognize those rules
as authoritative or controlling, how do we deal with China?
Ms. Bliss. Thank you, Senator. Well, I think there a couple
of ways that we respond. And I would agree--as I said in my
oral statement, and I think you have heard from other witnesses
this afternoon--that we very much support playing, as Dean
said, the long game. In a sense, we believe there needs to be
an established process where we get the Chinese to sit down at
the negotiating table with well-defined objectives and a
timetable, but we do that in concert with our allies in order
to exert maximum pressure.
I also think that we avail ourselves--which I think the
United States has been doing, but could also step up--of
existing commitments under the WTO. And I would say that there
are some examples of where our hope is that the WTO commitments
and the dispute settlement process will ultimately yield
positive results in this area.
And the example I would give is the electronic payment
services, where China not only lost the case, was informed by a
WTO panel that it was inconsistent with its WTO commitments,
but then, in the 100-day initiative, recommitted to address
that and to allow U.S. EPS suppliers into the market. There are
now, as I am sure you are aware, a number of those license
applications pending. And our view is, now is the time to
ensure that China follows through on these commitments and
issues those licenses.
So that is one example where I know you question the
effectiveness of the WTO, but I think there is an opportunity
to show that it can be effective with China.
Secondly, I think the administration's current 301
response, where they have indicated their decision to take
forward an aspect of that with respect to licensing to the WTO,
is another example where we can take advantage of WTO rules in
forcing China to really live up to its commitments.
But finally, I would say we are concerned that under the
current environment, we do not think that turning to things
like escalating tariff threats is going to be an effective way
to secure meaningful systemic reform in China.
So I think the bottom line in our view is long-term,
consistent pressure to negotiate, working with our allies with
clearly defined objectives, and using tools that are available
to us, which we continue to believe are effective. And we would
include in that the WTO.
Senator Cornyn. Senator Casey?
Senator Casey. Thanks very much.
I want to start with Ms. Lee. I was glad that you focused
in part of your testimony about the impact on jobs and wages
here in the U.S. We have heard these numbers so many times, so
many different versions of them, and the enormity of them, I
think, even escapes our imagination.
There is a growing body of research, in addition to the
work that EPI has done--and we appreciate that work. The MIT
study I mentioned in my opening statement about just a 7-year
period--40 percent of the decline in U.S. manufacturing is
attributable to the surge in Chinese imports. So can you
discuss the impact in terms of not just jobs, but also in
particular wages--U.S. wages, I should say?
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much, Senator. And this is a really
important issue, and it is one that I think got a lot more
attention when David Autor and his colleagues at MIT did their
study, which was very carefully done. They were looking at
counties that were importing a lot of the products that we
import from China, and they were measuring the impact on jobs
and wages.
And one of the things I think that is not well understood
is, people talk about the benefits of free trade, but I think
even economists understand that there are winners and losers.
But the magnitude of the difference is, I think, part of what
is important, which is, there can be very small net economic
gains, and there can be very large distributional impacts. And
I think that is what we see from the trade relationship with
China. It is not entirely what we would expect from economic
theory.
Dani Rodrik at the Kennedy School has said it could be as
much as five to one, that the dislocation and the disruption
and the distributional impact could be five times greater than
the net gains. And so this is something.
One of the points that I made is, it is not just the
workers who lose their jobs because of imports from China or
because of outsourcing to China, but this is a labor market.
And so workers who are not directly impacted, who do not
directly lose their job, could also be impacted by downward
pressure on their wages. So even service sector workers who are
not in the traded sector could feel that impact.
And that is really a massive effect on the U.S. labor
market.
Senator Casey. So the wage impact is substantial?
Ms. Lee. Very substantial and in some ways more important
than the number of jobs that are directly displaced.
Senator Casey. No city in the United States can claim to
have the recipe for how to recover from huge job loss.
Pittsburgh has done as good a job as any, I think, in modern
history. It did not happen overnight. It did not happen because
they had a guidebook. They had to do a lot of trial-and-error,
invest in technology. They had big institutions, medical
research, big universities, foundation support, public/private
efforts, a whole range of things that were done.
But if you look at not just the Pittsburgh circumstance,
but just more broadly, what do you think we need to do to
confront this challenge in terms of what we can do
affirmatively in addition to confronting China? And I guess a
more particular way of talking about it is, how do we keep our
workforce more competitive?
Ms. Lee. Thank you for that question. I think, you know, if
we think about it as the supply and the demand side, on the
supply side, I think that is the responsibility of the U.S.
Government to invest more heavily in retraining and education
and skills for American workers.
The U.S. Government, compared to other governments,
especially in other industrialized nations, under-invests in
our workforce. And that is something, you know, that we
continue to see in the most recent budgets. And so that is an
easy place to start. But also, I think we need to make sure
that we are, you know, building those supply chains and the
manufacturing extension partnership, that we are supporting
cutting-edge manufacturing. We do not need to keep all
manufacturing here, but the United States should have a
competitive edge in really advanced manufacturing.
And there are apprenticeship programs for advanced
manufacturing skills that I know the AFL-CIO has invested in
that could be really important. There are programs like Jobs to
Move America, which is helping to tie public transit purchases
to rewarding companies that are producing those trains in the
United States and using American workers and training those
workers and really investing in their workforce. So I think
those are the kinds of programs that we should be looking at,
in addition to making sure that our trade policy is fair and
that we are enforcing the trade laws that we have on the books.
Senator Casey. I am just about out of time. Maybe I will go
to the other panel members on the next round, but thank you.
Senator Cornyn. Senator Grassley?
Senator Grassley. Yes. Instead of asking questions, I would
like to reflect on a trip I had with Senators Daines, Johnson,
Perdue, and Sasse to China a couple of weeks ago. We visited
five cities; we did not visit any of the rural parts of the
country. And Daines, Johnson, and Perdue have been to China
many times connected with businesses, so they know better than
I do about China and what they do that way.
But I had various ideas about China before I went there,
and all I can say is, they were made very real to me, some
assumptions I had, like their status as a developing nation, to
still be considered such, that does not meet the common-sense
test. I think a common-sense test for me was, if they want to
do business, their businesses doing business in the United
States--they are the second-largest economy in the world; we
are the largest--if they want to do business in our country, we
ought to be able to do business on the same basis in their
country. That is just what common sense tells me.
If China was the 50th-largest economy in the world, that
would be a whole different story. But number one and number two
ought to be able to operate pretty much the same way.
I kind of came away with the opinion that they will do
anything legal or illegal, anything moral or immoral, anything
ethical or unethical--do whatever they want to to get ahead and
to stay ahead.
And I had a chance with the political leaders in each one
of the five cities, we each of us had an opportunity to present
our views and ask for their rebuttal. I said that I am one of
the few members of the United States Senate who is still in the
Senate who voted for China to be in the WTO. I thought it was a
very good thing that they be in the WTO, and I suppose I still
think that they ought to be in the WTO, because that signifies
living by the trade rules that we have under our international
organizations.
And I said it has not turned out the way that I anticipated
with you violating all these rules and doing what you do to
foreign competition. And I said, you know, I kind of feel like
I should be sorry for my vote. And of course, they assured me I
should not be sorry for my vote.
And then you keep hearing from them, well, we want to have
dialogue with the United States. Well, we have been having
dialogue with them for a long, long time. I told them my view--
you know, not that they are going to listen to me, but they
have to hear me, what I think--you know what needs to be done,
you just ought to do it.
But they are, as you said, I think, Ms. Lee, very
strategic, and we are very shortsighted. That is our fault. But
if you want to do business in that country, do you have to give
them all your trade secrets? They steal our trademarks. They
make fake products. They violate everything.
And so I will end with this, to whoever of you said, we
need new laws. I would like to have my colleagues look at a
bill that Senator Brown and I have put in that would take a lot
of what countries want to do here into consideration,
particularly if they are going to buy into the United States
and buy our research and development and all that sort of
stuff.
Then lastly, the former Governor of Iowa is now the
Ambassador to China. And I saw him at several of our meetings
over there. But I came to this conclusion from visiting with
Chinese political leaders: because of his 30-year relationship
with President Xi and American business people over there as
well as our foreign service officers, I got a feeling that he
was the right choice for the President of the United States to
choose to be our Ambassador there.
Thank you very much.
Senator Cornyn. Thank you, Senator Grassley.
Senator Roberts?
Senator Roberts. I do not know if I can top that.
[Laughter.] Although I understand, Mr. Chairman, that you did
invite Mr. Smoot and Mr. Hawley to come and testify; I do not
see them. [Laughter.]
Senator Cornyn. They were busy.
Senator Roberts. I do not know if they are in the audience
or not, but I do recall I knew them, but Senator Grassley
worked with them at that particular time. [Laughter.]
Ms. Dempsey, you are the only witness who brought up
agriculture, and I appreciate that, although there was a
connection, I think, with Ms. Bliss too. And I do appreciate
the two pillars and the testimony of all the witnesses.
China has obviously, Mr. Chairman, been at the forefront of
our trade policy agenda here in recent weeks--or months for
that matter. Most significant has been the administration's
enforcement actions now following the conclusion of
investigations regarding section 232, steel and aluminum
imports, and section 301, the intellectual property and
technology transfer practices, which have been referred to by
all of the witnesses.
But as we have seen numerous times, Mr. Chairman,
agriculture is often the first industry impacted when
retaliatory measures are enacted. And with the recent
announcement of Chinese tariffs on U.S. products, many of which
are agriculture products, they are the first ones that they
pick. It is clear that history may be repeating itself. I hope
that is not the case.
The U.S. exported nearly $20 billion in agriculture
products to China in 2017. That made it one of the top export
markets for U.S. agriculture. But let me point out that over
the last 3 or 4 years, farm prices are down 40 percent. Farm
income is down 52 percent. So, when we have a tariff that is
announced in response to whatever negotiations are going on and
all of a sudden we find out, in response to washing machines
and solar panels, sorghum producers in my State, whose price
was about the cost of production, all of a sudden find out
their basis points are down 80 percent. Boom, just like that.
And in the second place, as we keep going with that, now we
have the additional--I do not know what to call them--I guess
measures that the President has mentioned and that the
administration has mentioned, Wilbur Ross and Mr. Navarro and
Bob Lighthizer.
I had a long talk with Bob Lighthizer about this here just
the other night. And some of us are going up to the White House
tomorrow. Obviously, we are involved in agriculture, and we are
worried about the retaliation.
And here we have the soybean market off 17 percent. The
sorghum producers that I mentioned, when I was at the White
House, they were in my office. And when I came back, they said,
``What in God's name did you do?'' I said, ``Hey, it was not
me, coach.'' You know, one farmer was in tears. He said, ``You
know, I had to sell at this particular time.'' So you can see
the ramifications here.
So during an already challenging time for farmers and
ranchers, drastic trade policy measures will have a compounding
effect on producers in rural America. Everybody up and down
Main Street is nervous about trade--everybody in the food chain
and all the lenders.
And by the way, Senator Casey is a Senator I really
respect. He is a very valuable Senator on the sometimes
powerful Senate Agriculture Committee. And I understand your
plea for workers with regards to Pennsylvania.
Pennsylvania is also a big ag State, and farmers and
ranchers and growers are also workers, and they work from dawn
to dusk. And I hope we do not get into a situation where one is
pitted against the other. That is not what we should do.
So, what has the administration proposed here in terms of
proposing tariffs? I think the President has signaled, at least
in the press--and we will learn about that possibly tomorrow--
about using the Commodity Credit Corporation and using money to
offset some of the problems that we have experienced with
regards to prices in the farm sector.
We do not need that. We do not want another subsidy
program. What we want is a market. We have to sell our product,
we have to sell things we make, but we also have to sell things
that we grow. And we are in a rough patch in agriculture today.
So I am very hopeful--and any witness who wants to can comment
about this--but I hope we do not go down that road of creating
some very cumbersome and very difficult-to-implement if not
impossible program from the CCC.
What do you think about--the President mentioned this
sometime back; he has not mentioned it since. I hope maybe
after tomorrow he will mention it again. How about the 11
countries that joined on the TPP program, what about making
efforts to get back in sync with the TPP? If there is ever an
opportunity for the United States to plant the American flag
and also have their back and also increase trade--you know,
propositions all throughout the Pacific--it would be that. That
would be my best suggestion, either that or, well, both sell
something or else signal that we are interested in getting back
with the TPP.
Would any of you like to comment?
Ms. Dempsey. Maybe I can start. I mean, the National
Association of Manufacturers had wanted to see a strong TPP go
forward, and we were disappointed that it did not. If there is
an opportunity for the United States to get back in as part of
the TPP, I think that is important. It would set the rules of
the international trading system.
We also, though, think we have to take this moment with
China. We have to act urgently to get new rules of the road.
When China joined the WTO in 2001, the rules were written in
1994 for most of it. Right? We did not have an Internet, we did
not have the digital economy and the cyber issues. We did not
have the growth in trade that we have now seen today.
We have to get China to, at the negotiating table, not just
dialogues where statements are issued, we have to get them at
the negotiating table to an agreement that is fully
enforceable. And we can do that through working with our TPP
partners, but we also have to do that bilaterally.
Senator Roberts. Well, thank you for your comments. My time
has long since expired.
Senator Cornyn. I think, Mr. Garfield, you had a comment;
you wanted to respond to Senator Roberts?
Mr. Garfield. Yes.
Senator Roberts. I am sorry, Mr. Garfield. Please.
Mr. Garfield. I think your point about farming is an apt
one. One of the things that has been surprising about the
discussion over the last 3 weeks around China is how much it
has unified the broad business community across three pillars,
I would say. One is the need to redefine the relationship with
China. What we are doing is simply not sustainable. Second is
the importance of doing things that work, which means avoiding
tariffs. They have not worked since McKinley or Smoot-Hawley
and will not work now. And then third is doing all the things
that we have been talking about in alignment here on the panel,
which are, developing a strategy and pushing China with clearly
defined dates and accountability metrics.
When China acceded to the WTO, there were no timelines
against which China would do the things that it committed to
do. In fact, 2 days ago, President Xi recommitted for the fifth
time for China to open up its financial services sector.
And so, unless we push China to commit to a date certain
and have a metric for measuring whether they are doing it, we
will simply continue to repeat the current cycle.
Senator Roberts. Well, let me just close by saying that I
agree with the President, I agree with everybody who has said,
all of the witnesses, that long-term--and it is going to have
to be a long-term policy with regards to China--you are going
to have to have systemic change in China. That may be an
oxymoron; I hope it is not. But that is one thing.
But short-term, for goodness' sake, do not, in this
business of playing your cards of trying to get a better deal
for the United States or a better trade situation, do not do so
at the expense of American agriculture, which is going through
a very difficult time.
And I do not like this business of using farmers and
workers as pawns in this particular game, because every sector
of ag now is in trouble, and they are worried to death and very
nervous about that future.
And I want to thank you all for your comments. Sorry for
going overboard.
Senator Cornyn. Senator Cardin?
Senator Cardin. Well, Mr. Chairman, first, thank you for
convening this hearing. And I thank all of our witnesses.
And I just want to underscore the point that Senator
Roberts made. I recently took over as the ranking Democrat on
the Small Business Committee, and farmers are small-business
owners. And over half of our exporters to China are small
businesses.
So what concerns me is, we talk about these policies
concerning China and how companies have to adjust. If you are a
small-
business owner, it is almost impossible to adjust.
So I would hope we could get some suggestions as we talk
about how we engage on trade, our sensitivity to small-business
owners who are engaged in export, international trade, because
they really are getting caught without any ability to handle
the consequences of these trade discussions.
I do not know if any of you have any suggestions focused on
small businesses, but I would welcome those.
Ms. Dempsey. Maybe I will start. You know, over 90 percent
of the NAM's members are small and medium-sized businesses. And
actually, one of our small-business members of our board of
directors was on the House Small Business Committee today
talking exactly about these types of trade issues.
I mean, small-business owners, certainly our manufacturers,
face many of the same challenges that bigger companies do, but
they face more challenges because they do not have outside
legal teams, inside legal teams, and the whole support network
to deal with these challenges.
Senator Cardin. So how do we help them? How do we, how does
the USTR, how does the trade discussion become sensitive to our
smaller companies?
Ms. Dempsey. The three items that our small-business
colleague mentioned today at the Small Business Committee on
the House side were, first, making sure that we have strong and
enforceable trade agreements with clear rules.
You know, they are in China and facing multiple changes to
medical equipment regulations and different standards. That
makes it really hard for a small-business owner to compete.
They have done great in terms of exports to China; will that
continue? That is hard. If we can get China to agree to strong,
accountable rules, that is part of it.
Another piece for us is, getting things like our Export-
Import back into full functionality. And we would like to see
the Senate move forward expeditiously on the nominees that are
awaiting confirmation.
The other thing is, the Small Business Administration has
programs, like the STEP program and other trade promotion
activities. Our trading partners overseas, our friends and
allies and those who are not, do a heck of a lot more to help
their small businesses export and participate--market
intelligence and assistance--than we do here in the United
States.
We have to look really clear-eyed at ways that we can use
the resources we have. We have excellent resources at the
Commerce Department; our foreign service officers that Senator
Grassley was talking about should be making sure that those
activities are coordinated with the States, because the States
do a lot of export promotion now too.
But clear rules, defined rules, that type of support, and
certainty. And that is why trade agreements and those types of
things are so important.
Senator Cardin. I think that is helpful.
I want to get to Ms. Bliss for one second. I appreciated
your testimony and responses to some of the questions.
I just want to get to the overall strategies we have on
China that I think are not well understood, primarily because
of the President's lead on general tariffs on steel and
aluminum under section 232, and then coming under section 301
against China specifically, where we have legitimate problems
with China on intellectual property. But it gets confused as to
whether we are going after specific problems in countries or
whether we are just trying to protect our domestic industries,
as seen by the international community in the credibility of
our programs.
We did not use the antidumping claim this go-around, which
is better understood and is specific to a country. Instead, we
used a general tariff. And I just would like to get your view,
as a person who was in the USTR, as to how this affects
America's credibility globally, working with our trading
partners to understand our policies in regards to China, which
we have legitimate concerns about, but the manner that we are
going about packaging that, international trade policies.
Ms. Bliss. Well, thank you, Senator. In that regard, I
think, as I have said, that certainly wearing both maybe my old
USTR hat, but also at CSI, we honestly think that it is
critically important at this stage to clearly define what the
objectives are. Now, a lot of that work has been done, because
there was tremendous work put into the 301 investigation with
respect to tech transfer and IP. So I think there is no
question that measures have been looked at, have been
identified.
But I think, in terms of pressing forward on what should be
accomplished, there still needs to be a roadmap, and I think
that is what we have been really waiting to see in terms of,
what are the specific objectives, what is the timetable, what
happens if those objectives are not reached?
And I think a critical part of that, as I have said, is
working with our allies, which I think the United States
government does to a great degree. But I think now, more than
ever----
Senator Cardin. We did not in regards to the steel and
aluminum.
Ms. Bliss. No, I am not saying that. I am just talking
about China right now.
Senator Cardin. But it came right after steel and
aluminum----
Ms. Bliss. Right. No, I understand that. But I am just
saying that, to be effective in focusing specifically on China,
I think working with our allies--and even though it is out of
my area of expertise at this point--I think the same could have
been done with respect to steel and aluminum, although that
issue seems to be working itself out.
I would say, and I just wanted to add, that I think
services is an important part of the trade picture in going
forward and figuring out where the benefits are.
Senator Cardin. I agree with you. I think their rules on
services--and our penetration on services is so low compared to
our capacity to be involved in services in China.
Ms. Bliss. Exactly.
Senator Cardin. And their rules on investment limitations,
et cetera, are just so protectionist. We clearly need to take
actions.
But I guess my point is that that is how we should be going
after China, where we have very strong claims that are
understood by the international community rather than using,
again, the broad stroke, as we started, with aluminum and steel
at this point.
Mr. Garfield. I was in Brussels 2 weeks ago, and they were
very clear about their interest in working with the United
States on these issues. And our colleagues are heading to Japan
and Korea next week, and the interest in partnering and working
with the United States is high. The concern they have is that
they do not see the broader strategy, and they think the focus
is solely on tariffs, which our allies are not interested in.
And so, if we can make clear that there is a broader
strategy and that it goes beyond tariffs, I think we would be
surprised at the number of nations that are willing to work in
collaboration with us.
Senator Cornyn. Senator Scott?
Senator Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to
the panelists for being here this afternoon.
Certainly, our trade approach perhaps is unorthodox at this
moment. I do think that we are going beyond the trade scope. I
think I would break it down to three ``t''s, Mr. Chairman:
trade, tariffs, and theft.
And perhaps we are conflating some issues at times, but
really, long-term, I think the President's objective is to make
sure that we are still in business in the next generation. And
if we allow the theft to continue from an IP perspective, we
will find ourselves wishing we would have addressed it
differently in the past, looking back a generation from now.
I think the importance of goods in this conversation cannot
be emphasized enough. I come from South Carolina, a State where
we were fairly anti-trade for a hundred-plus years, and in the
last decade or two, maybe three, we have seen a renaissance.
And now we have BMW that exports 100,000-plus cars from South
Carolina to China. We are building the new Volvo plant. We have
the country's largest exporter, Boeing, in my backyard,
Mercedes as well. So we have a lot of folks who are focused and
interested in the goods part of the trade conversation.
I am on the Banking Committee, so I have spent a little
time on the services part as well. And I think as we look at
the portfolio of who we are as Americans and what we will
produce in the future, 75 percent of the U.S. private sector is
in services. About $731 billion of our exports are services,
about 80 percent of our GDP.
So while we spend a lot of time, and we should, on the
goods component or aspect of our trade conversation, it is
truly important that we spend a fair amount of time on the
future economy of this country, which will be driven by our
services and our ability to engage this world around those
services. And I would note that our services trade surplus with
China has grown from, in 2007, $1.3 billion to, 2017, around
$38 billion. Now, this is just a smidgen--which is southern for
``small.'' [Laughter.]
Now, I know that kind of confuses people sometimes. But the
fact of the matter is that we are growing in the right
direction. And if we get the rules right with China, we can
grow exponentially faster in a shorter period of time.
That growth would be better, Mr. Garfield, as you were just
talking about, if we made sure that we hold the folks in China
accountable for the timelines that they set out.
And to that, if you think about it, China prohibits
American firms in banking and insurance from establishing
wholly owned operations by capping their ownership levels. Of
course, when the Chinese financial services providers come
here, they do not face the same barriers. And so the
conversation around reciprocity, I think, is actually a healthy
conversation and a necessary one.
In November, China announced plans to remove its foreign
ownership equity caps in financial services over the next 3
years. President Xi reiterated those comments this week. Good
news, I think, Mr. Garfield.
Maybe not good enough, Ms. Bliss, so I am going to ask you
to answer a question--two questions for you. Number one, when
you are focused on China's approach to services, I think there
is a lot of fine print in the contracts that we have to pay
close attention to. My understanding is that the Chinese
securities regulatory commission is currently writing draft
rules to implement these changes. Is there something we should
watch for that would not allow U.S. firms to compete on a level
playing field as promised? Do you think the 3-year roadmap is a
realistic one?
Ms. Bliss, if you would start, and anyone else who wants to
can jump in in my 45 seconds that I have left.
I have noted, however, that we typically give each Senator
12 minutes in this hearing, and I appreciate that.
Senator Cornyn. We will come back for another round.
Ms. Bliss. Thank you very much, Senator Scott, and for your
comments about services. Because certainly, one of our missions
at CSI is to educate about the role of services in the economy
and the very positive role that it has in job creation and in
good jobs, and jobs of the future in particular.
But let me turn specifically to financial services. I think
we see the notion of--certainly with respect to life insurance,
China has talked about lifting the 51-percent cap entirely in 5
years. So we see that as a positive development. And with
respect to securities, similarly, we look in a positive way at
the timetable for that to be lifted.
And really, I think the answer to your question is ``yes,''
it is a welcome development for two reasons. One is, because it
is a commitment that we can solidly and hopefully enforce; and
two, because it sets a specific timetable.
So I think our challenge is to make sure that we are there
the whole way, pushing and making sure that it happens and
talking about what happens if it does not. So I absolutely
agree with you.
And if I can add just a couple of things on the services
side. I think that, certainly, in terms of the future, one of
the points that we like to make, which I think is very
important, is the role that services play in other sectors of
the economy, like manufacturing and agriculture.
Senator Scott. Yes.
Ms. Bliss. So I would just mention that, because when you
talk about how eight out of 10 of us are in services jobs, if
you look closely in manufacturing, 25 to 49 percent of the
import in manufacturing is services.
So a lot of the jobs that are being created in smart
manufacturing, which is critically important to our future, are
services jobs.
Senator Scott. Absolutely.
Ms. Bliss. So thank you.
Senator Scott. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Cornyn. Thank you, Senator Scott.
I am interested, Ms. Bliss. I think you said something
along the lines that the aluminum and steel tariff issue is
working its way out--or something like that. Am I putting words
in your mouth? And if not, would you--if I am, please clarify
that, and if you would, sort of tell us what you meant by that.
Ms. Bliss. I think what I meant more generally was that the
administration approach to that particular issue, for which I
claim no expertise and I am not involved in with respect to my
association, seems to be on a road--I am not endorsing it one
way or another--but that is all my comment really meant.
Senator Cornyn. Okay. Okay. Thank you.
Given the nature of the Chinese government and their desire
for economic growth and stability in their political system,
why in the world would they want to participate in a trade war
with the United States? Do any of you have any comment on that
or any response? Because it strikes me as counterintuitive that
they would want to do anything that would create either
economic uncertainty or political instability.
Mr. Garfield. Well, I do not think they want a trade war. I
think President Xi has spent the last 6, 7 years consolidating
power for reasons that are important locally.
Senator Cornyn. He has done a pretty good job.
Mr. Garfield. Yes. And if there is the potential of eroding
that consolidation of power, then he and the nation will push
back aggressively. And I think that is what we saw with the
tit-for-tat discussions around tariffs.
I think you raised an excellent point, though. One of the
things I have learned over the years in visiting China is that
there are Chinese companies and individuals within the Chinese
government who have significant concern about the trade norms
in China. And so part of the work is actually empowering those
companies and those potential allies within China to begin to
stand up on the need for China to align with global norms.
Senator Cornyn. Several of you have mentioned that we ought
to be playing the long game when it comes to China, but I am a
little concerned about what happens in the near term, which may
affect the long game. In other words, if China is able, through
theft of intellectual property, to undermine our industrial
base by strategic investment in the United States, including
startup companies that may not even be on our radar screen, I
just wonder how much time we have before they basically beat us
in the near-term game so that, long-term, they are the dominant
economy. And meanwhile, they continue to build their military,
project military power, in order to protect that position.
Ms. Dempsey. You know, I think one of the issues that this
administration, this President, has brought to the table is the
urgency of the situation. And my remarks on a bilateral trade
agreement with China--that is not a long game, that is
something we should be engaged in right now with real
timetables to move this forward, because we have to solve these
issues now rather than later.
The Chinese market--Mr. Garfield talked about the ICT
sector. Think about autos, which the Senator from South
Carolina, Senator Scott, was talking about. Last year in China,
there were nearly 30 million vehicle sales. Contrast that to
the United States market, about 17.5 million vehicle sales.
We have to be part of that market. We have to find a way to
grow in that market. And right now, the rules are stacked
against us. We have old rules. We can bring them to comply with
the WTO rules that are clear-cut. There have been many cases
that the U.S. Government has brought--rare earths, raw
materials, auto parts, some others--where the rules were
absolutely clear; China actually complied.
But we do not have clear enough rules on a lot of these
issues right now. We have unfair trade practices that both Ms.
Lee and I talked about. We need to make sure that our own rules
there are enforced as well, but we have to act now.
And I think it is really important that both of you have
brought this hearing together today, but that is our message.
Ms. Lee. And, Senator Cornyn, I think that is a really
excellent point. I have been in this trade debate for a long
time, for a couple of decades, and a decade ago this was an
urgent question. And the AFL-CIO, where I used to work, was in
partnership with a lot of small businesses that were also
feeling that they were being completely undermined by China's
currency policies at that time and others.
And so, you know, I think the urgency is important. And in
one sense--you asked about a trade war. I know Clyde Prestowitz
from the Economic Strategy Institute will say we have been in a
trade war with China that they started a long time ago, and we
have been losing, and so when we come to the table----
Senator Cornyn. I am not sure we have been fighting back.
Ms. Lee. Right. Well, that is because we have not
recognized that we were in the war. And we come to the table
very late.
And, you know, I think that the current policies, the trade
policies, the tariff policies, that the Trump administration
has put in place have not been well messaged, they have not
been well implemented, they have not been thoughtfully
addressed with respect to our trading partners. And yet, we
definitely do have the attention of the Chinese government.
And I think you are right and Mr. Garfield is right, that
the Chinese government is looking for a trade war, because we
already have this tremendously imbalanced trade relationship.
They cannot even find enough U.S. exports to put tariffs on,
because the imbalance is so great. So I think that the urgency
is important.
And I just wanted to quickly address the issues about
agriculture and small business that were raised by your
colleagues.
If you look at the immediate impact, I think people are
concerned about what will happen if there is retaliation; will
farmers be in the crosshairs? They will, and small business
will be impacted.
But we need to step back and take in the bigger picture
that I think other people have also raised, which is that, if
we can address the totality of Chinese unfair trade practices,
including currency, including subsidies, it will actually help
both small businesses and farmers.
Senator Cornyn. Well, I know, Ms. Dempsey, you said we need
to get a bilateral agreement with China. Most of us are
concerned with the more immediate concerns about section 232,
section 301, and NAFTA renegotiation. And it is almost like our
plate is overflowing, and the idea of undertaking something of
that magnitude is daunting.
But let me ask you again. There has been some discussion
about TPP. I think many of us think the President has not been
well advised when it comes to trade issues, and we are hoping
that with Mr. Kudlow onboard and with his track record that he
will provide a more balanced advice to the President on these
issues.
But I have heard the President say that the 11 countries
that entered into the TPP, absent the United States, have now
come back to the United States to see if we would be interested
in joining. Is that a real prospect? Because it strikes me that
TPP may be one of our best weapons--``weapons'' is not the
right word--one of our best instrumentalities to try to engage
China constructively on trade and to leverage our allies, as
many of you have said we should be doing when it comes to
dealing with China on trade issues.
Mr. Garfield. I actually think this is a place where the
Senate, and Congress generally, can be incredibly impactful.
Two things. In recent conversations with Ambassador
Lighthizer, he has raised that both publicly and in private.
There is the question as to whether that is something this
Congress would support.
And so I think, to the extent that there is clarity, that
it has a path to success, that would be incredibly helpful. And
so anything that you and your colleagues could do to clearly
communicate that, I think would be quite helpful.
The second thing that has been really surprising to us in
the whole back-and-forth with China with this administration
over the last few weeks, particularly over the last few days,
is just the lack of urgency in sitting down face-to-face with
China to take advantage of the moment. And that is something
where I think some encouragement from Congress on Secretary
Mnuchin to get on a plane and advance these negotiations in the
immediate term, so we can take advantage of what President Xi
is saying, would be quite helpful as well.
Senator Cornyn. Well, thank you for that.
I would just remind all of us that Trade Promotion
Authority in and of itself was not an easy lift. And so the
idea of actually approving some other trade agreement in this
political environment is far from a certainty. So there are
challenges everywhere.
Senator Casey?
Senator Casey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to put something on the record to respond to the
distinguished chairman of the Agriculture Committee, Senator
Roberts.
He and I might have a disagreement about when I was making
points about workers, but I do not think this is one of those
false choices where you can choose to support workers or
farmers when it comes to China. Everyone loses if we do not
confront China.
They have really taken advantage of our workers and our
economy, so I hope we do not get into pitting one group against
the other, because we are all going to lose if we do not
confront them. And we have not confronted them; neither party
has done a very good job on this.
Senator Cornyn. I thought he was just pulling your leg.
Senator Casey. Well, I just wanted to make sure the record
was clear before we moved on.
Now, Ms. Dempsey, I am calling on you not only because you
have roots in Pennsylvania, but it helps.
I want to talk to you about IP theft, because I know we
have been referring to a number of the consequences of our
failure to confront China. And I wanted to start with western
Pennsylvania.
I am not sure there has been a county--and I am speaking of
Allegheny County, where Pittsburgh is--or a region of any State
where there has been more of a target placed by the Chinese
government than western Pennsylvania.
They managed to hack into a number of institutions, whether
it was U.S. Steel or the Steelworkers or ALCOA or ATI or
Westinghouse--the list goes on and on. A course of prosecution
was commenced by then United States Attorney David Hickton and
then carried forward.
The individual who took over for Dave Hickton, the Acting
U.S. Attorney for western Pennsylvania, as of when this
statement was made, November of 2017, said, quote: ``Any
company should be able to succeed based upon its ability to
innovate and to compete without being sabotaged by cyber-
hacking,'' unquote. So companies invest millions, if not tens
of millions, in developing technology and innovation to give
them a competitive edge, and then that can be ripped away from
them and certainly have long-term impacts.
I guess I wanted to ask you to discuss some of those
impacts in terms of what happens to a particular company on a
number of fronts. Number one, what happens to their ability to
be competitive or to be as competitive as they once were or
hoped to be? What happens to their incentives to innovate? And,
of course, what happens to their jobs? Can you comment on all
of that?
Ms. Dempsey. Absolutely, Senator. And thank you for
highlighting that concern, because that is a concern. Our
members in Pennsylvania, those that you mentioned, but also
across the country, look at that--you know, those were well-
publicized cases--and it chills a lot of our manufacturers.
And going back to the conversation about small
manufacturers, can you imagine these smaller manufacturers too
and the impacts? The impacts are devastating. Companies are
losing their trade secrets, their ``secret sauce'' of
production or their special formulas. And some of that you can
never get back again.
The concern is, it is not just general counsels' offices,
it is discussions engineers are having about, how do you plan
and incentivize that growth going forward? How do you deal with
that? And then there is the jobs impact.
I think one of the things that we are looking at is how
these cases are going in U.S. courts. This is not something
that is legal in the U.S. legal system, right? We need to make
sure that the U.S. legal system has the right remedies to stop
this and to prevent this. And that is probably beyond my level
of expertise, in terms of the types of actions that we need to
take.
This is an issue that we are facing. You know, we face it
domestically, we face it from other countries, but the concerns
we have out of China are probably the most compelling that we
are seeing here. And I think it is an issue that we need to
stay on top of; we need to be making sure that we do everything
in our own domestic legal system. We do not need a trade
agreement to deal with some of this. We can take care of these
domestic actions right here at home.
Senator Casey. Anyone else in terms of the company-specific
or sector-specific impacts? Does anyone want to comment on
that?
Mr. Garfield?
Mr. Garfield. We talked about electronic payment systems.
When you look at China UnionPay and how much China UnionPay has
grown since China entered the WTO--and it is now, I think, the
number-two electronic payment processor in the world while non-
Chinese-based payment processors do not have access to the
China market--it shows you the nonreciprocal nature and the
impact it has, because those are jobs that were created there
through China UnionPay but are not being created here because
we do not have access to that market, or those companies do not
have access to that market.
Senator Casey. Ms. Lee?
Ms. Lee. Just a brief point. I want to agree with Ms.
Dempsey's points about the impact on workers but also the
importance for manufacturing, because we think of intellectual
property rights as being for pharmaceuticals or for motion
pictures or other things. But the counterfeit auto parts and
other things directly impact American workers.
But there is a difference also when it happens in Allegheny
County. We have certain tools, we can use the U.S. court
system. When it happens in another country--which does happen
when there is outsourcing, when American companies take their
precious intellectual property and they bring it to another
country where they do not have these kinds of protections--it
is much more challenging. So I think it is worth noting that.
Senator Casey. I want to highlight something that was
submitted as testimony by the United Steelworkers. On page 2 of
this testimony, they are talking about the auto sector and the
consequences here. They are talking about a particular
advanced, high-strength steel used in the auto industry. And I
am quoting: ``Companies in China have been unable to develop
this technology and were under pressure from their domestic car
companies to get it, so their government stole it for them.
After the theft, one of the largest steel companies in China,
Bohai steel, used the trade secrets to produce the specialized
steel and export it to the United States in direct competition
with U.S. steel,'' unquote.
So that is what we are talking about. And we are either
going to confront this or we are just going to surrender to it.
And I think for too long, we have been in a surrender mode.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Cornyn. Well, thank you, Senator Casey.
And thanks to each of you for helping us highlight this
important topic. And I do think the slumbering giant of the
United States government is starting to be awakened. And
hopefully, we will be in a position to respond and to address
these challenges in a way that protects our economy and
protects our national security and protects our workforce,
which is so important.
I want to express my gratitude to Senator Casey and his
staff for working with my staff to put together this hearing.
And as a reminder, the deadline for filing any additional
questions or statements for the hearing record will be 2 weeks
from today.
So with that, the Senate Committee on Finance stands
adjourned. Thank you very much.
Senator Casey. Thanks, John.
[Whereupon, at 4:05 p.m., the hearing was concluded.]
A P P E N D I X
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
----------
Prepared Statement of Christine Bliss, President,
Coalition of Services Industries
Chairman Cornyn, Ranking Member Casey, members of the subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to present the views of the Coalition of
Services Industries (CSI) on market access issues in China.
For more than 3 decades, CSI has been the leading industry
association devoted exclusively to promoting the international
objectives of U.S. services companies and associations. Our members
include the vast array of U.S. companies that provide services and
digitally enabled services--domestically and internationally--including
information and communication technology (ICT) services, financial
services, express delivery and logistics, media and entertainment, and
distribution and professional services.
The services sector is a bedrock of the U.S. economy. Services
account for about 75 percent of U.S. private sector jobs, $730.6
billion in U.S. exports, and nearly 80 percent of U.S. gross domestic
product (GDP). Services, including digitally enabled services, are a
part of and enable every single sector of the U.S. economy. Moreover,
ICT services drive U.S. productivity overall. Services allow all
businesses to be more productive, reach more customers in more foreign
markets, and ultimately, support a better livelihood through higher
wages and greater opportunities.
current state of play in china
China was the second-largest services export market for U.S.
services providers in 2017, with $56 billion in U.S. services exports,
and a $38 billion services trade surplus.\1\ From 1999 to 2007, the
United States maintained a services trade surplus with China of around
$1 billion. Since then, U.S. services exports have more than
quadrupled, resulting in the growth of the U.S. services trade surplus
with China from $1.3 billion in 2007 to $38 billion in 2017.\2\ This
growth over the last decade in U.S. services exports to China, along
with the bilateral services trade surplus with China, exceeds the
growth in U.S. services exports to other nations (54 percent), and
exceeds the increase in the global U.S. services trade surplus (which
has risen by 115 percent).\3\ China has thus become one of the fastest
growing markets for U.S. services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``Table 3.2. U.S. International Trade in Services by Area and
Country, Seasonally Adjusted Detail, China,'' Bureau of Economic
Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce, March 21, 2017, https://
www.bea.gov/itable/.
\2\ Ibid.
\3\ Ibid.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The financial services sector has been an area of great strength
for U.S. services providers. Over the last decade, the United States
has increased its financial services exports to China by 347 percent,
totaling over $3 billion in 2015.\4\ This growth rate is the second
highest among all U.S. trade partners and nearly triple the average
global financial services export growth rate.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ ``Table 2.3. U.S. Trade in Services, by Country or Affiliation
and by Type of Service, China,'' Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S.
Department of Commerce, December 19, 2016, https://www.bea.gov/itable/.
\5\ Ibid.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Despite the growth of U.S. financial services exports and China's
stated intent to provide greater services market access, significant
market access barriers remain, including existing and proposed
discriminatory regulations in areas such as restrictions on data flows,
information technologies, equity cap limitations, licensing
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
restrictions, and outright bans on foreign investment.
Thank you to the members of the Senate Committee on Finance--
including Senators Cornyn, Scott, Heller, Crapo, Portman, Cassidy,
Isakson, and Thune--among other Senators, for your leadership on these
issues. Your September 2017 letter to the administration regarding
trade and investment barriers that harm U.S. financial services
institutions and their ability to grow the American economy outlined
many of our issues. We appreciate your leadership on these and other
trade issues.
China has long insisted that it is an open market with clear rules.
Unfortunately, this position does not match reality. While China
continues to increase its investments abroad and engage in more trade
with its partners, U.S. firms have an increasingly difficult time
competing on a fair playing field in China. U.S. firms have
considerable experience that could prove beneficial to China as its
economy develops further, but this requires that U.S. companies have
non-discriminatory access to the Chinese market. China's current short-
sighted approach means that China risks losing the significant benefits
and expertise of U.S. services firms.
china's treatment of data and technology
The free flow of data across borders is critical in every business
sector as it is necessary for businesses to operate globally in an
efficient and secure manner. In addition to the free flow of data,
businesses also need ICT services, platforms, and other infrastructure
to provide their services, which are increasingly digitally enabled.
The free flow of data means that companies can integrate staff
around the world, maintain their customer networks as well as their
supply chains, and ultimately build their competitiveness. For
instance, financial services companies rely on the ability to transfer
data quickly and easily across the globe to provide better service to
their clients at lower cost. This means that consumers can access their
accounts from any location, whether they are performing a simple bank
transfer or more complex transactions. Further, cross-border data flows
increase access to capital for start-ups and allow small businesses,
through digital marketplaces, to tap into foreign markets and receive
payments from customers.
Over the last decade, China has taken wide-ranging steps to
restrict data flows, including through requirements to localize data
and servers in China. Because of the widespread use of and reliance on
customer data by many services firms, these practices have significant
impacts, including in insurance, banking, and cloud computing, among
other areas.\6\ These data-restrictive policies impede the ability of
U.S. services firms to supply cross-border services and to make
investments in China. The inability to operate cross-border, the loss
of efficiency, the increase in costs, and other impediments reduce U.S.
competitiveness. The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) has
recently raised concerns at the World Trade Organization (WTO) over
China's recent restrictions on cross-border data services (including
Virtual Private Networks or VPNs), and the types of companies able to
offer those services. The restrictions impact the availability of
services and suppliers for important business communication services in
China. There have also been reports of China blocking VPNs used by
foreign businesses in China.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Nigel Cory, ``Cross-Border Data Flows: Where Are the Barriers,
and What Do They Cost?'', Information Technology and Innovation
Foundation, May 1, 2017, https://itif.org/publications/2017/05/01/
cross-border-data-flows-where-are-barriers-and-what-do-they-cost.
Moreover, as noted in the letter to China's Cybersecurity
Administration signed by a global coalition of industry associations,
including CSI, China's Cyber Security Law (CSL), along with other
current and proposed regulations, has the potential to create
additional, discriminatory barriers and impose significant compliance
burdens for suppliers of a wide number of services due to the CSL's
broad and vaguely defined scope. Particularly concerning is China's
proposed requirement that all Chinese personal data must be stored
domestically. The CSL also potentially subjects U.S. companies to
security reviews. This includes the proposed requirements to review
companies' proprietary source code and allow the government to review
and approve encryption measures. China is still developing implementing
regulations 9 months after the law has gone into effect, creating a
great deal of uncertainty around the obligations around different kinds
of data. Specifically, measures regarding the cross-border transfer of
data and the scope of Critical Information Infrastructure were written
quite broadly and contain the strictest requirements around localized
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
storage of data and cross-border transfer.
China restricts foreign firms from providing cloud services
directly in China and imposes numerous discriminatory restrictions. In
addition, new draft regulations, if implemented, combined with existing
Chinese laws, would force U.S. cloud service providers to hand over
operation and control of their business to a Chinese company in order
to operate in China, and also transfer valuable U.S. intellectual
property and use of their brand names. These proposed regulations are
of concern both to U.S. cloud service providers as well as the many
services and other U.S. sectors that rely on cloud services to operate
in China.
To address this, the United States should secure China's commitment
that it will allow U.S. cloud service providers to obtain and hold all
necessary licenses for the operation and provision of cloud services in
China, including those related to software, hardware, facilities, and
infrastructure; allow foreign investment in Chinese companies
established to provide cloud services in China; and allow U.S. cloud
service providers to sign contracts for the provision of cloud services
in China and use their trademarks and brands to market their cloud
services. China should also allow U.S. cloud service providers to
procure telecommunication services (including bandwidth) for the
provision of cloud services on the same terms available to Chinese
companies.
China's regulation of cloud services flows from its decision to
classify cloud services as a telecommunications service, which, based
on China's rules, restricts foreign providers to a maximum 50-percent
equity limit. A similar approach has been taken with other services not
typically regulated as telecom services, such as content delivery
networks and Internet platforms. China's approach is inconsistent with
the global approach that does not regulate or restrict foreign
participation in these types of services. China should loosen these
policies to increase market access for U.S. providers of these and
other types of communications services.
China has cited concerns over national security as the
justification for many of these restrictions, but in September 2015 and
June 2016, China committed to the United States that measures it has
taken to enhance cybersecurity in commercial sectors would be non-
discriminatory and would not impose nationality-based conditions or
restrictions. These restrictions are in direct contradiction of
commitments and commitments China has made to open up its market.
China imposes other severe restrictions in ICT services as well. It
fails to provide non-discriminatory market access for a broad range of
online services--requiring joint venture partners for online services
and then failing to issue approvals for those joint ventures. It fails
to allow U.S. companies to provide video and music services on a cross-
border basis. And more broadly, China completely blocks a wide range of
legitimate U.S. websites and services, as USTR has highlighted in its
recent National Trade Estimate report.
insurance markets in china
U.S. access to China's insurance and retirement securities markets
remains difficult because of restrictive Chinese measures. Foreign
insurers have less than a 5-percent cumulative market share in what is
the third-largest insurance and pensions market in the world.\7\ Given
the size and future growth of China's insurance markets, and the
relatively small market share of foreign firms, the economic
opportunity for foreign insurers, absent the discriminatory equity cap
and prohibition on U.S. companies in the enterprise annuities sector
(China's 401k), is exponential and would deliver significant commercial
benefits to U.S. industry. Profits generated from overseas operations
would help fund long-term infrastructure investments in the United
States, create jobs, and support high-paying service jobs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ ``The 13th Five-Year Plan--China's Transformation and
Integration With the World Economy,'' KPMG, October 2016, https://
assets.kpmg.com/content/dam/kpmg/cn/pdf/en/2016/10/13fyp-opportunities-
analysis-for-chinese-and-foreign-businesses.pdf.
Current Chinese regulation places a 50-percent cap on foreign
equity in life, health, and pension companies, a restriction that has
been in place since China's accession to the WTO in 2001. Removing this
equity cap has been a top priority for the U.S. financial services
industry for over a decade. At the end of 2017, China announced it
would allow 51-percent foreign ownership in Chinese life-insurance
companies in 3 years and lift that restriction entirely in 5 years.
This is a welcome development and strong signal of liberalization from
China, though follow-through and implementation are of utmost
importance to ensure the equity cap is lifted in an effective manner.
Liberalization in the life insurance sector would benefit Chinese
consumers who need greater access to insurance and more stable
protection and investment options in light of China's recent market
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
volatility.
China has made some progress in liberalizing the non-life insurance
sector. In 2013, China removed all restrictions on foreign non-life
insurers. In January 2017, China's State Council issued the ``Circular
on Several Measures to Expand the Opening-up and Actively Utilize
Foreign Investment,'' which committed to lower entry restrictions on
foreign investment in several services sectors, including insurance,
banking, and securities.\8\ But, further action is needed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ ``Circular on Several Measures to Expand the Opening-up and
Actively Utilize Foreign Investment,'' State Council of China, January
17, 2017, http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2017-01/17/
content_5160624.htm.
The elimination of the equity cap aligns well with China's domestic
policy goals and economic reform agenda, which emphasizes the need to
grow the services sector, deepen financial inclusion, and enhance the
participation of foreign financial services firms in China.
Liberalization in the life insurance sector would benefit Chinese
consumers who need greater access to insurance and more stable
protection and investment options in light of China's recent market
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
volatility.
China has not yet authorized any U.S. investment in the enterprise
annuities industry, which is China's 401(k) industry. In addition to
equity restrictions in China, there is a 33 percent cap in the
securities sector. There is also a recent proposal for new regulations
to restrict domestic shareholding in foreign-invested insurance
companies (both life and property casualty), which will diminish the
value of existing investments. The United States should seek
confirmation from China's insurance regulator that the existing
``Foreign-Invested Measures'' will continue to govern, with respect to
foreign equity and all other issues involving insurers, with at least
25-percent foreign investment. It should also seek confirmation that
the proposed regulations will not be applied retroactively to foreign-
invested insurance companies.
China has made several commitments on insurance at the WTO. This
includes allowing 100-percent foreign equity in property insurance and
reinsurance, as well as prohibitions on creating conditions of
ownership for existing foreign suppliers of insurance services that are
more restrictive than they were on the date of China's accession to the
WTO. Both commitments are formalized in the 2004 ``Detailed Rules on
the Measures for the Administration of Foreign-Invested Insurance
Companies.''
However, questions remain on how well these commitments have been
followed. In short, explicit and implicit barriers in China's insurance
sector mean that U.S. firms are unable to fully tap into this critical
market.
banking and securities barriers
China has exercised great caution in opening its banking sector to
the United States. In particular, China has imposed capital
requirements and other rules that that have made it more difficult for
foreign banks to establish and expand their market presence in China.
It is then unsurprising that foreign banks' collective market share in
2013 was below 2 percent.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ ``Future Directions for Foreign Banks in China 2014,'' Ernst
and Young, 2014, http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/EY-foreign-
bank-china-report-2014/$FILE/EY-foreign-bank-china-report-2014.pdf.
U.S. banks, securities, and other bodies are unable to compete on
an equal footing with domestic institutions. U.S. banks are subject to
a 20 percent investment ceiling (for single foreign shareholders) and a
25-percent investment limit (for multiple foreign shareholders) in
local Chinese banks. Further, once a foreign-funded business in the
banking sector is established, it is limited in its activity for 2
years. Following this waiting period, a business can expand the scope
of the business, assuming it has met certain conditions, which includes
holding over $10 billion in total assets.\10\ There are also other
restrictive regulations, including stipulations that foreign banks in
China must work through branches, as opposed to subsidiaries. These
restrictions have legal and economic impacts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ ``2017 National Trade Estimate,'' China, Officer of the United
States Trade Representative, Executive Office of the President, March
2017, https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/reports-
and-publications/2017/2017-national-trade-estimate, 87-88.
Equity caps on foreign ownership of securities joint ventures have
not been lifted in China since 2012, and remain at 49 percent, despite
the commitment to ``gradually raise'' the equity caps from the 2016
Strategic and Economic Dialogue (S&ED).\11\ China has announced it will
allow foreign companies to hold 51 percent of domestic securities
firms, up from 49 percent, with the plan for the 51-percent cap to be
removed 3 years after the new limit takes effect. Again, a welcome
development that requires proper implementation. Following through on
this commitment to ensure that a foreign firm can establish a wholly
owned company in its market is a bedrock free market principle that the
Unitexd States and a significant number of other countries committed
themselves to many years ago. It is time for China to make the same
positive step by allowing U.S. securities firms to establish wholly
owned subsidiaries without subjecting them to additional requirements
that would hamper those subsidiaries' ability to conduct business
onshore on the same terms as domestic players.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ ``2016 U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue Joint U.S.-
China Fact Sheet--Economic Track,'' U.S. Department of Treasury, June
7, 2016, https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/
jl0484.aspx.
China has also committed to expand opportunities for U.S. financial
services firms to acquire settlement and underwriting licenses as part
of the 2016 S&ED.\12\ CSI's member companies look forward to working
with the U.S. and Chinese governments to ensure proper and effective
implementation of these licenses is underway.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
electronic payment services
In May 2017, opening China's domestic market for U.S. electronic
payment services (EPS) suppliers via a bank card clearing institution
(BCCI) licensing process was included in the 100 Day Action Plan
between the United States and China. Several U.S. EPS suppliers filed
their BCCI applications in 2017 and all are still pending review by the
People's Bank of China (PBOC) at this time.
China has committed through its WTO obligations, and more recently
under the 100 Day Action Plan, to ensure ``full and prompt'' market
access for U.S. EPS suppliers. CSI urges this commitment to be upheld
as soon as possible.
a path forward through continued bilateral engagement
Despite the market access issues I've outlined, it is important to
keep in mind that China represents a significant opportunity for U.S.
services firms. China is the third largest destination for American
goods and services.\13\ In fact, U.S. exports to China supported 1.8
million new jobs and $165 billion in GDP in 2015.\14\ One cannot
underestimate the potential of the Chinese market--one-fifth of the
world's population and almost 10 percent of global wealth is China.\15\
China also holds the largest middle class in the world. In order to
increase the services surplus with China, we recommend identifying
incentives to open up new opportunities for U.S. firms. Any approach
designed to further U.S. interests ought to recognize that the Chinese
market has much to offer for American companies and their employees.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Oxford Economics, ``Understanding the U.S.-China Trade
Relationship,'' U.S. China Business Council, January 2017, https://
www.uschina.org/sites/default/files/Oxford%20Economics
%20US%20Jobs%20and%20China%20Trade%20Report.pdf, 4.
\14\ Ibid., 4.
\15\ Richard Kersley and Markus Siterli, ``Global Wealth in 2015:
Underlying Trends Remain Positive,'' Credit Suisse, October 2015,
https://www.credit-suisse.com/corporate/en/research/research-institute/
news-and-videos/articles/news-and-expertise/2015/10/en/global-wealth-
in-2015-underlying-trends-remain-positive.html.
CSI supports efforts to constructively engage with China because it
is critical for the United States to address the current and growing
trade and investment challenges facing U.S. services providers
operating in China. We believe that a measured and holistic approach in
engaging with China and avoiding harm to U.S. businesses, workers and
consumers is of the utmost importance. Close cooperation with our
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
international partners is also an essential element for success.
CSI and its members stand ready to work with you in crafting a
comprehensive and transparent approach to ensure that the full spectrum
of barriers to U.S. services providers operating in China are addressed
in a manner that demands action from China and minimizes the real
threat of reciprocal punitive measures. CSI believes that a carefully
calibrated approach with robust input from industry will facilitate the
most positive outcome.
Thank you for your time. I look forward to answering your
questions.
______
Prepared Statement of Hon. Robert P. Casey, Jr.,
a U.S. Senator From Pennsylvania
From steel and tires to high-tech, industries across Pennsylvania
and the country face significant challenges when it comes to China. Be
it through forced technology transfer, joint ventures, theft of
intellectual property, or straight-up barriers to entry, U.S. firms and
manufacturers have been fighting for decades to get the same treatment
for American-made products in China, as Chinese exports see in the
United States.
When Ambassador Lighthizer came before the committee a few weeks
ago, he stated ``the costs of globalization are falling most heavily on
workers.'' I could not agree more. Studies by EPI and MIT economist
David Autor, and his coauthors David Dorn and Gordon Hanson lend data
to that assertion. According to the MIT study, roughly 40 percent of
the decline in U.S. manufacturing between 2000 and 2007 was due to a
surge in imports from China.
That has been the experience of Pennsylvania. It started to present
itself in the 1980s. There was a 4- or 5-year period in the early 1980s
when tens of thousands of steel worker jobs in southwestern
Pennsylvania were lost. And it just continued from there. And I have to
say that I don't think in the last generation that either party has
done nearly enough. Neither party has had, in my judgment--and this
applies to multiple administrations and multiple Congresses--an answer
for these workers.
U.S. industries have been under a sustained attack from China for
the past decade--our steel, aluminum, manufacturing. And now China has
given us the playbook for their next line of attack: robotics, rail
equipment, and advanced medical products, to name a few. Pennsylvania
knows all too well what may be in store for cities across the country
if we don't address the systemic threat that China presents. After the
collapse of the steel industry Pittsburgh fought its way back,
reinventing itself with the help of our civic leaders, foundations and
universities to be on the cutting edge in robotics and advance tech.
China, in its 2025 plan, is coming after that too.
I am glad we're having this hearing today, and I hope it begins a
much-needed conversation on the type of comprehensive strategy we need
to address the threat posed by China. If you don't have a strategy that
undergirds the development of an answer, then you won't get the result
I think we can all agree on: ensuring U.S. workers have the skills they
need to compete, insulating our communities from economic shock and
preventing China from stealing our future.
Part of that is making sure our communities have access to
immediate economic assistance when a large job loss or localized
recession occurs--which can happen for any number of reasons outside of
trade. The goal is always to prevent economic shocks from happening,
but if they do occur, we must respond, and respond quickly. I've put
forward a proposal on that and would welcome your insights at a future
date.
China has made no secret about its strategy to push the rules to
their limit, and when advantageous, break them outright. They know that
by the time a trade case reaches conclusion the damage to an industry
has been done. The United States needs a sustained and coordinated
strategy to address the threat posed by China. And the United States
should work with our allies to execute it. This is not a problem unique
to the United States, there is no need to treat it as such.
I think we can all agree that something must be done to address the
barriers China puts up that prevent our companies from competing on a
level playing field.
I am glad to work with Senator Cornyn on these critical issues. And
I appreciate our witnesses for sharing their expertise and experience
with the committee.
______
Prepared Statement of Hon. John Cornyn,
a U.S. Senator From Texas
Good afternoon. Thank you for being here today.
The focus of today's hearing is on an important international
market--one that happens to be the world's second-largest economy.
This market--I'm talking about China, of course--is also the United
States' largest merchandise trading partner and is the third-largest
export market for U.S. goods abroad.
While the legitimate flow of goods and services between United
States and this nation have increased over the years, the statistics
alone do not tell the entire story.
We also must consider the national security context here. Within
just 7 years, China will pose the greatest threat to U.S. national
security of any nation, according to General Joe Dunford, Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
As China's population grows and its economy continues to modernize,
the Chinese market will continue to emerge as an attractive one for
U.S. businesses seeking the opportunity to serve the Chinese consumer,
in all sectors.
But, unfortunately, while Chinese companies enjoy largely
unfettered access to the U.S. market and an economy that is open to
investment, U.S. companies are not afforded with reciprocity in this
regard.
In order to paint a picture of the persisting problem, we must
first review the historical context.
In the 1980s, China first sought entry into the rules based global
trading system known as the World Trade Organization (WTO).
After years of deliberations and negotiations, an agreement was
reached in 2001.
This agreement allowed for China's accession to the World Trade
Organization if it agreed to comply with a number of free-market
principles: tariff reductions, equal footing for foreign businesses,
and the removal of implicit and explicit barriers to trade.
Moreover, China would have to adhere to global principles under the
TRIPS agreement to protect and enforce intellectual property rights.
Fast forward to 2018, 17 years later, and China has still not lived
up to its WTO obligations.
China's authoritarian regime, its One Belt, One Road Initiative,
and its Made in China 2025 plan are part of a comprehensive agenda to
promote state-driven industrial policies that distort and disadvantage
U.S. firms who are simply seeking free market competition with Chinese
companies.
U.S. companies seeking to do business in China often encounter a
protectionist system; one that employs predatory tactics and promotes
domestic, subsidized industries over foreign competitors.
The U.S. Trade Representative's 2017 Report on China's WTO
Compliance explains that today's situation in China is even worse than
it was 5 years ago, as the state's grip on the economy continues to
increase.
Even more alarming is the fact that U.S. technology companies often
report of China's blatant attempts to steal sensitive and proprietary
intellectual property.
In many cases, China has used trade as a weapon, coercing U.S.
companies to enter into joint ventures and other business arrangements
which require a company to hand over key technology and know-how, the
so-called ``secret sauce,'' simply in order to gain market access.
This practice has already begun to erode America's technological
advantage and undermine our defense industrial base.
That's why I have introduced legislation, along with Senator
Feinstein, called the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act
(FIRRMA), to combat this epidemic and modernize the Committee on
Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS).
It is also my understanding that President Trump and his
administration are currently considering potential temporary actions
under existing authority to ensure investment reciprocity and protect
U.S. national security, in part because CFIUS lacks adequate authority
under its current statute.
China's restrictive market is highly concerning, and multiple
administrations have attempted to engage China's leaders on their trade
practices.
China will even send its students to American colleges and
universities for STEM-related degrees, only to have them return to
China and further advance their goals.
Unfortunately, many rounds of high-level diplomatic talks have
generally yielded little progress--often resulting in commitments made
with zero action.
Take the latest Comprehensive Economic Dialogue for example. The
``100-day plan on trade'' yielded commitments from China--most of which
have yet to be followed through on.
Discussions may continue in the future, but one thing is clear:
China's market access reforms are too slow, and barriers still exist.
Reciprocal treatment for U.S. companies should not be too much to
ask.
It is my hope that today's hearing will paint a clear picture of
the problems that persist with access to China's market, and that
significant reforms will follow.
______
Prepared Statement of Linda Menghetti Dempsey, Vice President,
International Economic Affairs, National Association of Manufacturers
Chairman Cornyn, Ranking Member Casey, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on
manufacturers' views on market access challenges in China.
The National Association of Manufacturers (NAM) is the largest
manufacturing association in the United States, representing more than
14,000 manufacturers small and large in every industrial sector and in
all 50 States. Manufacturing employs nearly 12.6 million women and men
across the country, contributing $2.25 trillion to the U.S. economy
annually. The NAM is committed to achieving a policy agenda that helps
manufacturers grow and create jobs. Manufacturers very much appreciate
your interest in and support of the manufacturing economy.
U.S.-China commercial relations are a top priority for
manufacturers in the United States, given both the challenges and
opportunities this relationship presents. I appreciate the opportunity
to testify today to discuss the market access challenges that
manufacturers face in China.
i. overview
It's fair to say that our Nation's trading relationship with China
is complicated.
On the one hand, there are few places in the world where
manufacturers sell more or have increased sales. Indeed, manufacturers
in the United States export more goods to China than any other market
outside of our NAFTA partners in North America--to the tune of nearly
$96 billion in 2017--which, in turn, supports hundreds of thousands of
U.S. manufacturing jobs here at home. Exports of ``made in the USA''
manufactured goods to China have grown more than $76 billion since
2002, more than to any other country, except Canada and Mexico. That's
especially important considering that more than half of American
manufacturing workers depend on exports for their paychecks.
On the other hand, there are few places in the world where trade
has proven more challenging for American manufacturing. From unfair
subsidies, to intellectual property (IP) theft and market-distorting
policies that shield Chinese companies, manufacturers and workers in
the United States face an unfair playing field that harms U.S.
manufacturing and holds us back.
There is no doubt that we need to address these challenges. China
simply must follow the same rules as everyone else. It simply must be
held accountable when it cheats. On this, nearly all parties agree.
The question is how best to go about doing so.
There has been a lot of debate about this for a long time. We at
the NAM believe it's time to finally change the contours of that
debate. We think a comprehensive strategy will be needed if our country
is to truly achieve the best outcomes for American workers and American
enterprise. In our view, that means pursuing a modern, innovative and
comprehensive bilateral trade agreement that wholly restructures our
economic relationship with China. This is at once both a radical idea
and, in our estimation, the most pragmatic and effective way forward.
Targeted actions can provide some relief in the short term to some
manufacturing industries, they can harm others, and there will be a lot
of arguments about their merits in-between. So, at the end of the day,
we think it's best to address the underlying systemic issues that have
given rise to the imbalances in the U.S.-China relationship in the
first place. That's what I look forward to discussing with you further
a little later in my testimony.
But first, it's important to understand the nature of our trading
relationship with China.
ii. the u.s.-china commercial relationship
The U.S.-China commercial relationship has grown substantially over
the past several decades following China's accession to the World Trade
Organization (WTO) in 2001. China is the United States' largest goods
trading partner, the largest source of U.S.-manufactured goods imports,
and the third-largest export market for U.S.-manufactured goods:

U.S.-manufactured goods exports to China grew from $19
billion to nearly $97 billion between 2002 and 2017.

U.S. imports of manufactured goods from China have grown
even more from $122 billion in 2002 to nearly $496 billion in
2017.
In joining the WTO, China agreed to abide by the WTO agreements
that were largely created in the Uruguay Round talks that ended in
1994, as well as some specific requirements in its protocol of
accession. In subsequent years, China has also agreed to new, targeted
agreements, including the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) to cut red
tape at the border and regularize customs processing and the 2015
expansion of the Information Technology Agreement cutting tariffs on
information and communications technology products. Unlike some of the
original WTO members, most notably Brazil and India, China was brought
into the WTO on much stricter tariff terms, agreeing to cut tariffs to
an average rate of 10 percent without any flexibility to raise tariffs
(as Brazil, India, and other countries have retained) and changing
thousands of regulations, laws, and guidelines. China's protocol of
accession also outlined many other requirements specific to China,
including some requirements to address distortive activities by state-
owned enterprises (SOEs) and unfair government involvement in
commercial transactions. While China implemented many of these
provisions fully, there are gaps in China's implementation and issues
that were not fully covered by the WTO requirements.
As a result of the implementation of many of these provisions, U.S.
manufacturers have increased exports to record levels in 2017,
supporting hundreds of thousands of American manufacturing workers.
China is the single largest foreign purchaser of U.S.-manufactured
goods outside of North America, and U.S.-manufactured goods exports
account for approximately 11 percent of all of China's imports. Among
the U.S. manufacturing sectors that have seen the biggest growth are:

Transportation equipment, including aerospace products and
parts; motor vehicles, auto parts, and related products;
railroad rolling stock; and ships and boats; overall, U.S.
transportation equipment exports increased by nearly $26
billion between 2002 and 2017;

Chemical products, which have increased by nearly $12
billion since 2002;

Computer and electronic products, including semiconductors,
measuring and medical control equipment, and computer and
communications equipment; overall, U.S. computer and electronic
product equipment exports to China increased by nearly $12
billion between 2002 and 2017; and

Machinery, such as industrial machines, engines, and power
transmission equipment; overall, U.S. machinery exports
increased by more than $6 billion between 2002 and 2017.
Manufacturers of agricultural equipment, from tractors and seeds to
farming implements, grain storage structures, and fertilizers, have
also grown as a result of increased sales to the U.S. agricultural
sector, which has expanded U.S. product through strong export growth to
the Chinese market in numerous areas. Indeed, U.S. agricultural exports
to China have grown to nearly $18 billion in 2017, from a base of less
than $1.5 billion in 2002. China is the largest single country
purchaser of U.S. farm products.
The U.S.-China investment relationship is also substantial,
totaling more than $68 billion in 2016. U.S. manufacturing investment
in China equaled $47 billion in 2016, up from nearly $6 billion in
2002, and equal to just 7 percent of worldwide U.S. foreign direct
investment in manufacturing ($667 billion in 2016). Sales by U.S.
manufacturing affiliates in China equaled $283 billion in 2015,
compared to only $9 billion in U.S. exports by those same affiliates.
Chinese foreign direct investment in U.S. manufacturing totaled nearly
$21 billion that same year, up from just $215 million in 2002.
While there have been significant improvements in the U.S.-China
commercial relationship, China also poses a major challenge for
manufacturers small and large, imposing a range of market-distorting
and trade-limiting barriers that impact manufacturers in the United
States. To address some of these issues, the United States has brought
more than 20 WTO challenges against China, several of which have
successfully resolved issues directly covered by WTO rules, such as
relating to export restraints, subsidies, and automotive parts. In
other areas, as discussed below, the WTO rules do not explicitly or
sufficiently discipline practices, and additional work is needed to
address these gaps in coverage that allow unfair barriers to continue.
iii. key market access concerns in china and related issues
The Chinese market remains one of the most frequently cited trouble
spots for manufacturers in the United States, and challenges continue
to rise. Among the market-distorting and damaging industrial policies
and other measures negatively impacting manufacturers in the United
States include the following:

Localization Policies: Manufacturers in the United States
have seen in recent years a resurgence of discriminatory
policies, particularly those that have a differential impact on
products and technologies produced by domestic and foreign
companies, even if they do not explicitly treat domestic and
foreign companies differently. These policies are often as
problematic for foreign companies as explicit discrimination
and should be eliminated. Particularly concerning are
localization policies related to production or technology that
mandate local testing and certification requirements for
products in the information, communications and
telecommunications, (ICT) and medical sectors as well as
policies requiring companies to store China-generated data on
local servers and prohibiting their transfer overseas.
One policy area of significant concern is China's ``Made in
China 2025,'' an ambitious 10-year plan designed to upgrade
China's manufacturing economy. The plan sets specific targets
for domestic manufacturing (40 percent domestic content of core
components and materials by 2020 and 70 percent by 2025),
focusing on 10 priority sectors, such as information
technology, new energy vehicles, agricultural equipment, and
robotics. While the plan's broad objective of promoting smart
manufacturing policies in China is common to many countries,
the specific implementation and localization targets of the
plan raise significant concerns for manufacturers in the United
States. In particular, the plan's focus on building globally
competitive Chinese companies through specific government
policies and financial support raise concerns that the plan's
effect will be to benefit Chinese manufacturers over foreign
ones, raising significant questions about the consistency of
policies with China's WTO commitments.
Examples of other policies with localization elements
include:
Cybersecurity policies that pressure
companies to localize technology;
Data flow restrictions/Internet controls; and
Expedited product approvals for innovative
medical device products.

IP Rights: While China has increasingly recognized the value
of innovation and IP rights and enforcement, with some steps
being taken to upgrade IP laws and regulations, promote IP
awareness, and tackle IP enforcement, much more work is needed
in this core area important to manufacturers of all sizes and
types. Among the areas of most concern that impede U.S. market
access and fair competition in the Chinese market are:
High levels of counterfeiting, piracy, and
trade secret theft, both physically and online;
Structural barriers to strong IP enforcement,
such as value thresholds that effectively preclude criminal
enforcement;
Policies designed to push companies to
localize R&D and technology and promote the development of
Chinese IP-intensive industries;
Policy developments in areas such as
competition, standards, and product price controls that
undercut U.S.-generated IP;
Cybertheft that has targeted several U.S.
companies; and
Weak enforcement.

Standards, Technical Regulations, and Conformity Assessment
Procedures: Manufacturers in the United States continue to
experience a variety of challenges related to standards and
technical regulations in China, ranging from inadequate
channels for participation in standard-setting processes,
treatment of IP in standards setting, and Chinese efforts to
promote standards, both at home and abroad, that do not
harmonize with international standards. All of these
regulations and requirements can add significantly to the cost
of manufacturing products for export to China and limit the
ability of U.S.-manufactured products to compete fairly in
China. Among the areas where manufacturers in the United States
are facing challenges include electric vehicles, medical
equipment, and hazardous substances in electric and electronic
products.

Subsidies and Other Measures: Manufacturers in the United
States continue to be concerned about a range of other Chinese
Government actions that have led to market distortions, such as
subsidies and state-owned enterprise (SOE) interventions in the
market that have built up massive overcapacity. Steel and
aluminum are front and center, but overcapacity is also a
problem in industries such as chemicals, fertilizer, concrete,
agricultural processing, and semiconductors. More broadly,
Chinese Government agencies continue to use a variety of export
policies, particularly export restraints and subsidies, to
promote or restrict the growth and export of priority products
and sectors to provide an advantage to Chinese producers
reliant on various metals and raw materials. While the United
States has brought and won WTO cases on some of these policies,
others continue to pop up. These actions both undermine U.S.
market access in China and distort competition in the United
States and third-country markets, all to the disadvantage of
manufacturers and their workers in the United States.

Investment Restrictions: Manufacturers also face investment
caps in key manufacturing sectors, such as agricultural
processing, automotive, and telecommunications, forcing them to
form joint ventures with domestic companies under the Catalogue
Guiding Foreign Investment. Problematically, this allows
government and company stakeholders leverage to seek
concessions from foreign companies, including investment
commitments, local sourcing, and access to capital and
technology, in exchange for investment approval. In a series of
changes in late 2016, China approved some revisions to its main
foreign investment laws, which, while generally welcome, did
not fully address remaining concerns from manufacturers in the
United States about continued investment caps in critical
sectors, efforts to build a national security review system for
foreign investment and broader regulatory concerns that impact
foreign-invested enterprises. Given the role of investment
overseas in helping manufacturers reach foreign customers and
participate in foreign resource and infrastructure projections,
these rules negatively impact market access for manufacturers
in the United States.

SOEs: During China's WTO accession, China made a number of
commitments related to the activities of SOEs and state-
invested enterprises (SIEs), including agreeing that those
firms would make purchases and sales based solely on commercial
considerations and not be influenced by the government. Despite
that commitment, the Chinese Government has continued to play a
strong hand in SOE and SIE management and decision-making and
pressure these firms to act in ways to support government
priorities. Efforts to strengthen SOEs have only accelerated
under President Xi Jinping, with plans that have generally
focused on strengthening, not reforming, SOEs with only small
changes, such as promoting mixed-ownership structures,
addressing corruption, and reforming executive board
operations.

Import Regulation: From tariffs and customs barriers to
differential import procedures, manufacturers in the United
States face a number of border barriers in China that impede
U.S. exports and limit market access:
While China reduced tariffs as part of its
WTO implementation on a broad range of manufacturing products,
the process did not eliminate all of China's burdensome
tariffs, including some high tariff rates in key manufacturing
sectors.
While China ratified the WTO's TFA in
September 2015, it will not implement its Schedule B
commitments, including implementation of a ``single window''
system for customs clearance, publication of average customs
release times, or customs cooperation, until 2020. As a result,
U.S.-manufactured goods face higher costs and red tape as well
as delays in exporting to China.
Inconsistencies in customs-related
regulations and enforcement create unnecessary challenges for
U.S. exporters. Particularly concerning are different customs
clearance proceedings and regulations between different ports,
different agencies, and even different customs agents as they
seek to get products cleared, including customs classification,
customs valuation procedures, and clearance requirements.
In addition, China's current import clearance
regime unnecessarily complicates trade and restricts low-value
shipments (including shipments of manufactured goods sent
through e-commerce channels) from benefiting from expedited
shipments treatment, as envisioned in the TFA. Although China's
complex import clearance procedures can clear products through
one of three channels (including an e-commerce category),
burdensome requirements to utilize the e-commerce channel
prevent many products from benefiting from this option.
Manufacturers in the United States are seeing
the misuse of Chinese trade laws to retaliate against U.S.
industries and limit U.S. imports unfairly.
Import bans and other regulatory limits have
also undermined U.S. access to China's market, including bans
on remanufactured products and units and a July 2018 ban on 24
types of materials, including scrap paper and plastic.

Transparency and the Rule of Law: Despite Chinese
commitments during its accession to a range of reforms related
to the rule of law, including regulatory transparency and
consistent implementation of laws and regulations, China
continues to struggle with many of these areas in ways that
have a significant negative impact on the ability of
manufacturers in the United States to navigate China's
regulatory framework and participate on a level playing field
in the Chinese market. Among the most concerning areas are:
A lack of full regulatory transparency
regarding laws and regulations, where new rules are implemented
with limited notice and input from the private sector; and
A lack of fair and open processes regarding
regulatory approvals.
iv. improving the u.s.-china commercial relationship
The U.S.-China commercial relationship holds potential to spur the
growth and expansion of manufacturing here at home, but the trading
relationship must be fair and open and must tackle persistent barriers.
On this point, there is a lot of work left undone. Of particular
importance for manufacturers is work to ensure full enforcement of
existing international and domestic trade rules, including bringing
additional WTO cases; engagement and coordinated activities with our
trading partners and through regional and global channels, such as the
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum and G20; and the creation of
new rules to ensure a free and fair competitive landscape for
manufacturers in the United States.
While targeted actions can provide some relief in the short term to
some manufacturing industries, they can harm others, and there will be
a lot of arguments about their merits in-between. This is especially
true of tariffs, which, as NAM president and CEO Jay Timmons recently
put it, can also create new challenges in the form of significant added
costs or provoke China to take further destructive actions. So, at the
end of the day, we think it's best to address the underlying systemic
issues that have given rise to the imbalances in the U.S.-China
relationship in the first place.
As Timmons explained in a letter to the President on January 8th,
to address these issues comprehensively and truly level the playing
field for the long term, the United States should ``be pursuing a truly
modern, innovative and comprehensive bilateral trade agreement with
China that wholly restructures our economic relationship.'' The letter
explained that ``[t]o be successful, this free and fair agreement must:

``Eliminate barriers that unfairly block American companies
and America's manufacturing exports from full and fair access
to the Chinese market;

``Raise standards in China and create new rules to prevent
the wide range of market-distorting practices that violate free
markets and fair competition and hurt American businesses and
workers; and

``Create clear mechanisms to mandate strong and binding
enforcement of the agreement, providing specific channels for
government and industry alike to address cheating and
violations.''
A bilateral U.S.-China trade agreement would need to build on, but
go far past, previous agreements by adding priority issues relevant to
China, from industrial policy, state-favored industries and new
transparency and IP disciplines to rules that reflect other changes in
the global economy since the WTO agreements were negotiated, starting
with digital trade and cross-border data flows. In particular, such an
agreement would need to address those areas where unfair,
discriminatory and harmful Chinese policies and practices are not
actionable at the WTO.
We believe this approach, while in some sense a radical idea,
presents the best way to restructure the U.S.-China economic
relationship so that it works for manufacturers and all Americans.
v. conclusion
Chairman Cornyn, Ranking Member Casey, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for your work on global trade and
competitiveness issues and for holding this hearing.
______
Prepared Statement of Dean Garfield, President and CEO,
Information Technology Industry Council
introduction
Chairman Cornyn, Ranking Member Casey, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify this afternoon.
The Information Technology Industry Council (IT) represents over 60
of the world's leading information and communications technology (ICT)
companies. We are the global voice of the tech sector and the premier
advocate and thought leader in the United States and around the world
for the ICT industry. ITI's member companies are comprised of leading
technology and innovation companies from all corners of the ICT sector,
including hardware, software, digital services, semiconductor, network
equipment, Internet companies, and companies using technology to
fundamentally evolve their businesses. Trade issues are critical to our
members, and China is always a subject of much concern and interest.
Today's hearing is particularly timely, as the U.S.-China
relationship stands at a crossroads. If we continue down our current
path of tolerating China's blatant disregard for international norms
governing free trade and market access, we will continue to lose ground
on both technological and economic fronts. Yet, altering course poses a
unique challenge of navigating uncharted waters. The U.S.-China
relationship is as complex as it is important. The relationship has
always been--and likely will continue to be--one of both competition
and cooperation. We need to approach managing difficulties in the
bilateral trade relationship with the nuance and deliberation they
deserve, recognizing that both action and inaction will have
consequences for years to come, in positive and negative respects.
The tech sector has been at the forefront of the competitive and
cooperative balance with China for decades. While competition and
collaboration between our companies can and should be a driver of
innovation and growth, it is clear that China does not compete fairly.
The Chinese have run a robust effort to rewrite the rules of the game
in their favor--and this needs to change. Foreign companies must be
able to compete on even footing with domestic companies in China and
around the globe.
While we must address China's problematic policies and practices,
that is only half of the equation. We also need to rebalance our
approach to strengthening the U.S. economy and our own capacity for
innovation. To that end, we must invest in our own people, our own
research and development, and foster emerging technologies here in the
United States.
Regardless of whether China plays by the rules or not, it will
continue to develop significant capacity for technological development,
innovation, and growth. The United States must be prepared to compete.
In my testimony, I will outline some of the key market access
problems that our companies face as well as what we can do about it,
why the Chinese market is so important, and how we can ensure that the
United States continues to foster an environment that gives the best
and brightest individuals the necessary tools to develop tomorrow's
most innovative technology.
key problems foreign tech companies face in the chinese market
Our companies face real and persistent challenges in the Chinese
market, including data localization requirements, cloud services
restrictions, and intrusive and undefined security review regimes that
may lead to exposure of source code and intellectual property. Over the
last decade, China has made a concerted effort not only to address
legitimate cybersecurity and privacy concerns but also to foster a
protected space for domestic companies to gain an unfair market
advantage. As the Office of the United States Trade Representative
(USTR) laid out in its comprehensive section 301 investigation findings
report, China has created a tapestry of laws, regulations, standards,
and practices that collectively advantage Chinese companies and create
conditions for direct and indirect tech transfer.
Despite this clearly strategic approach to boost Chinese innovation
and indigenous technology, the Chinese government is not a monolith.
Infighting, discord, and pressure from Chinese leadership for agencies
to issue regulations and demonstrate enforcement has added another
layer of uncertainty and unpredictability to the Chinese market.
Following passage of China's 2016 Cybersecurity Law, the tech sector
has seen an unprecedented onslaught of implementing regulations,
notices, measures, and standards drafted by numerous agencies within
the Chinese bureaucracy, often contradicting one another. For example,
the information technology standards body known as TC 260 released 110
standards for comment between November 2016 and September 2017 alone,
accounting for nearly half of all standards it has ever released for
comment. Implementing regulations and standards that the Chinese
government promised would clarify compliance questions often seem
hastily drafted by individuals without relevant expertise, leading to
more questions than answers. While the Chinese government has addressed
certain concerns through solicitation of comment, often industry finds
that issues go unaddressed or appear again in other regulations or
implementing guidelines--leaving us to play an endless game of ``whack-
a-mole.'' These hastily enacted regulations also allow enforcement
agencies to both interpret obligations unevenly and, potentially,
target foreign companies.
broad and ambiguous security review regimes
While the Chinese Government has for the most part been careful not
to explicitly outline requirements for transfers of technology, source
code, or IP, the ambiguity and uncertainty surrounding China's numerous
``security review regimes'' create conditions ripe for coercion of
companies to expose these valuable trade secrets. The Cybersecurity Law
requires that companies subject themselves to intrusive security
reviews for products and infrastructure to qualify as ``secure and
controllable.'' While the meaning of this term is ambiguous, the
provision seems to favor domestic companies and products as inherently
more secure. This provision appears to be a thinly-veiled attempt to
encourage consumers to ``buy domestic.'' Specifically, the Cross-Border
Data Transfer Measures outline highly intrusive procedures, including
background investigations of network suppliers and inspections of
corporate offices. Given that President Xi Jinping and other officials
have publicly stated an official preference for Chinese technologies,
industry remains concerned that this policy empowers agencies to focus
disproportionate regulatory attention on foreign technology products
and services, relying on a broad justification of ``public interest''
concerns rather than true national security.
implicit and explicit technology transfer requirements
Intellectual property and source code are the lifeblood of American
companies, and they make a concerted effort to safeguard these secrets.
In addition to ambiguous security review regimes, Chinese requirements
outlined in various laws and regulations--including those that require
firms to locate production or facilities in China and establish a joint
venture (JV) with a Chinese partner in order to operate in China--can
put this invaluable information at risk. Disclosure of sensitive
information can be forced through a contract (e.g., JV, partnership),
direct pressure from local or central governments, or governmental
review or certification mechanisms. While the term ``joint venture''
has come to carry a negative connotation, JVs can serve as an asset in
China and other markets--allowing foreign companies to operate under
otherwise rigid investment restrictions as well as leverage local
expertise, support, and connections. There is nothing inherently wrong
with JVs and partnerships if they are voluntary. They become
problematic, however, when they are forced and regulations stipulate
that the Chinese partner must maintain majority control of the JV or
required product licenses can only be obtained by a Chinese company,
thereby necessitating a partnership.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See ``Law of the People's Republic of China on Chinese-Foreign
Joint Ventures; Provisions on Administration of Foreign-Invested
Telecommunications Enterprises; The People's Republic of China Foreign
Investment Catalogue 2017.''
China has made its technology transfer objective clear through its
national strategy to promote indigenous innovation, Made in China 2025.
The strategy explicitly promotes the transfer of technology as a means
of advancing technological capability, competitiveness, and strategic
emerging industries. Further, it outlines a wide-ranging effort to
employ funding and the investment of significant government resources
in support of key industries. This top-down direction fosters an
environment that actively pursues technology transfer as a prerequisite
for doing business in China. These factors create real risks for
companies and reduce the competitiveness of American firms as well as
their profitability.
restrictions on foreign cloud service providers
China's restrictions on U.S. cloud services providers (CSPs)
exemplify the lack of reciprocity in the U.S.-China trade relationship.
Foreign companies face written and unwritten requirements that could
force U.S. CSPs to transfer valuable intellectual property, surrender
use of their brand names, and hand over operation and control of their
businesses to Chinese companies in order to do business in the Chinese
market. Chinese cloud service providers operating in the United States
are subject to none of these market access barriers.
Draft and current Chinese regulations--including Regulating
Business Operation in Cloud Services Market (2016) and Cleaning Up and
Regulating the Internet Access Service Market (2017), would force U.S.
cloud computing providers to offer their services through Chinese
partners in the market. These measures, together with existing
licensing and foreign direct investment restrictions on U.S. CSPs
operating in China under the Classification Catalogue of
Telecommunications Services (2015), would require U.S. CSPs to turn
over essentially all ownership and operations to a Chinese company,
forcing the transfer of incredibly valuable intellectual property and
know-how to China.
data localization requirements
Despite numerous efforts by the U.S. tech sector to revise
problematic Chinese regulations and explain that localization does not
equate to security, China continues to publish new and troubling laws,
regulations, and standards that restrict data flows. Cross-border data
flows are essential to digital trade. In 2016, over 53 percent of total
U.S. service exports relied on cross-border data flows.\2\ China's
Cybersecurity Law and other regulations seriously harm many U.S.
exporters by restricting cross-border data flows and requiring firms to
store and process data in China. Draft regulations--including the
Cross-Border Data Transfer Measures and the Critical Information
Infrastructure Protection Regulation (both implementing regulations of
the Cybersecurity Law) contain numerous provisions that will force
companies to localize certain data in China and create undue and
expensive impediments to transferring business information out of China
in a timely manner.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.brookings.edu/blog/up-front/2014/10/21/cross-
border-data-flows-the-internet-and-what-it-means-for-u-s-and-eu-trade-
and-investment/.
The Chinese Government's focus on data localization reflects the
premium placed on control of content and data as a tool to ensure the
stability of the Chinese Government. Though these policies will also
have a negative impact on Chinese multi-national companies, thus far
the Chinese Government has not heeded these concerns.
proliferation of ``china-unique'' standards
Standards offer yet another avenue for China to expand its
regulatory and legal objectives--with even greater international
consequences. Since the early 2000s, China has sought to establish a
more robust and coordinated national technical standards regime,
increase China's participation in international standards setting
bodies, and increase the number of Chinese standards adopted by those
bodies. This has led to notable improvements in China's standards
setting and transparency, but also caused significant problems for U.S.
tech companies.
China's use of standards is particularly problematic for a few
reasons. First, China uses standards as final implementing guidelines
of laws (including the Cybersecurity Law) for companies, meaning the
standard is our last chance to clarify and address problematic
provisions of laws and regulations. Political pressure in China to
produce standards rapidly has also led regulators to offer insufficient
comment periods that fall far short of the WTO's recommended 60-day
comment period.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The WTO TBT Agreement Code of Good Conduct calls for a 60-day
comment period and mandatory reply to all comments received by domestic
and international stakeholders.
Second, China claims that numerous Chinese standards are in line
with international standards; however, they frequently contain key
differences that require companies to modify products and practices
specifically for the Chinese market, which takes time and increases
costs for foreign companies. Moreover, China's reluctance to allow
foreign experts to participate in the standards-setting process in a
truly robust and influential way has limited technical experts' ability
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
to counter these trends.
Third, China seeks to promote its standards in international
standards setting bodies. The cumulative effect of China rapidly
publishing and promoting ``China-unique'' standards that favor Chinese
companies will not only limit foreign companies' access to the Chinese
market but also reshape international standards in favor of Chinese
companies.
Recently, China has also sought to codify its standards-setting
process in law through revision of its Standardization Law. The
Standardization Law presents numerous requirements unique to China,
including public disclosure requirements for internal company practices
that will add unnecessary costs and risk making public sensitive
company data and practices. For example, the Law requires that
companies disclose ``enterprise standards,'' which are related to the
features and performance of a company's product. In addition, the
inclusion of a preference for indigenous innovations in the Law creates
trade barriers that would conflict with China's obligations under the
WTO TBT Agreement. In order to counter these trends, we must ensure
that countries' national standardization practices are fully compliant
with international norms and WTO obligations that apply to a central
government standardizing bodies.
why do companies stay in the chinese market?
While the Chinese market presents clear risks and impediments for
foreign companies, its size and impact on the global supply chain
cannot be ignored. In 2017 alone, the U.S. exported $23 billion worth
of ICT goods to China.\4\ And, as of 2015, China was the second largest
export market for U.S. commercial ICT services exports in Asia. Put
simply, companies cannot be truly global if they give up 25 percent of
the global market.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ U.S. GDP was $19.739 trillion in the fourth quarter of 2017.
Customer retention is another important factor. Customers operate
globally, and they expect leading American companies to offer services
where they need them. If U.S. companies cannot operate in China, they
risk ceding to Chinese companies in the global market, as customers--
particularly those that depend on services such as Cloud--will seek out
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
companies that provide services in all markets in which they operate.
Ultimately, companies face two unappealing options: loss of the
Chinese market and diminished global competitiveness OR operating in a
risky and highly restricted but profitable and important market.
what the u.s. government can do to change the status quo
ITI appreciates that the U.S. Government recognizes that there is a
market-access problem in China and has taken steps to address it,
including USTR's Section 301 investigation and subsequent report
regarding China's unfair trade policies and practices. The tools that
the U.S. Government uses to address these issues, however, must be
tailored and strategic to avoid causing unnecessary harm to U.S.
consumers, businesses, and the economy. I'd like to outline a few basic
tenets below.
do no harm to u.s. consumers and businesses
Tariffs are counterproductive. The broad array of products
identified by USTR for increased tariffs will have a significant
negative impact on the U.S. economy across multiple sectors, increasing
prices for consumers and businesses. The administration has claimed
that consumer goods will be exempt from tariffs; however, the structure
of the global supply chain and the numerous product inputs from across
the globe factoring into final products make it virtually impossible to
exempt consumer goods from the increased costs attributable to tariffs.
For example, smart home devices like connected thermostats would
increase in price as a result of these tariffs,\5\ as the final product
ships from China though it is the product of U.S. know-how and
innovative technology. Additionally, tariffs on key components of
televisions, touch-screen devices, and cameras are all captured by the
current list of potential tariffs and, if imposed, will yield increased
prices on the final product. In short, tariffs ultimately amount to a
tax on American consumers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2018/04/06/2018-
07119/notice-of-determination-and-request-for-public-comment-
concerning-proposed-determination-of-action.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
don't go it alone--leverage international pressure and coalitions
We cannot ignore the global importance of the Chinese market and we
cannot unilaterally punish China into changing its behavior. It is
misguided to assume that publically--and unilaterally--punching China
will change behavior. As we are seeing play out in real-time, this will
only prompt China to retaliate in order to demonstrate that it won't be
bullied by the United States.
We must focus on what works. Multilateral pressure is one of the
few tactics that has caused China to change course. For example, in
2004, China proposed an international standard for wireless security,
``Wireless Authentication and Privacy Infrastructure (WAPI).'' China
subsequently tried to make this mandatory for wireless LAN equipment in
China. Members of the International Standards Organization (ISO)
refuted the mandatory status of the standard and slow-rolled its
approval as an international standard. With the support of business
groups and standards group around the world, ISO ultimately rejected
the proposal for WAPI to become an international standard in 2006.
In 2009, China required that ``Green Dam-Youth Escort'' screening
software be installed on computers to be sold in China, ostensibly for
the purpose of restricting pornographic imagery. However, the software
had clear ``censor-ware'' capabilities with intrusive surveillance
potential; cybersecurity experts also noted serious security
vulnerability concerns. The international community across businesses,
rights groups, and NGOs, and the United States, Japanese, and EU
governments combined intense pressure on numerous fronts, which led to
the delay and ultimate suspension of the program.
Finally, while it is fair to say that bringing China into the WTO
has not had the positive impact that we hoped for, it does create the
opportunity to hold China accountable. Thus far, China has not faced
any real consequences for its actions. It's time for the international
community to stand united and tell China that its market access
restrictions will no longer be tolerated.
compete with china and invest in our future
Punishing China and restricting Chinese investment in the United
States alone will not help us achieve our goals. We must invest in our
own future. This means investing in research and development,
education, science and technology, artificial intelligence (AI), and
incentivizing innovation--all of which are key to our future economic
and societal prosperity.
We must be prepared to step up and compete with China. Regardless
of whether China plays by the rules or not, Chinese inventors,
entrepreneurs, and businesses will continue innovating and will close
the technological gap between the United States and China. While we of
course want a level playing field, we must also step up our game. China
is making a concerted and strategic effort to invest and plan for its
economic and technological future. The United States can and should do
more. According to the World Economic Forum, in 2016 China had 4.7
million recent STEM graduates while the United States had 568,000
graduates. In 2017, China accounted for 48 percent of the total global
investment in AI startup funding, while the U.S. accounted for 38
percent. In monetary terms, China invested $7.3 billion in AI while the
U.S. invested $5.77 billion.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.technologyreview.com/the-download/610271/chinas-ai-
startups-scored-more-funding-than-americas-last-year/.
China is also on track to outpace the United States in other areas.
For example, according to a 2018 International Data Corporation (IDC)
report, the United States will spend $22 billion on smart city
development this year. China is close behind with projected spending at
$21 billion.\7\ As of 2015, there were 1,000 smart city pilot plans in
the works worldwide, 500 of which were located in China.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://www.techrepublic.com/article/smart-cities-expected-to-
invest-80b-in-technologies-in-2018/.
\8\ https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/tr/Documents/
public-sector/deloitte-nl-ps-smart-cities-report.pdf.
These are just a few examples. The bottom line is that the United
States is failing itself by not seriously investing in our country's
technological and economic future.
conclusion
The tech sector faces serious challenges in accessing the Chinese
market. We must address these challenges aggressively, but we also
cannot ignore or deny the significant role China plays in the global
economy as a key piece of the global supply chain, supplier of products
and components, and a vital market for U.S. goods and services.
There is no question that it is time to demonstrate to China that
there are consequences for its unfair trade actions, and that the
international community will not tolerate blatant disregard for
international norms and principles of free trade. However, addressing
China's behavior must not come at a cost for American consumers and
businesses. And we cannot let our efforts distract us from
strengthening and developing our own tech sector and economy. We do
ourselves a disservice if we downplay the need to invest in our ability
to compete with an increasingly innovative and technologically advanced
China.
Market access in China is a complex and multi-faceted problem that
will require us to be strategic on numerous fronts. With the right
approach, we can address these serious issues in a way that benefits,
not harms, the United States and the global economy.
On behalf of all ITI members, I thank you for having me before the
committee today and commend you for your interest in examining the
evolving U.S.-China trade relationship. We stand ready to work with you
to address these challenges. I look forward to answering your
questions.
______
Prepared Statement of Thea M. Lee,
President, Economic Policy Institute
Thank you, Chairman Cornyn and Ranking Member Casey, for the
invitation to participate in this important hearing. I am the president
of the Economic Policy Institute, the Nation's premier think tank for
analyzing the effects of economic policy on America's working families.
EPI has focused attention over many years on the impact of the
imbalanced U.S. economic relationship with China on U.S. jobs and
wages, as well as on American business and the long-term prospects for
U.S. innovation and growth.
Seventeen years after China acceded to the World Trade Organization
(WTO), the bilateral economic relationship between our two countries is
enormously lopsided and problematic. The U.S. ran a goods trade deficit
with China of $375 billion in 2017--up from $83 billion in 2001. This
is the largest single bilateral trade deficit between any two countries
in the history of the world--and it continues to trend upwards, despite
20 U.S. challenges to China at the WTO, despite earnest annual
bilateral talks and commitments, and despite all the ``reform''
commitments China made upon accession.
Furthermore, it is not just the sheer size of the U.S. trade
imbalance with China that is of concern. It is the composition.
As recently as 2001, the U.S. ran a global trade surplus in
advanced technology products (ATP). ATP includes advanced elements of
computers and electronics, as well as biotechnology, life sciences,
aerospace, and nuclear technology, among others. ATP should be a strong
suit for a wealthy, technologically savvy, high-skilled, capital-
intensive country like the United States. However, roughly coincident
with China's entry into the WTO, the surplus turned to deficit and grew
rapidly, hitting $136 billion in 2017. The U.S. ATP deficit with China
is more than our entire global ATP trade deficit, which was $110
billion. This means that excluding China, we actually have a trade
surplus in ATP with the rest of the world. This statistic alone should
be a signal that there are significant anomalies in the U.S. trade
relationship with China that cannot be explained by market forces.
Meanwhile, top U.S. exports to China include raw materials,
agricultural products, and waste materials. Between 2001 and 2015, we
saw the fastest growth in imports over exports with China in computers,
electronics, miscellaneous manufactured commodities, and apparel. We
saw the fastest growth in exports over imports in agriculture and
aerospace (where significant technology is being transferred over
time). This is not the profile of imports and exports that would be
expected between countries at the respective economic development
levels of China and the United States.
wto promises
In 2000, politicians from both the Democratic and Republican
parties and business leaders argued that WTO accession would create a
``win-win result for both countries''--the U.S. would gain access to
Chinese markets, ``reformers'' in China would ascend in the political/
economic hierarchy, workers' rights would improve, and both countries
would prosper.
The actual outcomes have been decidedly different.
According to USTR, China is still not fully compliant with the
commitments it made during the WTO accession process. American
companies trying to do business in China face theft of trade secrets,
counterfeiting, inadequate protection of intellectual property, online
piracy, industrial policies that promote domestic goods at the expense
of U.S. products, subsidies, discriminatory product standards, the
dumping of excess capacity, and restricted access for American
services. Seventeen years after accession, China has not even listed
all of its restricted export subsidies, let alone eliminated them, as
promised.
In addition, China has used currency policy to gain an unfair
competitive advantage over American business and labor. During the
crucial decade after China's accession, the Chinese Government
intervened systematically and in one direction in currency markets to
thwart exchange rate adjustment that could have helped to rebalance
trade with the United States. The legacy of that currency intervention
remains an important factor in the current imbalance. While in
principle both the WTO and the IMF have mechanisms and rules to address
currency manipulation, in practice no U.S. administration has yet been
willing to use those mechanisms or U.S. unilateral measures to address
this problem.
impact on jobs and wages
This litany of unfair trade practices and currency manipulation has
had a serious and pervasive negative impact on American jobs and wages.
As my colleague, Rob Scott, demonstrated in a 2017 report, ``Growth in
U.S.-China Trade Deficit Between 2001 and 2015 Cost 3.4 Million Jobs,''
the deficit cost jobs in all 50 States and the District of Columbia.
Between 2001 and 2011, the growing trade deficit cost directly impacted
workers $37 billion a year, while also putting downward pressure on the
wages of all non-college graduates by $180 billion a year.
American businesses have also suffered from closed markets and
unfair practices in China, but they are often reluctant to initiate
trade complaints or protest, as they fear any public outcry will bring
more unfavorable treatment on their company.
It is no secret that the Chinese Government has a long-term
economic strategy to build certain sectors through subsidies, as well
as purchasing, tax, and regulatory policies. These strategies are
announced publicly at regular intervals--pillar industries, strategic
emerging industries, Made with China, Made in China 2025. These
strategic plans are variations on the theme of ``picking winners,''
also known as industrial policy, something American politicians of both
parties tend to scorn. These plans set targets for indigenous
production, use of technology, favorable treatment for state-owned
enterprises, and discriminatory treatment of foreign brands and
companies, among other things. These practices are deep and pervasive.
Of course, the Chinese Government has a right to set its own
strategic goals, and the United States can certainly be faulted for
failing to articulate, let alone implement, any coherent, long-term
economic strategy.
But there are two problems here, and we should be careful to
distinguish them. On the one hand, many of the Chinese Government's
practices are inconsistent with international rules and norms--not just
WTO rules on prohibited subsidies and dumping, but also international
conventions on workers' rights, public health, human rights,
environmental protections, intellectual property rights, and consumer
safety. The United States touts the importance of a rules-based system,
but if some players--like China--flout the rules with impunity over
decades, then the rules-based system becomes a trap for those who
comply. The United States failure to adequately enforce existing rules
is why there is so much pent-up frustration among workers and domestic
producers over trade with China. The U.S. Government's piecemeal and
scattershot enforcement strategy has been time-consuming and
ineffective.
The U.S. Government has not ever raised, in any systematic or
meaningful way, China's failure to comply with its obligations as a
member of the International Labor Organization to ``respect, promote,
and realize'' the core international workers' rights outlined in the
ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work: freedom
of association, right to organize and bargain collectively, and freedom
from child labor, forced labor, and discrimination. This means that
American workers and businesses are competing on a tilted playing
field, since Chinese workers cannot exercise their rights to form
independent and democratic unions.
On the other hand, the United States has its own responsibility to
develop and implement a coherent long-term economic strategy with
respect to both manufacturing and services, both trade-related and
domestic. The U.S. Government has failed to invest adequately in
infrastructure and skills for decades, and business has not filled the
void. We have a tax system that rewards capital over labor and
outsourcing over domestic production. It remains riddled with
unproductive loopholes, and--especially after last year's changes--it
fails to raise adequate revenue to fund needed investments.
Our trade policy is geared toward boosting the profits and mobility
of multinational corporations, but not creating and supporting good
jobs at home. Our government spends a lot of time and energy
negotiating new trade agreements, but has failed to act to stem
currency manipulation, which undermines the market-opening measures
negotiated with so much fanfare.
Forced technology transfer, IPR transgressions, and the loss of
domestic capacity in key sectors can all contribute to the undermining
of American innovation and technological leadership. This has
consequences not just for the current labor market, but for our future
trajectory.
The Chinese Government is clearly playing a long game, while the
U.S. is egregiously shortsighted. Our trade policies in the past have
been so inadequate in scale and slow in implementation that by the time
we take action, it is often a decade too late, with the result that our
trade actions are ineffective, if not counterproductive.
We need to reform our domestic trade laws so we can act
expeditiously--as soon as the Chinese government announces its
strategic priorities, not a decade later, after we've lost market share
and the technological edge. Going forward, we must address new barriers
to trade in services and e-commerce. We need to make sure that we
have--and are willing to use--measures to address currency
misalignment. Our trade enforcement measures should prioritize good
jobs, workers' rights, democracy, environmental compliance, and
consumer safety over outsourcing and short-term profits.
In summary, the U.S. Government needs to develop and articulate its
own long-term economic development strategy. It needs to use domestic
tax, infrastructure, and workforce development policies to ensure that
American workers and businesses have the tools and skills they need to
compete successfully. But the government also needs to strengthen our
trade compliance and enforcement measures and be willing to use them
aggressively and consistently and in a timely manner to ensure that our
trade relationship with China is reciprocal and fair.
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to any questions you
may have.
______
Communication
----------
United Steelworkers (USW)
Statement of the United Steel, Paper and Forestry, Rubber,
Manufacturing, Energy, Allied Industrial and
Service Workers International Union (USW)
On behalf of the 850,000 members of the United Steelworkers (USW), we
wish to thank you for holding this important hearing on market access
challenges in China and for the opportunity to provide submissions to
the record. Access to foreign markets are critical for any
manufacturer, and as the largest union in the manufacturing sector in
North America, it is imperative that the rules of trade provide for
fair competition that raises living standards for all workers.
Since the ascension of the People's Republic of China (PRC) to the
World Trade Organization (WTO), the dramatic loss of U.S. manufacturing
jobs has been staggering. The growth in the U.S. goods trade deficit
with China eliminated or displaced 3.4 million U.S. jobs between 2001
and 2015 according to research by the Economic Policy Institute. Nearly
three-fourths of the jobs lost, or 2.6 million jobs, were in
manufacturing.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.epi.org/press/the-growing-trade-deficit-with-china-
cost-3-4-million-u-s-jobs-between-2001-and-2015/.
The market access barriers in China are not unknown to American workers
or to Congress. The most recent National Trade Estimate report of the
United States Trade Representative (USTR) highlights, in 18 pages,
multiple long standing market access barriers for every segment of the
economy from agriculture to manufacturing.\2\ Each of these barriers
represents a long established issue with the PRC, such as the illegal
hacking of several USW represented companies like United States Steel.
Throughout 2010, the Chinese Government subjected U.S. Steel to cyber-
attacks. Then in 2011, government hackers in China hijacked information
from U.S. Steel on advanced high-strength steel used in the auto
industry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/files/reports/2017/NTE/
2017%20NTE.pdf.
Companies in China had been unable to develop this technology and were
under pressure from their domestic car companies to get it. So their
government stole it for them. After the theft, one of the largest steel
companies in China, Baosteel, used the trade secrets to produce the
specialized steel and export it to the United States in direct
competition with U.S. Steel.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.usw.org/blog/2016/outlaw-chinese-steel.
These attacks also targeted USW staff. We were directly attacked by
China's People's Liberation Army hackers, as shown in the May 2014
indictment obtained by the U.S. Attorney for the Western District of
Pennsylvania, David Hickton. Several of our employers were also
identified as victims in those attacks.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.usw.org/news/media-center/releases/2018/usw-
section-301-decision-confronts-chinas-intellectual-property-abuses.
These overt raids of intellectual property and espionage of labor
organizations are unfortunately just one of the many challenges with
the PRC market. The industrial policies of the country create a wide
array of limits to U.S. products that were long established prior to
the recent announcements of retaliation by the PRC for the U.S. attempt
to maintain its critical defense and infrastructure through the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
completion of the 232 investigations on steel and aluminum.
USW members in the food processing and ethanol industries have seen
anti-dumping and countervailing duties raised against their exports
because of the PRC's mercantilist policies. After USW tire workers
successfully petitioned the Obama administration for tariff relief
under section 421 of U.S. trade law on passenger vehicle and light
truck tires, the PRC responded by illegally retaliating against U.S.
chicken producers.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.reuters.com/article/us-chicken-china-sb/u-s-china-
tire-spat-couId-hurt-chicken-feet-idUSTRE58D4P620090914.
In the last 2 years, the PRC has also raised significant tariffs on
U.S. ethanol production, undercutting foreign market growth for U.S.
producers and amplifying ongoing issues in U.S. domestic renewable
fuels policy. In late 2016, the PRC added a 30-percent tariff on U.S.
ethanol exports, the goal was not to prevent U.S. dumping but to
develop the domestic industry and reduce Chinese subsidized corn
stocks.\6\ The addition of a 15 percent ethanol tariff in retaliation
for the Administration's steel and aluminum 232 announcements was not
just a response to tariffs but strategically done to blunt U.S.
producer's competitiveness. U.S. imports had recently picked up after
prices fell enough to be attractive even with the high 30-
percent duties.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://lta.reuters.com/article/marketsNews/
idLTAL4N1DM34C?rpc=401&.
\7\ https://www.reuters.com/article/usa-trade-china-ethanol/update-
1-china-tariffs-on-u-s-ethanol-to-cut-off-imports-in-short-term-
idUSL4N1RF4G0.
While much attention continues to be paid to the PRC's retaliatory
threats against U.S. agricultural products, previously established
market access barriers from the country's ``Made in China 2025''
program will undercut the U.S. ability to access the Chinese market in
advanced manufacturing. The PRC intends to develop and grow advanced
information technology, automated machine tools and robotics, aviation
and spaceflight equipment, maritime engineering equipment and high-tech
vessels, advanced rail transit equipment, new energy vehicles, power
equipment, farm machinery, new materials, biopharmaceuticals and
advanced medical products. The country intends to capture these
advanced manufacturing productions through state-driven plans and
initiatives, as it, for example, sets targets for indigenous production
or control of up to 40 percent of certain critical components in the
aerospace, power and construction sector.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/tiles/reports/2017/NTE/
2017%20NTE.pdf.
How we respond to these market challenges is a critical function that
the administration and Congress must address. For too long U.S.
manufacturing workers have been asked to sacrifice their jobs to what
economists blithely call ``comparative advantage.'' However, economics
101 quickly falls apart in the real world where political calculations
are made. U.S. workers cannot idly wait years for international forums
to squabble over terms and definitions of industrial overcapacity and
other critical debates. Congress should support aggressive attempt to
open Chinese markets but not at the expense of unilateral domestic
deindustrialization. Trade between the two largest individual economies
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
in the world today must be fair and reciprocal.
