- COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
[Senate Hearing 115-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
FISCAL YEAR 2019
----------
WEDNESDAY, MAY 23, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 2:28 p.m., in Room SD-192, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Jerry Moran (Chairman) presiding.
Present: Senators Moran, Murkowski, Capito, Schatz, and Van
Hollen.
NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES F. BRIDENSTINE, ADMINISTRATOR
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR JERRY MORAN
Senator Moran. My hand will work as the gavel this
afternoon.
We are going to start just a couple minutes early. The vote
is at 3:15, and so this will be similar to the hearing that we
had last week when we were under similar circumstances with the
FBI Director.
Good afternoon. I call this hearing to order.
I am pleased to be joined today by the Acting Ranking
Member of this subcommittee, Senator Schatz. I chaired a
subcommittee that he was the ranking member of before I came
here, and he has followed me in this capacity. And I look
forward to working with you and your colleagues on this
particular issue of Commerce, Justice, Science, the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Administrator, we are delighted to have you join us. I look
forward to the conversation.
In light of the time constraints, I am going to forego an
opening statement, and I now turn to the Senator from Hawaii,
Senator Schatz.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR BRIAN SCHATZ
Senator Schatz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is good to be
back with you, Chairman Moran.
Thank you, Administrator Bridenstine, for being here.
I would also ask to enter both my statement into the record
and Ranking Member Shaheen's statement into the record.
Senator Moran. Without objection.
[The statements follow:]
Prepared Statement of Senator Brian Schatz
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome Administrator Bridenstine.
The President has requested $19.9 billion for NASA as a whole,
which is 4 percent lower than what the Congress enacted in fiscal year
2018. This budget repeats requests we rejected last fiscal year:
--Zero-ing out education
--Cutting Earth Science and next generation transportation systems
It is useful to know that the administration's position on these
programs, but make no mistake: the Committee believes they are
priorities, and we will continue to enact funding for them. They are
necessary for NASA to serve the American people through a balanced
portfolio of space, aeronautics, and science.
I have no argument with the budget's attention to human space
travel--except that it seems to come at the expense of important
programs that drive innovation, enable stewardship of the planet, and
ensure an American workforce ready for the STEM jobs of tomorrow.
To underscore my concerns, consider the Carbon Monitoring System,
or CMS, which NASA just eliminated. Administrator Bridenstine, I
appreciate our conversation and your assurances that funding will
continue for grants that have already been made. I also think you made
interesting points about NASA's other carbon observations, and I will
use my time later to give you a chance to share those points here
today.
But the CMS is still a $10 million/year grant program that supports
academic science in atmospheric carbon. This is the heart of what I
mentioned earlier:
--funding for innovation
--supporting universities that educate tomorrow's STEM workforce
--making factual observations of our environment.
I can accept that a specific program like the CMS may no longer fit
into NASA's portfolio of observations and science--but I sharply
question the systemic cuts proposed in the fiscal year 2019 budget to
Earth Science. The stakes are too high. We need impartial data from
trustworthy sources like NASA to make smart decisions about how we
manage resources and set policy for the future.
We also need an educated workforce to innovate economic growth from
NASA science, which makes the proposal to zero out education
particularly disappointing. For the kids and teachers in States like
mine where Space Grant inspires and educates, I have a message: don't
worry. Last year, we rejected the proposal to terminate NASA education,
and we will do it again this year.
As for the budget's focus on human space travel to the moon as a
stepping stone to Mars, I withhold judgment. It's a logical step, but I
worry that increasing costs and delay wind up with us stalled at the
moon indefinitely. The Government Accountability Office's most recent
assessment of major NASA projects illustrates my concerns. The GAO
found an average schedule delay of 1 year, up from 7 months last year,
and average costs growing at least 18.8 percent--up from 15.6 percent
last year.
Administrator Bridenstine, you and I had a good conversation last
week, and I hope it will be a strong foundation for working together.
We will need to, if we want to deliver the NASA that America needs and
deserves.
Prepared Statement of Senator Jeanne Shaheen
Thank you Mr. Chairman and welcome Administrator Bridenstine.
Overall, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
budget request is $19.9 billion, a cut of 4 percent below the fiscal
year 2018 level. The request repeats cuts Congress rejected in fiscal
year 2018, including eliminating education programs and cutting funding
for next generation transportation systems and Earth Science--items
that are priorities of this Committee because they help NASA achieve
the agency's calling to explore, discover, teach and inspire.
Such cuts threaten to stymie NASA's progress in achieving its
missions and goals. Just as the administration's ambitious plans to
return to the Moon rely on the deep space exploration vehicles, Orion
and the Space Launch System (SLS), so does it also rely on having a
technically-literate science and engineering workforce.
That's why I'm so disappointed by the repeated request to eliminate
NASA Education programs. The New Hampshire Space Grant is inspiring a
love of science in K-12 students and helping support undergraduates and
graduate students through scholarships, fellowships and internships.
Through research grants and educations programs like Space Grant and
EPSCOR, every State is a space State.
I was glad to see your recent comments regarding climate change,
Mr. Administrator. The science on climate change is beyond rational
dispute: It is a reality--a clear and present threat to our planet--and
it must be addressed robustly and urgently.
When it comes to climate change, NASA's job is to observe the
Earth--to tell us factually what is happening to our planet. NASA does
not say why Earth's climate is changing or what policies we need to
design in response. Yet NASA's fiscal year 2019 budget request cuts its
core Earth observation by more than 7 percent, ending 4 missions. If
this Nation is to make any progress in mitigating the harmful effects
of climate change, we need science agencies, such as NASA, to provide
factual and reliable information on how our world is changing.
Finally, I'd like to note that the Government Accountability Office
(GAO) in its assessment of NASA large projects reports that the cost
and schedule performance has deteriorated over the last year.
Exploration Mission-1 has slipped in to 2020 and the James Webb Space
Telescope is facing 18 months of delay due to issues like using the
wrong cleaner, the wrong voltage or the wrong torque. NASA can't afford
its vast ambitions if NASA and its contractors cannot even tighten
screws correctly.
You may not think of New Hampshire as a space State, but indeed we
are. We are the home State of Alan Shepard, the first American in
space, and Christa McAuliffe, our teacher in space who died in the
Challenger accident. Today, New Hampshire companies and universities
supply NASA with technology to improve both low-orbit and deep space
exploration and design, build and operate major instruments on NASA
satellites to study solar physics.
I look forward to working with you and the Chairman to ensure NASA
can help inspire and train the next generation of technical workers,
whether they are building rockets or building American industry and
products in the private sector.
Again, thank you for testifying today.
Senator Schatz. Thank you, Chairman.
Senator Moran. Administrator Bridenstine, we welcome your
testimony. While you may have been instructed to make it
abbreviated, I think we are going to have time to hear from
you, and I would encourage you to tell us what you would like
for us to know. And if we run into trouble, we will try to work
on cutting our questions short, which suggests you may want to
go long.
Mr. Bridenstine. Okay.
SUMMARY STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES F. BRIDENSTINE
Well, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking Member, it is an honor
to be here. I have, of course, submitted my written statement
for the record. I know, because of the time constraints, that
we are short on time, and I would be happy to forego an opening
statement and just say this, that I have been charged with
leading one of the most storied agencies in the United States
Government. It is the honor of a lifetime. We have people doing
very dangerous things even right now on the International Space
Station and flying missions all over the world to deliver
science and discovery not only on behalf of this Nation but on
behalf of the entire world. So it is an honor. I am thrilled to
be here, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. James F. Bridenstine
overview
Mr. Chairman and Members of the subcommittee, I am very pleased to
appear before you today, in my first opportunity to testify before
Congress as NASA Administrator, to discuss NASA's fiscal year 2019
budget request of $19.9 billion. This budget, along with the fiscal
year 2018 NASA appropriation included in the recently enacted fiscal
year 2018 Consolidated Appropriations Act, places NASA at the forefront
of a global effort to advance humanity's future in space, and expands
on our Nation's great capacity for exploration and innovation.
Pursuant to National Space Policy Directive-1, the request provides
the fiscal year 2019 resources NASA requires for its role in ``an
innovative and sustainable program of exploration with commercial and
international partners to enable human expansion across the solar
system and to bring back to Earth new knowledge and opportunities.''
The request provides the resources NASA needs to lead a sustainable
campaign of exploration, returning humans to the Moon for long-term
exploration and utilization followed by human missions to Mars and
other destinations.
With the fiscal year 2019 request, NASA is proposing an Exploration
Campaign funded at $10.5 billion in fiscal year 2019 and $52 billion
over 5 years. The Campaign is an Agency-wide integrated research and
development program that focuses interconnected exploration objectives.
Within the Exploration Campaign, NASA will pursue a bold new lunar
exploration program by employing expertise and resources across the
Agency in support of: a science and technology initiative; a small
commercial lander initiative; a development activity for commercial
mid-to-large landers to address both science and human exploration
objectives, and a Lunar Orbital Platform-Gateway (or ``Gateway''). The
effort is built to enable early successes with seamless collaboration
across the Agency, and foster both commercial and international
partnerships towards progressive capability development and leadership.
The International Space Station (ISS) is a cornerstone of our
integrated approach to exploration. NASA will use the full potential of
the Station to demonstrate critical technologies, learn about human
health in space, and focus commercial energies on the growing low Earth
orbit (LEO) economy. Starting this year, we will accelerate the process
of transitioning to commercial approaches to ensure a long-term human
presence in LEO by the end of 2024 as NASA leads a coalition of
international and commercial partners to the Moon and then Mars and
beyond. We propose to end direct U.S. financial support for the ISS in
2025, after which NASA would rely on commercial partners for our LEO
research and technology demonstration needs.
Deep space exploration will require a heavy-lift capability and a
crew vehicle designed for the rigors of long-duration flights and high-
speed reentry into the Earth's atmosphere. NASA will test these
capabilities with the uncrewed launch of the new Space Launch System
(SLS) and Orion crew vehicle on an initial mission around the Moon in
fiscal year 2020. In 2023, we will use these systems to launch humans
into lunar orbit--the first human mission beyond LEO since 1972.
To establish a presence beyond LEO in the strategic region around
the Moon, NASA will develop the Gateway. The Gateway will be a place to
live, learn and work around the Moon and will provide opportunities to
support missions to the surface. The fiscal year 2019 request supports
NASA's plan to launch the first element of the Gateway--its power and
propulsion module--in 2022 and will do so by launching the element
through a competitive commercial launch contract in an effort to both
accelerate the establishment of the Gateway and enable and further
advance commercial partnerships in deep space.
NASA will draw on the interests and capabilities of our industry
and international partners as we develop progressively complex robotic
missions to the surface of the Moon with scientific and exploration
objectives in advance of human return. In collaboration with our robust
scientific activity across the NASA portfolio, these new lunar robotic
missions will stretch the capabilities of industry and international
partners, while returning science and knowledge we can use for human
missions.
The fiscal year 2019 request proposes a new Exploration Research
and Technology budget line incorporating current Space Technology
Mission Directorate (STMD) and some Human Exploration and Operations
Mission Directorate (HEOMD) programs into an integrated technology
investment line focused on exploration. These technology investments
will enable new robotic and human exploration capabilities and
missions, and they will contribute to economic development and growth
by enabling innovative systems and services supporting the emerging
space economy.
At the end of the 5 years proposed in the budget request for this
Exploration Campaign, NASA plans to have achieved uncrewed and crewed
test launches of the SLS and Orion system; launched two of the initial
elements of the Gateway (to be complete with two additional launches by
2025); supported numerous commercial lunar robotic landings and
developed lunar landing capabilities to support future NASA mission
needs; developed key technologies needed to make exploration more
capable and cost-effective; and established a pathway to enable a
seamless transition from direct NASA financial support of the ISS in
2025.
The fiscal year 2019 request supports and expands science missions
across the solar system while integrating science into the exploration
campaign and leveraging NASA's extensive lunar science experience and
data. As the Mars Curiosity rover continues to make dazzling
discoveries, work continues on a sister Mars lander for launch in 2020.
The budget provides for continued work on a potential Mars sample
return mission, a Europa Clipper mission, and a constellation of
operating planetary science missions. The request effectively triples
funding for detecting and learning to respond to hazardous near-Earth
objects (NEOs), funding a first-of-kind mission to deliberately alter
the orbit of a near-Earth object. In Earth Science, the budget supports
the priorities of the science and applications communities with a
focused, balanced program including funding for Landsat-9 and a
Sustainable Land Imaging program. The request supports the study of our
nearest star with the launch later this year of the Parker Solar Probe,
a mission that will endure high temperatures while traveling through
the Sun's atmosphere to make the closest-ever observations of the Sun
and, indeed, of any star. In Astrophysics, the James Webb Space
Telescope will go to the opposite extremes--with detectors operating
just a few tens of degrees above absolute zero, the telescope will look
out over vast distances and back into the early universe.
The fiscal year 2019 request supports NASA's continuing research on
new aeronautics technologies, including commercial supersonic flight,
unmanned aviation systems, and the next generation of aircraft. NASA's
Low-Boom Flight Demonstrator, an experimental supersonic airplane will
make its first flight in 2021. This ``X-plane'' could open a new market
for U.S. companies to build faster commercial airliners, creating jobs
and cutting cross-country flight times in half.
The request proposes to terminate the Office of Education and its
portfolio of domestic assistance awards (principally grants and
cooperative agreements), redirecting those funds to NASA's core mission
of exploration. NASA will continue to support other education
activities, such as internships and fellowships funded by the mission
directorates.
NASA's fiscal year 2019 request supports the Agency's efforts to
renew and sustain facilities crucial to mission success while divesting
of unneeded infrastructure. The request maintains vital support for
independent technical and safety oversight of NASA missions and
operations.
human exploration and operations
The fiscal year 2019 request proposes an integrated, Agency-wide
Exploration Campaign. The Campaign will be executed with the goals of
establishing an innovative and sustainable program of exploration in
concert with our commercial and international partners, to spur a
vibrant commercial activity in LEO, and to enable human expansion
across the solar system, bringing new knowledge and opportunities back
to Earth. The United States will lead the return of humans to the Moon
for long-term exploration and utilization, followed by human missions
to Mars and other destinations. The request provides the necessary
resources in fiscal year 2019 to support development as planned of the
SLS rocket and Orion crew vehicle, as well as the other critical
technologies and research needed to support a robust exploration
program. The budget creates new opportunities for collaboration with
industry on ISS and supports public-private partnerships for
exploration systems that will extend human presence into the solar
system. The budget supports our plan to deliver to lunar orbit in 2022
a power and propulsion element as the foundation of the Gateway.
The fiscal year 2019 request includes a new account structure for
human exploration and operations and space technology programs to
improve alignment of programs and funding with NASA's new strategic
space exploration objectives. This new structure includes LEO and
Spaceflight Operations; Deep Space Exploration Systems; and Exploration
Research and Technology accounts, and realigns some program content.
Consistent with the new budget structure and in order to focus
Agency activity on exploration, NASA also plans to reorganize the Human
Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate (HEOMD) and Space
Technology Mission Directorate (STMD). NASA will assess restructuring
options (and hybrid options that may be developed), and prepare for
implementation at the start of the fiscal year 2019 budget year.
The fiscal year 2019 request includes $10.5 billion for the
Exploration Campaign, with $4.6 billion for Deep Space Exploration
Systems, and $1.0 billion for Exploration Research and Technology. The
fiscal year 2019 request also includes $4.5 billion for Low-Earth Orbit
and Spaceflight Operations, including the International Space Station
(ISS) and Space Transportation--both commercial crew system development
and ongoing crew and cargo transportation services that resupply the
ISS, as well as $44.8 million for the Exploration Campaign Construction
of Facilities and $268 million for Moon and Mars exploration activities
funded in the Science Mission Directorate.
The ISS will continue to serve as the Nation's core long-duration
human spaceflight asset through 2024--which will mark nearly 25 years
of continuous human occupancy. However, NASA must also look beyond its
current programs in order to secure the Nation's future in LEO.
Starting in fiscal year 2019, NASA proposes a new program designed to
foster the emerging commercial LEO space industry. This program,
starting with a $150 million investment in fiscal year 2019, will
support commercial partners to encourage development of capabilities
that the private sector and NASA can utilize in LEO. The budget
proposes to end direct U.S. Government funding for the ISS in 2025,
after which NASA would rely on these commercial partners for our LEO
research and technology demonstration requirements. This decision does
not necessarily imply that the platform itself will be deorbited at
that time--it is possible that industry could continue to operate
certain elements or capabilities of the ISS as part of a future
commercial platform. NASA will encourage the emergence of an
environment in LEO where NASA is one of many customers of a non-
Governmental human spaceflight enterprise. On May 17, NASA issued a
NASA Research Announcement (NRA) for LEO Commercialization to inform
NASA's strategy for enabling the commercialization of human spaceflight
in LEO and meeting NASA's long-term LEO needs. The NRA solicits
industry concepts, business plans and viability for habitable
platforms, whether using the ISS or free-flying, that would enable a
commercial marketplace in LEO where NASA is one of many customers. The
NRA also seeks industry input on the role of government and evolution
of ISS in the roadmap to commercialization of LEO. NASA anticipates
awarding multiple four-month, fixed price contracts, up to $1 million
per award.
Maintaining the ISS requires a fleet of launch vehicles to sustain
a constant supply line of both crew and cargo. Under the original
Commercial Resupply Services (CRS) contracts, our two commercial cargo
partners, Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX) and Orbital ATK, are
providing cargo deliveries to the ISS. Using the space launch vehicles
developed in partnership with NASA, SpaceX and Orbital ATK have also
helped to bring some of the commercial satellite launch market back to
the United States and have reduced commercial launch costs. Under new
CRS-2 contracts, SpaceX, Orbital ATK, and Sierra Nevada Corporation
will deliver critical science, research, and technology demonstrations
to the ISS over 5 years from 2020 through 2024. Working with our
commercial crew partners, SpaceX and the Boeing Company, NASA plans to
return crew launch capability to American soil in 2018. The fiscal year
2019 request provides critical resources in this exciting and
challenging period as we work with our partners to launch the first new
U.S. human spaceflight capability in a generation.
Under the auspices of the ISS National Laboratory, managed by the
Center for the Advancement of Science In Space (CASIS), NASA and CASIS
continue to expand research on the ISS sponsored by pharmaceutical,
technology, consumer product, and other industries, as well as by other
Government agencies, such as the National Institutes of Health and the
National Science Foundation. Through CASIS' efforts, the ISS National
Lab has reached full capacity for allocated crew time and upmass and
downmass.
As we move out beyond LEO, we will employ new deep space systems,
including the heavy-lift SLS, Orion crew vehicle, the Exploration
Ground Systems (EGS) that support them, commercial launch vehicles,
lunar landers, and new deep space habitation capabilities to be
developed through public-private partnerships and international
partnerships.
NASA plans to launch an initial, uncrewed deep space mission,
Exploration Mission-1 (EM-1), in fiscal year 2020. The mission will
combine the new heavy-lift SLS with an uncrewed version of the Orion
spacecraft on a mission to lunar orbit. A crewed mission, EM-2, will
follow in 2023. The fiscal year 2019 budget fully funds the Agency
baseline commitment schedule for EM-2 and the Orion spacecraft and
enables NASA to begin work on post EM-2 missions. Missions launched on
the SLS in the 2020s will establish the capability to operate safely
and productively in deep space.
SLS, Orion, and EGS are the critical capabilities for maintaining
and extending U.S. human spaceflight leadership beyond LEO to the Moon,
Mars, and beyond. In fiscal year 2018, SLS Core Stage integration and
outfitting (including installation of the four RS-25 engines) will
continue at Michoud Assembly Facility. There will be a series of EM-1
flight hardware deliveries to EGS at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). SLS
will continue a series of EM-1 Design Certification Reviews, conduct
the Critical Design Review (CDR) for the next mission, EM-2, and begin
fabrication of components for EM-3 and beyond. In fiscal year 2018,
Orion will continue qualification testing of systems for EM-2. NASA is
accelerating the ascent abort-2 test (AA-2) into 2019, ahead of EM-1.
Structural work is already underway on Orion EM-2 flight hardware
production. For EM-1, the European Service Module is scheduled to be
delivered to the Operations and Checkout Building at KSC for
integration with the Crew Module. Later this year, EGS will complete
the system verification and validation phase and begin the operations
and integration phase in preparation for multi-element verification and
validation for the Mobile Launcher, Pad, and Vehicle Assembly Building.
These are the early steps on a journey that leads American astronauts
into deep space, permanently.
We also will begin to build the in-space infrastructure for long-
term exploration and development of the Moon by delivering to lunar
orbit a power and propulsion element as the foundation of the Gateway.
The Gateway to the Moon and beyond will give us a strategic presence in
cislunar space that will drive our activity with commercial and
international partners and help us further explore the Moon and its
resources and leverage that experience toward human missions to Mars.
In-space power and propulsion and deep space habitation are central to
future human exploration. Development and deployment of these
capabilities will be a focus of the early-to-mid 2020s, leading to
crewed missions beyond the Earth-Moon system, including to the Mars
system.
NASA is also working on the second phase of the Next Space
Technologies for Exploration Partnerships (NextSTEP), an effort to
stimulate deep-space capability development across the aerospace
industry. Through these initial public-private partnerships, NextSTEP
partners will provide advanced concept studies, technology development
projects, and significant measurements in key areas, including habitat
concepts, environmental control and life support systems, advanced in-
space propulsion, and small spacecraft to conduct missions related to
strategic knowledge gaps. NASA intends to perform integrated ground
testing using habitation capabilities developed by the NextSTEP
partners in 2018.
As part of the Agency's overall strategy to conduct deep space
exploration, NASA is supporting the development of commercial lunar
exploration. A new cross-Agency campaign will combine science and
exploration objectives in Advanced Cislunar and Surface Capabilities.
The campaign will focus on engaging non-traditional U.S. industry
partners and sectors in the space program and using innovative
approaches to combine lunar robotics, a cislunar presence, and lunar
landing capabilities, involving commercial and international
participation. For example, the purpose of the Lunar Cargo
Transportation and Landing by Soft Touchdown (CATALYST) initiative is
to encourage the development of U.S. private-sector robotic lunar
landers capable of successfully delivering payloads to the lunar
surface using U.S. commercial launch capabilities. Commercial robotic
lunar lander capabilities could address emerging demand by private
customers who wish to conduct activities on the Moon, even while
providing cost-effective transportation services for NASA's science and
exploration missions, thereby benefitting the larger scientific and
academic communities. As part of the Exploration Campaign, we will
initiate a series of robotic lunar missions in partnership with
industry as early as 2019, eventually leading to a continual human
presence on and around the Moon. On April 27, the NASA Science Mission
Directorate issued a draft Request for Proposals for Commercial Lunar
Payload Services to acquire end-to-end commercial payload services
between the Earth and the lunar surface for the Science, Human
Exploration and Operations, and the Space Technology Mission
Directorates. The contractor will provide all activities necessary to
safely integrate, accommodate, transport, and operate NASA payloads
using contractor-provided assets, including launch vehicles, lunar
lander spacecraft, lunar surface systems, Earth re-entry vehicles, and
associated resources. I met with industry representatives at the
Commercial Lunar Payload Services Industry Day on May 8 and was excited
by the growing partnership between NASA and commercial companies.
NASA's expanding Moon strategy seeks to harness the innovation of
American space companies to build new lunar landers. This solicitation
for payload delivery services is a sign of NASA's ongoing confidence in
the ability of U.S. industry to meet the needs for delivery services in
space. These early deliveries to the lunar surface will support
stronger scientific and exploration mission activities for NASA, and
empower commercial industry to show the Agency what they have to offer.
The budget request provides for critical infrastructure
indispensable to the Nation's access and use of space, including those
provided under Space Communications and Navigation, the Launch Services
Program, Rocket Propulsion Testing, and Human Space Flight Operations.
New research, technologies, and capabilities lay the groundwork
that enhances and enables deep space exploration. Exploration Research
and Technology will consolidate the technology development program
content previously funded by Space Technology and Advanced Exploration
Systems, integrating and refocusing these activities toward Deep Space
Exploration. This will enable NASA's outstanding workforce to focus on
innovative ways to further humankind's exploration from conception to
testing to spaceflight. The Human Research Program (HRP) will continue
to conduct cutting-edge research on the effects of spaceflight on the
human body, including experiments on the ISS in microgravity. HRP will
support the development of Deep Space Exploration habitat concepts to
ensure crew health and performance risks are adequately addressed.
NASA's fiscal year 2019 request includes $1.0 billion for
Exploration Research and Technology to conduct research to address
needs for human and robotic space exploration and to foster commercial
expansion in LEO, cislunar space, and beyond. Technology drives
exploration by spanning the Technology Readiness Level spectrum,
including investments in early-stage concepts and prototypes.
Exploration Research and Technology key areas of focus will include:
--Advanced environmental control and life support systems;
--In-Situ Resource Utilization (ISRU);
--Power and propulsion technologies for exploration;
--Advanced communications, navigation, and avionics;
--In-space manufacturing and on-orbit assembly;
--Advanced materials;
--Entry, Descent, and Landing;
--Autonomous operations; and
--Research to enable humans to safely and effectively operate in
various space environments.
Exploration Research and Technology will work with the Science
Mission Directorate where appropriate on exploration-related technology
and research that also has relevance to achieving science goals. In
fiscal year 2019, NASA will build on its initial investment in In-Space
Robotic Manufacturing and Assembly, continuing a public-private
partnership approach to flight-demonstrate new technologies used to
build large structures in a space environment. In addition, technology
development in satellite servicing will be aligned to support on-orbit
assembly and manufacturing capabilities in collaboration with industry.
In fiscal year 2019, the HRP will continue to implement the ISS
flight research plan crucial to mitigating crew health and performance
risk for exploration. HRP will complete ground testing of an advanced
exploration exercise system in preparation for ISS deployment as part
of exploration system maturation plans. HRP will also continue to work
with Deep Space Exploration's Habitation development to define and
evaluate deep space exploration system habitats.
Upon completion of hardware building, system integration, and test
in fiscal year 2018, the Laser Communications Relay Demonstration
project will deliver the completed mission payload to support a fiscal
year 2019 launch. The outcome of this effort will prove optical
communications technology in an operational setting, providing data
rates up to 100 times faster than today's radio-frequency-based
communication systems.
In mid-2018, the Green Propellant Infusion Mission spacecraft and
the Deep Space Atomic Clock instrument will both be delivered to orbit
as part of the U.S. Air Force Space Test Program-2 mission aboard a
SpaceX Falcon Heavy booster. In fiscal year 2019, both missions will
complete their technology demonstrations. The Green Propellant Infusion
Mission demonstrates a propulsion system using a propellant that is
less toxic and has approximately 40 percent higher performance by
volume than hydrazine, and which will reduce spacecraft processing
costs. The Deep Space Atomic Clock demonstrates navigational accuracy
improvements (with 50 times more accuracy than today's best navigation
clocks) for deep space and improved gravity science measurements.
In late 2018, the Solar Electric Propulsion project will complete
ground testing of the engineering development units for the
magnetically-shielded Hall effect thrusters and begin fabrication of
the flight units for demonstration. As part of ongoing work under the
NextSTEP-1 awards, NASA plans to conduct vacuum chamber tests of high-
power electric propulsion systems operating for 100 continuous hours.
NASA will provide a number of technologies for the Mars 2020
mission including: Terrain Relative Navigation; Mars Oxygen ISRU
Experiment; the Mars Environmental Dynamics Analyzer; and the Entry,
Descent and Landing Instrumentation, with deliveries between Fall 2018
and Spring 2019 to support the mission need dates.
NASA continues to partner with researchers across academia,
industry, and within the Agency to explore transformative technologies
and approaches. Upcoming early stage innovation activities will
investigate areas such as breakthrough propulsion, challenges in deep
space human habitation, space-optimized energy systems, radiation
protection, and materials. These areas are part of a comprehensive
approach to efficiently support innovative discovery, progress toward
important goals, and the development of exciting new capabilities.
NASA will continue to engage with the emerging small spacecraft
industry, including through the CubeSat Launch Initiative. In 2019,
Lockheed Martin will complete LunIR, which will test an infrared sensor
through a Moon flyby, and Morehead State University will deliver Lunar
IceCube to NASA to make infrared measurements of lunar volatiles. NASA
will also launch its CubeSat Proximity Operations Demonstration,
possibly as soon as August of this year, which will demonstrate
rendezvous, proximity operations and docking using two 3-unit CubeSats.
science
NASA uses the unique vantage points of space, airborne, and ground-
based assets, as well as teams of scientists, engineers, and
technologists to expand our knowledge of the Earth, our Sun and solar
system, and the universe. NASA measurements and research advance
critical understanding, inform decisionmaking, and improve the quality
of life for citizens in the United States and humankind around the
globe. NASA's fiscal year 2019 budget requests $5.9 billion for NASA's
Science program, including $2.2 billion for Planetary Science, $1.2
billion for Astrophysics, $691 million for Heliophysics, and $1.8
billion for Earth Science. The budget ensures that NASA continues to
play an important role in safeguarding life on Earth: funding a robust
Earth Science program, a dedicated Planetary Defense program for NEO
detection and mitigation, and expanding research to improve predictions
and forecasting of space weather. It enables NASA to develop and
operate space missions that search for life and illuminate the secrets
of the universe.
The budget integrates science and human exploration goals,
including the eventual return of humans to the Moon. Just this past
year, scientists used data from NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter to
identify areas in lunar craters that are cold enough to have frost
present on the surface--ice that could provide crucial resources for
exploration while also containing valuable information about the
chemical makeup of the early solar system. Establishing a new Agency-
wide Lunar Discovery and Exploration program and leveraging NASA's
extensive lunar science experience and data, this budget jump-starts
commercial partnerships, innovative approaches for building and
launching next-generation precision science instruments, and the
development of small rovers that will reach the Moon's surface via
commercial landers.
The request supports a vigorous Planetary Defense Program. The
Near-Earth Object (NEO) Observations project will continue to fund
ground-based NEO discovery, tracking, and characterization efforts,
while laying the foundation for future space-based NEO detection
missions. The Double Asteroid Redirection Test (DART) will demonstrate
asteroid deflection technology, and use the kinetic impactor technique
to change the orbit of a small moon circling the asteroid Didymos,
which will be about seven million miles from Earth at its closest
approach in 2022.
Maintaining a balanced science program and achieving high-priority
science and applications objectives in a cost-effective manner requires
that NASA be committed to--and execute--a full range of responsible and
transparent program management practices, policies, and approaches. To
this end, the Science Mission Directorate is engaging in innovative
partnerships with commercial and international partners and promoting
the use of small, less expensive satellites. Given its significant cost
and competing priorities within NASA, the budget proposes termination
of the Wide Field Infrared Survey Telescope (WFIRST). Remaining WFIRST
funding is redirected towards other priorities of the astrophysics
community, including competed astrophysics missions and research.
NASA's Planetary Science program develops and operates missions
that explore our solar system and search for life elsewhere, helping to
answer fundamental questions about our place in the universe. NASA's
Interior Exploration using Seismic Investigations, Geodesy and Heat
Transport (InSight) lander launched on May 5, and will land on Mars on
November 26-joining a series of NASA rovers, landers, and orbiters
already at the Red Planet. InSight's advanced payload will provide
unique information on the interior structure of Mars, providing
glimpses into the processes that shaped the rocky planets of the inner
solar system. The budget also enables essential progress to be made on
the Mars 2020 rover and planning for a potential Mars Sample Return
mission incorporating commercial and international partnerships--a top
priority identified by the scientific community in the most recent
planetary decadal survey. In addition, we received radio signals
indicating that the first-ever CubeSats headed to deep space are alive
and well. Launched along with InSight, Mars Cube One, or MarCO, is a
pair of briefcase-sized spacecraft that will test out miniature
spacecraft technology along the way to Mars.
In the coming year, NASA's Origins, Spectral Interpretation,
Resource Identification, Security-Regolith Explorer (OSIRIS-REx)
mission will arrive at the asteroid Bennu, providing unique data that
will shed light on the early history of the solar system. OSIRIS-REx
measurements of the composition of the potentially hazardous Bennu will
also inform the design of future missions to mitigate asteroid impacts
on Earth, an effort aligned with and supporting NASA's new Planetary
Defense program. During 2018, NASA will continue development of the
cutting-edge Europa Clipper mission to fly by Jupiter's ocean moon, and
will announce the next scientifically and technologically innovative
New Frontiers mission: either a comet sample return or a drone to
explore Saturn's largest moon, Titan.
NASA's Astrophysics program investigates the creation and evolution
of the universe and the formation of planetary systems. It examines how
environments hospitable for life develop, and contributes to the search
for the signature of life on other worlds. The program operates the
Hubble, Chandra, Spitzer, Fermi, Kepler, and Swift space telescopes,
flies the airborne Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy
(SOFIA), and conducts balloon and suborbital rocket campaigns. NASA's
impressive observatories will be joined by the James Webb Space
Telescope. Webb will be larger and more powerful than any previous
space telescope. It will be capable of examining the first stars and
galaxies that formed, viewing the atmospheres of nearby planets outside
our solar system, and informing our understanding of the evolution of
our own solar system. As we have informed the Committee, based on
recent information, NASA has undertaken an external independent
assessment of the schedule and cost of the Webb mission.
Two new astrophysics missions were launched to the ISS in 2017--the
Neutron Star Interior Composition Explorer (NICER) in June and the
Cosmic Ray Energetics and Mass (CREAM) experiment in August. NICER is
the first NASA mission dedicated to pulsars--the densest observable
objects in the universe, and CREAM monitors the cosmic rays that
constantly shower the Earth. The Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite
(TESS), launched on April 18, is NASA's next planet-hunting mission,
searching for planets orbiting nearby stars. In August 2017, NASA
selected six astrophysics Explorer Program proposals for concept
studies. The proposed missions will collect unprecedented measurements
of gamma-ray and X-ray emissions from galaxy clusters and neutron star
systems, infrared emissions from galaxies in the early universe, and
atmospheres of exoplanets. In January 2019, NASA will select at least
two of these proposals for flight.
NASA's Heliophysics program studies how the Sun affects the Earth
and objects around it, how it influences other planets in the solar
system, and how our star affects the very nature of space itself.
Improved understanding of the Sun and information about the space
weather phenomena it produces is used to provide warnings and better
protect lives and essential--but vulnerable--systems on Earth, as well
to safeguard astronauts, satellites, and robotic missions traveling
through the solar system. The budget supports efficient, continued
operation and analysis of data from the Solar Dynamics Observatory
(SDO), the joint European Space Agency (ESA)-NASA Solar and
Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO), and the Solar and Terrestrial
Relations Observatory (STEREO). Together, they constantly monitor the
Sun, revealing coronal mass ejections and releases of solar energetic
particles, while also advancing scientific understanding of our star's
fundamental dynamics. Focusing closer to Earth, the Magnetospheric
Multiscale (MMS) mission uses four small spacecraft flying in formation
to gather information on Earth's magnetic environment, changing our
understanding of how that environment protects our planet.
Heliophysics is preparing the launch of several innovative
missions. The Global-scale Observations of the Limb and Disk (GOLD)
instrument was launched aboard a commercial communications satellite in
January 2018, and the Ionospheric Connection Explorer (ICON) spacecraft
launches as early as June 2018. Together, they will provide the most
comprehensive observations of the ionosphere--a region of charged
particles in Earth's upper atmosphere--ever achieved. NASA and the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) are exploring a
potential partnership to use a single launch vehicle for the
Interstellar MApping Probe (IMAP) (the highest priority in the
Heliophysics decadal survey) and a NOAA space weather monitoring
payload. The partnership would provide NOAA access to the Ll Lagrange
point for future space weather monitoring. The Space Environment
Testbed 1 mission, a technology demonstration mission developed in
partnership with the United States Air Force, is scheduled for launch
in 2018, and three heliophysics CubeSats are being prepared for launch
as part of NASA's CubeSat Launch Initiative. Perhaps most exciting is
the upcoming launch of the Parker Solar Probe, scheduled for August
2018. This historic mission will be the first to travel through the
Sun's atmosphere, providing humanity with the closest-ever observations
of a star.
NASA's Joint Agency Satellite Program brings NASA's best practices
to bear to support our interagency customer NOAA in the development of
critical weather satellites for the Nation. Geostationary Operational
Environment Satellite-R (GOES-R, now GOES-16) transitioned to NOAA
operations in June 2017, and Joint Polar Satellite System-1 (JPSS-1,
now NOAA-20) successfully launched in November 2017.
NASA's Earth Science program makes revolutionary observations of
our planet's land, oceans, and atmosphere from the vantage point of
space; combines measurements of many different quantities to understand
and accurately model the Earth's complex system of interacting
processes; and provides practical benefits by transforming the
measurements and understanding into focused information products that
are used broadly to improve the quality of life for all humans.
From December 2016 through December 2017, NASA launched two Earth-
observing technology demonstration CubeSats--ICECube and Microwave
Radiometer Technology Acceleration (MiRaTa); the Cyclone Global
Navigation Satellite System (CYGNSS) constellation of eight small
satellites to measure rapidly evolving tropical storms and hurricanes
using reflected Global Positioning System (GPS) signals from the ocean;
and three key Earth observation instruments now mounted externally on
the ISS (a Lightning Imaging Sensor (LIS); Stratospheric Aerosol and
Gas Experiment-III (SAGE-III) to measure atmospheric ozone and aerosol
profiles; and Total and Spectral Solar Irradiance Sensor-1 (TSIS-1) to
precisely monitor solar radiation reaching the Earth).
In August and September 2017, data products from NASA Earth-
observing research satellites were used to support real-time
decisionmaking and response efforts by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, other operational agencies, and first responders on the ground
in the affected areas during the catastrophic landfalls of hurricanes
Harvey, Irma, and Maria. Precise, broad-coverage observations from
NASA's Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) Core Observatory enabled
forecasters to understand and track the storms, and to generate
accurate flood predictions. A suite of NASA satellite missions,
including the Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) satellite, assisted
with flood mapping and recovery planning.
NASA's Earth Science program is pioneering innovative partnerships
and mission strategies to achieve science goals rapidly and cost-
effectively. The budget accelerates NASA's pilot data buys and
evaluations of data products from commercial, on-orbit small-satellite
constellations; NASA will have Blanket Purchase Agreements with at
least four private-sector small-satellite data providers in place by
Spring 2018. The low-cost, competitively-selected ECOsystem Spaceborne
Thermal Radiometer Experiment on Space Station (ECOSTRESS) instrument
to measure agricultural water use in the United States and vegetation
stress around the globe, and to identify drought warning conditions,
will launch to the ISS in mid-2018. Two major competitively selected
payloads--Tropospheric Emissions: Monitoring of Pollution (TEMPO) to
measure North American air quality, and Geostationary Carbon Cycle
Observatory (GeoCarb) to measure natural carbon flux processes in the
western hemisphere--are being developed for flight as hosted payloads
on commercial communications satellites in this budget.
In January 2018, the National Academies released the 2017-2027
Earth Science Decadal Survey, ``Thriving on Our Changing Planet.'' The
decadal survey recognized the value of NASA's Earth Science Program and
identified a suite of high-priority science and observation objectives
for NASA's Earth Science Division.
Launching in 2018, two important decadal-survey-recommended
missions will expand the long-term collection of key Earth
observations. Making precise measurements of gravity from two
spacecraft, the GRACE Follow-On mission (a partnership with German
research and space agencies, scheduled for launch on May 19) will
provide global information on ice sheet and oceanic mass balances,
underground water storage changes in aquifers, and regional drought
conditions. The Ice, Cloud and land Elevation Satellite-2 (ICESat-2),
the follow-on to NASA's ICESat and IceBridge missions, will launch in
Fall 2018 to map and monitor land ice topography and glacier flow, sea
ice thickness, and the heights of the vegetation canopy at low- and
mid-latitudes across the globe. NASA remains on track to launch
Landsat-9 in December 2020 to continue the critical land imaging series
begun with our United States Geological Survey (USGS) partners in 1972.
Consistent with the fiscal year 2018 budget, the fiscal year 2019
budget proposes to terminate Plankton Aerosol Cloud ocean Ecosystem
(PACE), OCO-3, DSCOVR Earth-viewing instruments, and CLARREO
Pathfinder.
NASA's decadal-survey-endorsed Earth-observing satellite missions,
along with the research, applications development, and Earth-focused
technology maturation programs enabled by this budget, advance our
understanding of the fundamental nature of our planet and improve
everyday life on Earth for our fellow citizens.
aeronautics
NASA's Aeronautics Research program advances U.S. global leadership
by developing and transferring key enabling technologies to make
aviation safer, more efficient, and more environmentally friendly. With
a request of $634 million for Aeronautics, the fiscal year 2019 budget
invests in the most critical concepts and technologies required to
support continued global leadership in civil aviation.
NASA recently awarded a competitive contract for detailed aircraft
design, build, and validation of the Low Boom Flight Demonstrator
(LBFD) X-Plane that will demonstrate quiet overland supersonic flight
and enable U.S. industry to open a new market. In fiscal year 2019,
NASA will ensure the LBFD X-plane is on track for first flight by
fiscal year 2021. NASA also will continue to develop and validate
community response test methodologies which will be employed during the
subsequent LBFD flight campaign. Data generated from flights of this
demonstrator will feed directly into national and international
regulatory decisionmaking processes and timelines, enabling a rule
change that will allow civil supersonic flight over land. NASA will
also continue to advance new subsonic aircraft technologies that will
dramatically reduce fuel consumption, noise, and emissions through a
combination of numerical analyses, ground tests, and flight
experiments.
NASA's request for Aeronautics will invest in developing
revolutionary tools and technologies ranging from hybrid and all-
electric aircraft, autonomy, advanced composite materials and
structures, data mining, verification and validation of complex
systems, and revolutionary vertical lift vehicles, to enabling further
advances for transformative vehicle and propulsion concepts that will
address a broad array of our aviation industry's needs. In partnership
with industry, NASA will complete the Advanced Composites project,
delivering a variety of computational tools and guidance that will
significantly reduce the time needed to develop and certify new
composite structures for aerospace applications.
NASA will advance electric propulsion systems by flight testing an
advanced configuration of the X-57 Maxwell aircraft, a general-
aviation-scale aircraft to test highly integrated distributed electric
propulsion technology. This demonstration will address the integration
of electrical and power distribution components, critical to
development of standards and certification methodologies required to
enable widespread use of this technology. NASA also will advance the
state of the art of key technologies needed to realize practical
larger-scale hybrid electric propulsion systems for the future.
NASA will demonstrate new air traffic management (ATM) tools that
integrate aircraft arrival, departure, and airport surface operations
to reduce flight delays and increase air traffic capacity and safety,
supporting realization of the Federal Aviation Administration's (FAA's)
full vision for the Next Generation Air Transportation System
(NextGen). Even with limited operational trials at the Charlotte
Douglas International Airport, technologies being developed by the ATM
Technology Demonstration-2 Project is already showing significant
savings in fuel burns and delays during taxi operations. NASA will
accelerate development and complete the transfer to FAA of key weather-
related technologies for efficient enroute operations. NASA will
explore new, innovative solutions for proactively mitigating the risks
of using new vehicle technologies, leveraging the recently published
National Research Council study on In-Time Aviation Safety Management
as well as partnerships with the FAA and aviation industry. In fiscal
year 2019, NASA will demonstrate and validate tools which can be used
for safety assessment of ATM and avionics systems, and transfer them to
the FAA and the avionics industry.
NASA will advance the realization of routine access of Unmanned
Aircraft Systems (UAS) into the National Airspace System (NAS) for
civil use by completing flight testing of detect and avoid (DAA) and
communications technologies, and providing the data to standards
development committees and the FAA to support UAS rule making.
Additionally, NASA will help support safe, low-altitude operations of
small UAS through development and demonstration of the UAS Traffic
Management concept (UTM), in high-density urban areas. This
comprehensive demonstration of the UTM concept in the most challenging
operational environment will set the stage for transition to and
implementation by the FAA and industry.
NASA's fiscal year 2019 request increases funding for hypersonic
fundamental research which will enable development of tools and methods
to more efficiently design future hypersonic vehicles.
Across all of these research areas, NASA investments will nurture
U.S. university leadership in innovation that will foster and train the
future workforce, and leverage non-aerospace technology advancements.
Specifically, NASA will continue to see benefits from the University
Leadership Initiative in which university-led research teams
independently analyze the technical barriers inherent in achieving the
Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate strategic outcomes, and who
have proposed multi-disciplinary technical challenges, along with
supporting activities to address those barriers.
education
NASA's fiscal year 2019 budget proposes the termination of NASA's
Office of Education and its portfolio of domestic assistance awards
(grants and cooperative agreements), and instead prioritizes funding
toward supporting an innovative and inspirational program of
exploration. While the fiscal year 2019 budget no longer supports these
programs, a common vision, mission, and focus areas will drive NASA's
future endeavors in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and public engagement. Through its mission directorates, NASA
will focus on: creating unique opportunities for students to contribute
to NASA's work in exploration and discovery; building a diverse future
STEM workforce by engaging students in authentic learning experiences
with NASA's people, content, and facilities; and strengthening
understanding by enabling powerful connections to NASA's mission and
work. A small team at NASA Headquarters will be accountable for the
strategic direction and coordination of the Agency's STEM engagement
efforts.
NASA's mission successes will continue to inspire the next
generation to pursue science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
studies, join us on our journey of discovery, and become the diverse
workforce we will need for tomorrow's critical aerospace careers. We
will use every opportunity to engage learners in our work and to
encourage educators, students, and the public to continue making their
own discoveries.
mission support
NASA's mission support programs directly enable the Agency's
portfolio of missions in aeronautics, technology development and space
exploration. The fiscal year 2019 request prioritizes the capabilities,
operations and equipment to safely operate and maintain NASA Centers
and facilities, along with the independent technical authority required
to reduce risk to life and program objectives for all NASA missions.
With installations in 14 States, NASA collectively manages $39 billion
in assets with an inventory of over 5,000 buildings and structures. Our
focus is on renewing and sustaining what is crucial to mission success
and divesting of unneeded, costly infrastructure to lower the cost of
operations. In the transformation of information technology (IT)
services, we are enhancing agency IT portfolio management and
strengthening NASA's cybersecurity capabilities to safeguard critical
systems and data.
Over the last several years, NASA's Office of the Chief Information
Officer (OCIO) has made significant progress in updating IT security
policies, processes, and procedures to support the ongoing enhancement
and automation of information system monitoring and reporting.
In fiscal year 2019, OCIO will continue working toward improving
NASA's compliance with the Federal Information Technology Acquisition
Reform Act (FITARA) and the Federal Information Security Modernization
Act (FISMA). Additionally, NASA OCIO will continue to implement
improved management practices and efficiencies recommended by an
internal IT Business Services Assessment. For example, NASA is
continuing to evolve from a highly decentralized IT environment
controlled by the Centers and Agency programs and projects to an
enterprise IT environment that is more centrally managed and overseen
by the Agency Chief Information Officer. This important transition,
along with other internal governance and infrastructure changes, is
contributing to a stronger cybersecurity posture at NASA. While there
is no perfect, one-size-fits-all tool to predict, counter and mitigate
the wide range of attacks experienced across the Federal Government,
new cybersecurity management tools will continue to allow NASA and
other Federal agencies to have better insight into their networks,
providing improved pro-active monitoring and mitigation of threats
before they cause significant harm.
conclusion
The President's fiscal year 2019 budget request enables NASA to
develop and operate technologies and systems for the human exploration
of deep space and encourages the creation of a thriving commercial
space economy in LEO and beyond; ensures robust programs of robotic
missions to monitor the Sun and Earth, explore the planets of our solar
system, and observe the universe beyond; and supports continuing
advances to make aviation safer, more efficient, and more
environmentally friendly.
Mr. Chairman, I would be pleased to respond to your questions and
those of other Members of the subcommittee.
Senator Moran. Mr. Secretary, before we turn to questions,
let me encourage you to tell us, as part of your statement, the
vision, the direction of NASA as reflected by its budget
priorities. Outline for us what you see happening based upon
the request of you and the administration for appropriations
from our subcommittee.
Mr. Bridenstine. Yes, Mr. Chairman. You are aware of Space
Policy Directive 1, which is from the President of the United
States directing us to return to the Moon and do it in a way
that is sustainable for the long term. We have had in the past
a number of different efforts to get back to the Moon since
1972, and in fact, we have been at the Moon and we still are at
the Moon with orbiters and other capabilities. This President
has said that getting back to the Moon with soft landings for
the purpose of an eventual human return to the Moon is the
objective to establish American leadership, but also to develop
science capabilities on the Moon and utilize resources of the
Moon--which is a new direction for this country, and I think it
is an important direction--as we utilize the resources of the
Moon to ultimately take us to Mars and beyond. That is, I
think, a big policy direction shift.
I also want to be really clear that we are still going to
Mars as well. In fact, one of my first launches as the
Administrator was the InSight launch, which is a lander that
right now is on its way to Mars. We are looking forward to
doing a soft landing on Mars around the Thanksgiving timeframe
and delivering science for an eventual human trip to Mars.
We are doing both. We are going to the Moon and we are
going to Mars. We are not taking our eyes off the so many other
critical, important missions of NASA, to include Earth Science,
Heliophysics, Astrophysics, and Planetary Science with robotic
landers and other things.
I would say one of the President's objectives--and we have
seen this in the NASA Transition Authorization Act--is to seek
constancy of purpose so as we go from one Administration to the
next, as we are doing these decadal kind of missions, that we
are actually moving out and accomplishing similar objectives to
the previous Administration, but at the same time small shifts
here and there to reflect the priorities of this President.
Senator Moran. Thank you very much, Administrator. And
thank you for joining us. I think this is your debut appearance
as the Administrator of NASA in front of our committee, maybe
in front of any congressional committee.
Mr. Bridenstine. Yes, sir.
Senator Moran. And I welcome you to your new position, and
I thank you for working to develop a good working relationship
with this subcommittee as we try to pursue things that make
sense from a budget point of view but also advance a cause of
science and space exploration. So thank you very much.
SCIENCE PORTFOLIO BALANCE
Let me ask you about that balance. Our committee has
consistently looked at various scientific decadal studies that
help us, guide us in making decisions in the process.
Obviously, lots of budgetary pressures always on any agency,
but including NASA. How do you plan to maintain a balance in
the scientific portfolio between planetary missions, Earth
science, biophysics, and astrophysics? How do you reach the
conclusion as to what the right ratio is of where our resources
ought to go and what the mission of NASA should be?
Mr. Bridenstine. That is a great question, Chairman, and it
is not an easy question to answer. We have, of course, at NASA
within the various divisions of the Science Mission
Directorate, a lot of critically important science missions
going forward from previous decadal surveys, as a matter of
fact. What happens is when we take on some of these really big
projects--and I can give a few examples, but one example that
is very salient right now is the James Webb Space Telescope. We
take on a project like that, which is something NASA needs to
do. We need to be at the very leading edge of technology. We
need to be pushing the edge of the envelope all the time. When
we take on a big project like that with brand new technologies
and brand new capabilities, we sometimes have overruns in
schedule and in cost, and that starts to impact other parts of
the Science Mission Directorate.
What we have to do going forward, as to your point, the
balance that we need to have across the different divisions of
the Science Mission Directorate, we need to look at
historically how those kind of missions can sometimes
potentially crowd out other missions and then build
architectures that deliver that same civilization-changing
science but maybe do it in a way where there is less risk
involved.
One way to do that would be to look more at the missions
that are safe, $200 million or less in lifecycle cost, and
instead of doing one flagship mission, divide it up among a
number of different missions. Then if one gets behind schedule
or over cost, it does not impact all of the other missions that
are currently underway. That is one way to develop
architectures across the different divisions of the Science
Mission Directorate that ultimately will not have such a
massive impact on the balance of the portfolio within each one.
EDUCATION
Senator Moran. Let me perhaps more make a statement, but
maybe there is a question in this as well.
You and I visited in my office. One of the things that I
think NASA provides that no other agency, no other Federal
program can do is to inspire people and many times often young
people, young men and women, to aspire to study science and
mathematics and engineering and space. I have this goal from my
own State at home in Kansas that we determine ways to increase
STEM education. We need an inspiration, something that captures
people's minds and hearts, and NASA in my view like no other
agency or program can do so.
We talked about the budget request when you and I visited
in person. And it eliminates a significant portion of that STEM
education role for NASA, something that I indicated to you I
find objectionable. You explained to me how this can be
addressed in other ways. But I would ask you, I guess, again
what is your vision and view for how NASA can help educate and
inspire another generation of individuals interested in science
and, in doing so, help our Nation economically, advance
technology, and to make certain that we are at the forefront of
all scientific and educational advancement globally. NASA in my
view has that mission.
Mr. Bridenstine. Yes, Chairman Moran. And I could not agree
with your assessment on the importance of education more.
I will say this about my own life. I was a young boy in 6th
grade, and I had the opportunity to go to a summer camp where I
interacted with a wind tunnel for the first time. I learned
about Bernoulli's theory of flight and how it works. I spent a
week playing with the wind tunnel and changing the shape of a
wing and seeing how that affected lift and drag and those kinds
of things. That was I think the summer before my 6th grade
year, and that impacted my life in an amazing way. From that
point forward, I knew that when I grew up, I was going to be a
pilot. It was just the way it was going to be. I have had that
personal experience myself.
I can also tell you there was a time in my life when I was
the director of the Tulsa Air and Space Museum, and I saw
firsthand the impact that I had when I was a child. I saw that
impact on other children as well, fundamentally changing the
way they viewed themselves and what they wanted to be when they
grew up and the things that they wanted to study. I can tell
you this, there is no agency in the Federal Government that can
do what NASA can do when it comes to inspiration, as you have
mentioned.
Of course, I have spent time at your museum, the
Cosmosphere in Hutchinson, Kansas, a wonderful, wonderful
place. The scout troop that my son is a member of, we have gone
up there and spent a weekend studying the history and the
technology and the capabilities of NASA. I believe, as you
believe, that is absolutely critical for our Nation.
I will tell you this, the 2018 Omnibus spending bill, which
just got passed a few months ago, obviously funded the
education budget of NASA. NASA right now is moving out to
follow the requirements of that spending bill.
It is also true that we have had to make difficult
decisions in challenging financial times, and this is one area
that, of course, has been trimmed.
What I will tell you is that NASA has--and I have been
there for a month now--NASA has in its DNA education, going
back to the very beginning, and it has in its DNA inspiration.
Every day NASA is making historical achievements, and every
day, whether we want to or not, we are inspiring children and
changing lives, and I will tell you that we want to. We are
committed to it.
Going forward, each one of the mission directorates has the
ability to affect education apart from that particular budget
line, and we will continue to do that. In fact, just this week,
we started an internship program with over 1,600 young folks
that are coming to NASA to determine whether or not this is
something they want to do for their futures. We are committed
to education. We are committed to inspiration. I believe in it
100 percent, and of course, NASA will do that regardless of
that particular budget line.
Senator Moran. Administrator, thank you. I would point out
that your budget was submitted prior to your confirmation, and
your budget was submitted prior to the fiscal year 2018 omnibus
bill taking effect. So you start from a new plane. I do want to
make sure that this is emphasized in our efforts.
And thank you for mentioning the Cosmosphere, and I look
forward to your return visit to Kansas.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Senator Schatz.
CLIMATE SCIENCE
Senator Schatz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Bridenstine, thank you for being here.
Do you believe that greenhouse gases are the primary cause
of climate change?
Mr. Bridenstine. Yes. The National Climate Assessment that
includes NASA--and it includes the Department of Energy and it
includes NOAA--has clearly stated that it is extremely likely
that human activity is the dominant cause of global warming,
and I have no reason to doubt the science that comes from that.
Senator Schatz. Do you agree with the scientific consensus,
which includes many NASA researchers, that the climate is
changing and humans are the leading cause?
Mr. Bridenstine. Yes.
Senator Schatz. Is it fair to call this an evolution of
your views?
Mr. Bridenstine. Yes.
Senator Schatz. Do you commit to supporting the funding,
independence, and integrity of climate science at NASA?
Mr. Bridenstine. Without question.
Senator Schatz. Thank you, Administrator Bridenstine. You
and I have had multiple conversations, both over the table but
since then, in person and on the phone. And I just want to
recognize your evolution on this issue. I think it is essential
for one of the premier science agencies of the Federal
Government for you to abide by the science. I think it is
especially important because, as you know, you are the first
NASA Administrator that was an elected official. You are also
the first NASA Administrator with an essentially partisan
confirmation vote. And so we needed to move through this period
of sort of ideological disagreement, political disagreement,
and back to the point where the NASA Administrator is a leader
of a science agency. And you cannot lead a science agency if
you are not grounded by the science.
I thank you for that. I do not think it is easy for you to
come to that conclusion. But on the other hand, what I have
seen from you and in my interactions with you, I have come to
the conclusion that this is a true evolution, that you respect
the people with whom you work. You respect the science. You
want their respect. And there is no way to move forward if you
are going to be undermining the science. And so I am really
pleased to see this change.
EARTH SCIENCE
I want to ask you about Earth science. NASA observations in
Earth science support resource managers and policymakers. So I
want to talk to you about the termination of the carbon
monitoring grants that we have talked about, the $10 million
worth of carbon monitoring grants.
First of all, I object to the termination of those grants.
But second of all, I understand that NASA has numerous lines of
efforts as it relates to carbon monitoring. So first, talk
about the grants, and second, talk about your commitment to
carbon monitoring and Earth Science generally.
Mr. Bridenstine. Yes. Senator, when you think about the
carbon cycle of the Earth, NASA has a number of different
satellites currently that are taking into account how the Earth
is changing and how our climate is changing and how carbon
ultimately plays into that. Right now, we are spending over
$100 million annually on measuring carbon not only in the
atmosphere but on the surface of the Earth and in the oceans
and other places. That is a critical piece of our Earth Science
Division within the Science Mission Directorate.
The carbon monitoring system specifically was a grant
program. It is $10 million every 3 years. About 8 months ago,
we issued grants, and those grants are going to go through the
year 2020. That program in the 2018 budget request was not put
in the President's budget request, and it did not receive a
line item in the appropriations process.
I will tell you that NASA has a number of programs even
going forward. The Orbiting Carbon Observatory 2 is currently
on orbit. The Orbiting Carbon Observatory 3 we are going to
launch in January. GeoCarb is another satellite that we are
developing and soon will be launching to monitor carbon. There
is a satellite called ECOSTRESS that does similar things, and
then GEDI is another satellite that we are launching.
So the bottom line, Senator, is NASA 100 percent committed
to understanding the carbon cycle, which is an extremely high
priority that comes from the decadal surveys of the National
Academy of Sciences. You have my commitment that we are going
to follow the guidance of those decadal surveys for the purpose
of keeping it, as you have said, apolitical, bipartisan,
nonpartisan because the science must not be partisan. NASA is
not a regulating body. What we want to do is to get the data,
and we want to make sure that we provide that data and that
science to decision-makers who can ultimately make sure that we
are doing the right things as a nation and leading the world.
So you have my commitment that NASA will continue doing that
kind of activity, and we are.
Senator Schatz. Thank you.
Senator Moran. Senator Schatz, thank you.
Senator Capito.
Senator Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Administrator, for being here. I appreciate
it. I know you waited a while to get here. So we are glad you
are taking charge.
INDEPENDENT VERIFICATION AND VALIDATION
I wanted to ask you. You and I talked about the IV&V
facility in Fairmont. I know that you have been aware and are
supportive of that. I wanted to know what you might envision
for the future there where the applications may be more
beneficial to NASA but also within the Federal Government. If
you have any thoughts on that.
Mr. Bridenstine. Yes, ma'am. That is a wonderful question.
The IV&V facility is currently partnering with a number of
different agencies apart from NASA. I can think of the
Department of Energy, the Department of Homeland Security. Of
course, we have some nongovernment partners as well. We do
utilize NASA's IV&V facility to do governmental things that are
broader than what NASA itself does. We want to continue doing
that. We believe that we are a national asset that can be
utilized by a whole host of different government and
nongovernment functions. We want to make sure that when we do
do that, though, we are not impacting, of course, NASA's
missions. That is, I think, an important thing that I want to
make sure that we do not impact NASA's missions, but certainly
we see ourselves as a partner to the Federal Government at
large.
Senator Capito. Thank you.
EDUCATION
Last week, NASA announced that a team from West Virginia
University was selected to test their research in simulated
microgravity at the Johnson Space Center. They will be able to
conduct their experiments in the pool where the astronauts
train for their space walks. This is a unique and tremendous
opportunity for our students, as you can imagine. And it is
part of NASA's education program.
So I continue to be frustrated that the administration
continues to call for the elimination of NASA's Office of
Education. So I would suggest maybe you rename it to be the
Office of Inspiration because you are inspiring through these
educational opportunities the next generation of science,
technology, and interest in space, lighting a fire among a lot
of young people.
Will you work with me to continue to emphasize the
importance of inspiring that next generation? I did not know if
you had any comments on the elimination of the Office of
Education.
Mr. Bridenstine. Yes, ma'am. We just had a long dialogue.
Senator Capito. Sorry.
Mr. Bridenstine. No, you are good.
What is interesting is you mentioned renaming it the Office
of Inspiration, and we have been moving in that direction at
the NASA headquarters but calling it the Office of STEM
Engagement. I think when we call it the Office of Education,
people get this idea that we are duplicating services of maybe
the Department of Education or other Federal entities.
What we do believe is that, as you are aware, NASA is
unmatched in the Federal Government in its ability to inspire
young folks and change lives and create the next generation of
scientists and engineers. NASA is exceptionally unique in that.
In fact, you mentioned that you had folks--was it the
University of West Virginia--that are heading down to Houston.
The University of West Virginia has done amazing things with
robotic return capabilities. All those technologies are
eventually going to be used for a robotic return of material
from the Martian surface. And if I remember right, the
University of West Virginia won a massive prize, and this was
done by your students. A prize. And of course, that leads to
more and greater technologies for that activity. It was about
$750,000.
Senator Capito. That is correct. And they are working on--
the West Virginia Robotic Technology Center is working on the
Restore-L and working to refuel satellites in the low orbit.
Let me just say, since I just have less than a minute--and
I think I shared this with when you when we talked. Trying to
inspire the next generation of young women and particularly
into the STEM area--I just want to thank NASA because Dr. Peggy
Whitson came to two elementary schools with me, talked about
her spacewalks, talks about how she has been in space longer
than anybody else in history. And she really inspired a lot of
young girls that day. That is such a rich resource. I mean, I
was kind of standing there going does anybody want to get in
public service, and nobody would even look at me because they
were just crazy to listen to what is it like to be in space and
to get to be up close and personal with such an inspirational
figure. So I hope that program continues, and I hope that the
resources that you have there you share with the next
generation to inspire. So thank you for that.
Mr. Bridenstine. Yes, ma'am. Thank you.
Senator Moran. Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Bridenstine, welcome and congratulations, and
I appreciated the chance to get together with you again
yesterday and go over some issues. And I want to thank you for
the tone that you have taken ever since you were sworn in, and
I do want to just underscore the comments of my colleague,
Senator Schatz, with respect to your commitment to follow the
science. I think the employees at NASA appreciated the town
hall meeting where you brought people together and committed to
focusing on the mission. And I appreciate your enthusiasm and
energy about the NASA mission, which is a great American
success story and a success story for the world.
And I do want to also underscore, I think, the importance
of sending the message that we will focus on real science not
political science, including when it comes to recognizing that
climate change is being driven primarily by carbon emissions
generated by human activity. So I am glad we are all focused on
the science.
And I also know that you were not responsible for the
budget that was submitted. It was our former colleague in the
House. We can all go talk to Mick Mulvaney at the Office of
Management and Budget.
EARTH SCIENCE
But I do want to echo concerns that have been raised by all
of our colleagues here on a bipartisan basis and specifically
with respect to some significant cuts in the Earth sciences
budget. I am very proud of the fact that Maryland is home to
NASA Goddard, and we also share with the Virginia region, the
Delaware region, Wallops Flight Facility.
But on Earth sciences--and you and I spoke about this
yesterday--there are proposals to--really deep cuts, eliminate
the PACE program and some other Earth sciences programs. So if
you could just again talk about what you see as the importance
of those programs to the NASA mission.
Mr. Bridenstine. Absolutely. A couple of things that I
think are important to make sure because this is a bipartisan
issue and I want to keep it as bipartisan as we can possibly
keep it. It is important for our country. It is important for
the world.
The President's budget request for 2019 on the Earth
Science side of the ledger was higher than 3 of the previous
Administration's budgets for Earth Science, and it is tied with
a fourth. It is kind of right there in the middle historically
of the last 9-10 years. I think it is a good budget. Obviously,
making difficult decisions in tough times, we made a
determination that there were a couple of programs that
ultimately were not the highest priority.
It is absolutely important to me, as I know it is important
to you, that NASA follows the guidance of the decadal survey. A
brand new decadal survey came out in January of this year, and
that decadal survey indicated that CLARREO and, as you
mentioned, PACE are high priorities for the National Academy of
Sciences that created the decadal survey.
That being the case, what we are doing right now within the
Earth Science Division of the Science Mission Directorate is we
are evaluating that decadal survey, trying to make sure that we
are covering all the science that they have called for us to
cover, and at the same time, because of what the Senate and the
House did for the 2018 Omnibus, we are moving forward with
those programs. You mentioned PACE. I mentioned CLARREO. Right
now, we are currently moving forward with those programs as
required by the Omnibus of 2018.
When we get to the point where we are ready to present how
NASA sees the new decadal survey that recently came out, I will
be more than happy to come and brief you and make sure that we
are all in agreement that we are getting the science necessary
that the National Academies have called for.
Senator Van Hollen. I appreciate that. I will probably
submit for the record--there are a number of other programs.
Restore-L is one where NASA is sort of on a path-breaking
mission for refueling, a number of other programs, including
DSCOVR.
WALLOPS
But if I could just use the remainder of my time to talk
about Wallops because I know you recently visited Wallops. If
you could talk about why the Wallops Flight Facility is an
important asset for NASA.
Mr. Bridenstine. Absolutely. Just a few days ago, I was out
there preceding a launch to the International Space Station
from the Antares rocket and the Cygnus spacecraft that was
resupplying the International Space Station. It is an amazing,
critical, strategic asset for the United States of America. It
helps us maintain our leadership in the world on the
International Space Station with those critical resupply
missions. Of course, there are a number of different sounding
rockets that are launched from there for the purposes of
weather research and climate research and a whole host of other
capabilities.
It is also true that there are a number of aircraft out
there, former Navy aircraft. There is a P-3 that is importantly
using Lidar to measure how thick are the ice sheets in the
Arctic or on the North Pole. In fact, just recently we had some
amazingly brave pilots flying over the North Pole, flying over
Greenland, over the north Atlantic, flying over Alaska
measuring the thickness of the ice using Lidar, laser radar, if
you will. The capabilities that are coming from that, of
course, are informing--helping us understand how the cryosphere
is changing, the ice on the surface of the planet and how that
affects the rest of the planet. Those missions are important.
We have NASA pilots that are taking great risk upon themselves
to accomplish that science. All of that is being done from
Wallops.
RESTORE-L
On the Restore-L, if I have some time, I would like to
address that, if it is okay, Chairman.
Senator Moran. Please.
Mr. Bridenstine. This is important. Robotic servicing for
our country is a critical capability that we need to have for
whole host of strategic reasons. Very soon, a number of
commercial satellite operators are going to be launching into
low Earth orbit with thousands of satellites for
communications. And historically, satellites, when they die, we
either try to bring them out of orbit or we supersynch them,
meaning we put them into a very deep orbit that gets them out
of the way. If you are in geostationary orbit, we supersynch
them. In low Earth orbit, we try to bring them out of orbit.
On top of all that, some satellites just do not work, and
they die, and then they become orbital debris. We have had
collisions, and we have had reports that indicate that an
Iridium-Cosmos type collision that happened in 2009 that
created 5,000 pieces of orbital debris--those kinds of
collisions are going to continue to happen every 5 to 9 years.
We have to make sure we do not do that. Orbital servicing
of satellites, robotic servicing, is a critical capability.
NASA is committed to it, and we want to make sure that we are
doing it in a way that we can very dynamically and robustly
service satellites in low Earth orbit to mitigate the orbital
debris problem, keep our satellites on orbit longer, and make
use of that capability. You have a commitment from me that we
will do that kind of activity.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you. I look forward to working
with you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Thank you, Senator.
I am going to suggest a modified second round of questions.
We have other Senators who are expected to arrive. We welcome
the Senator from Alaska. But in the absence of a new arrival,
those who are here or remain here will have additional
questions until approximately 3:15 or so.
So I now recognize the Senator from Alaska, Senator
Murkowski.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
it.
Administrator, nice to see you.
Mr. Bridenstine. Thank you.
NON-FEDERAL SPACEPORTS
Senator Murkowski. I think you bring a refreshing view of
expanding commercial space operations to the fore here and look
forward to having some conversations about what can be done to
help lower costs, increase the capabilities for NASA by
increasing some of the partnerships and utilizing more of the
capabilities that are offered by the private sector for space
access and operations.
We have in Alaska, as you know, some opportunities with the
Pacific Spaceport Complex in Kodiak. It is operated by the
Alaska Aerospace Corporation.
Can you share with me how you view the use or the potential
of non-Federal spaceports that can provide both the orbital and
suborbital launch capabilities that may fit into future NASA
programs and operations?
Mr. Bridenstine. Yes, Senator. NASA is committed to getting
more science and more data than we have ever been able to get
before, and we are able to do that now because there are
commercial partners providing data in low Earth orbit, remote
sensing and imagery, as well as communication. All kinds of
different sensors are being launched commercially to provide
all kinds of capabilities that really have nothing to do with
NASA specifically.
What that means is that we have the ability as an Agency to
purchase commercially access to space and to purchase
commercially data from other people that are accessing space
for other reasons.
The way I see it, ma'am, going forward is the
miniaturization of electronics, the reusability of rockets--we
are going to see unprecedented access to space in the coming
years. A facility like Kodiak, of course, is going to be a
beneficiary of that capability.
As an Agency, we are going to be launching commercially a
whole host of small satellites to do science, and of course,
even universities are building satellites on our behest. The
more we do that kind of activity, the more data we are going to
receive. What we do not do is, we do not tell our partners
where to launch from, but a healthy small launch market, medium
class launch market is what we want as a nation strategically
beyond just NASA but for our Nation strategically. Of course,
Kodiak could be a great player in that.
SMALL LAUNCH
Senator Murkowski. Well, you mentioned there is a lot of
potential. I think we recognize that there. So the small launch
vehicle operators have some great opportunity I think to expand
our space launch market and bring back some of that launch
business that we have been seeing overseas. So hopefully, you
share that same view of opportunity for how we might proceed
with that.
Let me ask about your plans, if any, to work with Federal
and non-Federal entities to help streamline the satellite
regulations and the launches that would help provide an
improved broadband infrastructure for rural areas. This is, of
course, of great interest to us up in the north and
particularly the high north. We see this as that opportunity
that will really help build out our capacity in some of these
very remote, rural, and high-cost areas. Can you speak to that?
Mr. Bridenstine. Absolutely, it would be my honor to speak
to it.
Historically when you talk about communications from space,
historically it has been done from geostationary orbit. When
you think about DirecTV and Dish Network, even some
communication satellites for Internet from space, for example,
that is done from geostationary orbit, which is 33,000
kilometers from Earth. It is the highest orbit. The up side is
that they do not move relative to the moving of the Earth. As
the Earth turns, they stay in the same position over the Earth.
That is the up side. The down side is that there is latency.
There is a time for the signal to travel all the way out to
geostationary orbit and all the way back.
What is happening now that I think a lot of us, and I know
you are excited about, is the idea that we have got antennas
now that are electronically steerable, which means a flat
antenna like this notepad would be on somebody's house. In low
Earth orbit, where the satellites are constantly coming over
the horizon and you cannot just have your satellite dish locked
to one satellite, you have got to be tracking one satellite and
sharing information back and forth with that satellite. Other
satellites are coming by. You have to be able to pick those up.
Electronically steerable satellite antennas are a huge
technology breakthrough that are now being commercialized,
which enables us to do this. Take those satellites in
geostationary orbit and bring them down to low Earth orbit.
Now, this is not necessarily tied to NASA, but it is tied
to a robust commercial marketplace for communications to the
point where if we can get it down to low Earth orbit, these
constellations of thousands of satellites in low Earth orbit,
the latency goes down to the point where you can use the exact
same kind of waveforms as a cell phone. Now we have got
potentially thousands of cell towers in low Earth orbit that
any of us can access, and you can have portable bandwidth that
can be--if there are 100,000 people descending on one part of
the country--maybe there is a convention in Anchorage or
something--you can steer the bandwidth to make sure that nobody
gets blocked out from being able to use their cell phone.
This changes how we understand communications on planet
Earth. I, for example, could be on an aircraft carrier, which I
have been, in the middle of the Pacific Ocean with no access to
any kind of Internet connectivity, and all of a sudden, if
these kind of constellations get built, I would have access
immediately, instantaneously. That is transformative.
Obviously, in rural Alaska, that is a big game-changer.
Senator Murkowski. Game-changer.
Mr. Bridenstine. Absolutely a game-changer. It is a game-
changer for a lot of my old constituents in Oklahoma, for
example.
To what Senator Van Hollen was talking about with robotic
servicing, that is the capability where satellites in low Earth
orbit can be addressed with a robust commercial robotic
servicing capability. Those satellites in low Earth orbit
generally come out of orbit in 5 to 10 years just because there
is trace atmosphere in those low Earth orbits. With robotic
servicing, you can boost the satellites. You can even change
the technology on the satellites to increase capacity and
throughput to get more data than we have ever gotten before,
and, of course, data rates are continuing to increase. It is
all about getting more gigabits per second of throughput.
There are a lot of opportunities here, and NASA wants to be
a partner. That is why robotic servicing is so important, and
we intend to do that.
Senator Murkowski. Exciting.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Thank you, Senator.
AERONAUTICS
Administrator, we talked about--a number of us raised the
topic of education. Let me take this to the university level,
but let me do that by talking a moment about the aeronautics
aspect of NASA.
NASA, for example, is currently working on a low sonic boom
aircraft that is expected to shorten flight times across the
country and to destinations around the world. Research is done
with the FAA on traffic management on integration of piloted
and unpiloted vehicles into the Nation's airspace. Advanced
material developments and characterization will lead to safer,
cleaner, more fuel efficient aircraft. Kansas, as you know--
Oklahoma as well--is in aircraft aviation. We are States--that
in many ways dominates what we do for a living.
I want to know your view as to the role that universities
can play in being a partner with NASA in regard to aeronautics.
What do you expect to happen and how can I be of help to you in
that regard?
Mr. Bridenstine. That is another wonderful question. We see
universities as a great opportunity to help us do the research
necessary to get more advanced materials, composites, for
example. I know you guys in Kansas are really big into
composite repair and composite manufacturing. I know the
Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate at NASA is working
through an advanced composite program with, I think it is, the
University of Wichita in conjunction with Spirit AeroSystems to
put together a consortium of research, which is the university,
and manufacturing, which is Spirit AeroSystems. That kind of
partnership, along with some of our brilliant engineers, puts
together really an ability for us to stay ahead technologically
when it comes to manufacturing aircraft and creating lighter
materials, materials that ultimately increase fuel efficiency
and improve aviation in our country and make us more
competitive in the world. I think that partnership is solid. I
think we need to do more of that kind of activity, and I
support it.
Senator Moran. I appreciate your answer.
WEBB TELESCOPE
As I arrived in this position to Chair this subcommittee,
one of the things that captured my attention and somewhat my
imagination is the Webb telescope. And it has had its
challenges. And I am interested in knowing what you see as its
history, but more importantly, what you see as its future.
There has been a lot of attention paid it by Congress, by GAO,
by the contractor. What do you see forthcoming despite some of
the challenges that the telescope has had?
Mr. Bridenstine. Yes, Chairman. It is a challenge that we
have.
I want to start by saying this and I believe this. With
James Webb Space Telescope and other things that NASA does,
what we ought to be doing is staying at the very leading edge
of technology. When the James Webb Space Telescope launches, it
is going to see back to the beginning of the universe. That is
an amazing capability that all of us are anxiously
anticipating.
That being said, as important as that mission is, as
critical as it is to NASA and to the United States and to the
world, as critical as it is, it has had its challenges because
we are at that very leading edge of technology.
There have been a number of challenges. You start with the
fact that the thrusters were one of the issues that we had. The
thrusters were cleaned with a solvent that was not the right
solvent, and that damaged some of the seals that ultimately
required us to go back and develop new thrusters, to build new
thrusters, and fix thrusters. That set us back.
The sunshield that was on it, the ability to unfold it and
fold it back together and test it--that has proven more
challenging than I think was anticipated and that has set us
back in terms of time and budget.
We are with our challenges with the James Webb Space
Telescope.
I will tell you this: Looking at the budget for 2019, I do
not think the impact is going to be that significant and here
is why. Instead of doing operations, which we have a budget for
operations for James Webb, we will just use that operations
budget for development. That is not a good thing. I would
rather be using it for operations, but the reality is for the
2019 budget, I do not think it will be that big of an impact. I
do not think it will be that big of an impact for 2020 for that
same reason.
The biggest challenge that I have, sir--and I am probably
going to have to come back and talk to you--there is a
potential--I do not want to get ahead of myself because I do
not know yet, but there is a potential I might need to come
back and talk to you. There is a funding limit on the James
Webb Space Telescope that is set at $8 billion, and if the
development costs go beyond that, we are going to have to come
back to Congress and get reauthorized to continue the mission.
I would say that at this point, we have spent so much money
and we have come so far and we are so close, that it is
important that we do that. I will testify to that today, but I
am here to tell you that I do not know if we are going to hit
that $8 billion mark or not. I honestly do not know that.
The good thing is we have an independent review that is
underway right now by a person who is exceptionally good at
this kind of activity, and he and his team are going to report
to us and to you on the status of the James Webb here in June.
When that report comes out, we are going to have to come to a
meeting of the minds and figure out how do we go forward with
this program, if indeed we do need to go above the $8 billion
cap that was set by Congress.
Senator Moran. Thank you for your testimony.
Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was
just checking off one of my questions on the Webb telescope.
And we talked about that when we met yesterday, Mr.
Administrator.
Mr. Bridenstine. Yes, sir.
Senator Van Hollen. You are right. We have had some
setbacks. I hope the independent review gets to the bottom of
that. But as I understand your testimony, you are 100 percent
committed to getting this program to completion and fulfilling
the mission. Is that right?
Mr. Bridenstine. Without question.
WFIRST
Senator Van Hollen. The other question I had related to one
of the recommendations that came out of the decadal survey. You
mentioned the importance of pursuing the recommendations, and
we talked about this a little bit yesterday. And the top
priority, the large project in the 2010 National Research
Council's decadal survey of astronomy and astrophysics was the
wide field infrared survey telescope, WFIRST.
Could you just talk a little bit about why the decadal
survey made that a priority and the importance of that mission?
Mr. Bridenstine. Absolutely. When we think about these big
projects like the James Webb Space Telescope and the WFIRST
space telescope, these are opportunities for us--we are talking
about programs that have a finite lifetime. When the end of the
James Webb happens, we need to have something that can come
next, and that something needs to push the edge just a little
bit further than the previous. Now, I certainly understand all
of that.
One of the challenges we have is because when we do these
flagship programs that take a big chunk of what the decadal
survey is wanting in terms of science, and if you take 60
percent of the budget that we have to do one particular mission
and then that mission grows, that puts us in a really difficult
spot for all of our other missions.
When we think about WFIRST, first of all, we are following
through on the Omnibus of 2018. That is happening right now. We
are looking at what the costs are going to be going forward for
WFIRST, and we are committed to not have the same thing happen
to WFIRST that happened to James Webb. That is where we are on
that.
Going forward, when we think about decadal surveys in the
future, we might want to consider maybe distributing the risk
among more smaller projects rather than one massive project
that can clobber an entire division within the NASA budget.
Senator Van Hollen. Got it. Well, I look forward to
continuing the conversation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Senator, thank you.
Senator Schatz, thanks for filling the role of ranking
member today.
And, Administrator Bridenstine, thank you very much for
your testimony. Our votes have been called. I would ask you, if
you have a moment after the hearing, I would like to spend a
minute with you.
Mr. Bridenstine. Yes, sir.
Senator Moran. And I would announce that our subcommittee
will have its markup at 2:30 on June the 12th. That will
include NASA but our full array of issues within our
subcommittee's jurisdiction. Two days later, June 14, the full
committee is scheduled to meet to do markup of this and other
appropriation bills.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
With that, there are no further questions this afternoon.
Senators may submit additional questions for the subcommittee's
official hearing record. We request that NASA respond to those
questions within 30 days.
[The following questions were not asked at the hearing, but
were submitted to the Agency for response subsequent to the
hearing:]
Questions Submitted to Hon. James F. Bridenstine
Questions Submitted by Senator John Boozman
Question. Administrator Bridenstine, thank you for testifying about
the request for fiscal year 2019 funding for NASA. I appreciated the
opportunity to talk to you in my office a couple weeks ago to discuss
your plans for NASA and to hear you lay out the return to a focus on
lunar and cislunar exploration. I certainly want to support that
effort. In the omnibus for fiscal year 2018, we funded NASA at $20.8
billion, almost $2 billion above the President's budget request. I was
pleased to see that the budget request this year was increased by $800
million over what the agency projected for fiscal year 2019 last year.
Still, I think Congress will continue to show its strong support for
your mission. In the budget request, I noted no funding was made
available for the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research, or EPSCoR That, in fact, the proposal is to shut down the
Office of Education that oversees EPSCoR and other grant programs.
Arkansas scientists benefits from this NASA program via the Arkansas
Space Grant Consortium. Your budget proposal indicates that STEM
engagement will now be overseen by the Agency Management and Operations
team.
How will you ensure that NASA continues its vital contributions to
STEM education if this transition occurs?
Answer. While the fiscal year 2019 budget no longer supports the
formal Office of Education programs, a common vision, mission and focus
areas will drive NASA's future endeavors in STEM engagement and public
engagement. The Agency Management and Operations budget will support
13 civil servants for the Office of STEM Engagement, which will be
accountable for strategic guidance and coordination of NASA's STEM
engagement efforts Agency-wide, enabling a mission-driven approach to
this work in close collaboration with the Mission Directorates.
Through its Mission Directorates, NASA will focus on creating
unique opportunities for students and the public to contribute to
NASA's work in exploration and discovery; building a diverse future
STEM workforce by engaging students in authentic learning experiences
with NASA's people, content and facilities; and strengthening public
understanding by enabling powerful connections to NASA's mission and
work.
Question. For programs, like the Arkansas Space Grant Consortium,
that benefit from current NASA programs, how can they continue to be
engaged with and supported by NASA?
Answer. While the fiscal year 2019 budget no longer supports the
formal Office of Education programs such as the National Space Grant
College and Fellowship Program, NASA will continue creating unique
opportunities for students and the public to contribute to NASA's work
in exploration and discovery through its Mission Directorates. NASA
will also continue to offer internships and fellowships and work to
build a diverse future STEM workforce by engaging students in authentic
learning experiences with NASA's people, content and facilities. There
are also opportunities for organizations, like the Arkansas Space Grant
Consortium, researchers, businesses and entrepreneurs throughout the
country to engage with NASA through a variety of solicitations and
partnership opportunities typically posted here: https://
nspires.nasaprs.com/external/
In addition, the following NASA mission directorates also provide
opportunities that may interest Arkansas State:
--The HEOMD education initiatives are listed at: https://
www.nasa.gov/
directorates/heo/education/projects.html
--The SMD education initiatives are listed at: http://smdepo.org/
projects
--The STMD education initiatives (through Glenn Research Center) are
listed at: https://spaceflightsystems.grc.nasa.gov/education-
outreach/
--The ARMD education initiatives are listed at: https://
www.hq.nasa.gov/office/aero/education.htm
Also, NASA routinely conducts outreach events in areas where there
is not a NASA presence or NASA Center. For example, NASA's Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small Business Technology
Transfer (STIR) program officials routinely take part in the Small
Business Administration's SBIR Road Tours (https://www.sbir.gov/sbir-
road-tour), which play an important role in increasing engagement with
entrepreneurial ecosystems across the country to support the creation
of small businesses focusing on next generation research. For example,
Little Rock, Arkansas hosted a Road Tour at the University of Arkansas,
Little Rock Reynolds Business Center on April 18, 2018.
Organizations may also request the NASA Office of Small Business
Programs to participate in outreach events being held in their States
to discuss how to do business with NASA. For example, NASA collaborates
with local Procurement Technical Assistance Centers (PTAC)
organizations to promote NASA community-level events. At these events,
local industry can get more information about NASA small business
programs, the SBIR/STTR program, the NASA Centers, and NASA prime
contractors.
NASA hosts webinars covering different topics to help industry
better understand how to work with the Agency and our prime
contractors. NASA also has several websites that individuals or
industry can access to get more information (including contact
details). For example, the SBIR/STTR program (https://sbir.nasa.gov/),
and Small Business Programs (https://www.osbp.nasa.gov/).
Question. Can you assure me that my schools in Arkansas will
continue to enjoy a productive relationship with your Agency?
Answer. We will continue to engage the Nation in NASA's mission.
While NASA cannot assure continuance of specific relationships with
existing programs that are funded by the Office of Education, we can
however ensure that the agency will continue to provide opportunities
that include immersing the public in NASA's work in air and space,
enhancing STEM literacy, and inspiring the next generation to pursue
STEM.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator John Kennedy
Question. With the rise of private space firms such as SpaceX and
Virgin Galactic, we have seen affordability and reusability become
important factors in the space arena. Are there any cost saving lessons
that NASA can adapt from the private space industry?
Answer. The President's fiscal year 2019 budget request proposes an
integrated, Agency-wide Exploration Campaign, which will be executed
with the goals of establishing an innovative and sustainable program of
exploration in concert with our commercial and international partners.
NASA plans to develop key technologies needed to make exploration more
capable and cost-effective and develop spaceflight interoperability
standards to increase competitiveness and opportunities for new
partners. The Agency will leverage its unique capabilities, as well as
those of the private sector, and use partnerships to develop safe,
reliable, and cost-effective space systems, while simultaneously
developing a commercial low-Earth orbit (LEO) space economy. NASA is
planning acquisition strategies that leverage existing commercial
designs rather then creating new designs to lower overall development
and sustaining costs. NASA is also working on spaceflight acquisition
approaches such as Gateway that will enable partnerships to achieve the
goals of both partners while furthering exploration capabilities. The
Agency's long-term Mars plans include reuse of transportation and
habitation systems through cislunar points of departure and return,
avoiding the costs of propellant systems necessary to leave and return
in the Earth's strong gravity well. Finally, the Agency is assessing
lunar lander concepts and low lunar orbiting tugs that are refuellable
and reusable for multiple missions.
Question. In March, the President announced his 'America First
National Space Strategy'. In his announcement the President stated that
our international rivals have turned space into a warfighting domain.
How can we better prepare our space infrastructure for attacks from
international adversaries and bad actors?
Answer. As context, NASA's perspective on the space domain has been
from a mission-based civil architecture rather than from the extensive
systems planning inherent in mission-driven military capability for
warfighting and survivability.
The need for protection of NASA's space infrastructure, or more
broadly the NASA enterprise, begins with understanding the risks and
potential threats to space assets and to the overall enterprise. Once a
risk is identified, a posture for protection of infrastructure and
enterprise systems could span a wide range of assets and capability.
For example, within NASA, space systems span capability from human
spaceflight to robotic science spacecraft performing roles that may
deliver a capability over decades. In all NASA missions there are
critical ground-based operations and communications systems upon which
there is a dependency for safe operation of the space operations
architecture. Additionally, there are corporate information systems
that tie legacy and new mission ground-based infrastructure supporting
core NASA missions in space flight, as well as research and
development, test facilities and equipment.
NASA has been aware of evolving competitive sophistication in the
space domain which drives the need for identifying vulnerabilities and
risks associated with maintaining mission-assured civil capability from
adversarial attack. We have implemented a program of identifying,
classifying and assessing applicable threats, followed by implementing
risk mitigations to reduce exposure. In practice, as we continue to
implement mitigations and strengthen our posture toward protection of
our enterprise systems, additional investments will likely be required
to perform core NASA missions in a rapidly evolving space domain.
Question. With the first SLS mission scheduled for 2020, do you
have an updated budget forecast for the SLS program that you can share?
Answer. The current Space Launch System (SLS) runout is reflected
in the fiscal year 2019 President's budget request, as below; any
changes in the runout will be reflected in future budget requests.
BUDGET AUTHORITY
[In millions of dollars]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2019
2020 *
2021 *
2022 *
2023 *
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Space Launch System............................
2,078.1
2,062.9
2,165.1
2,131.0
2,276.0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Notional
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
The subcommittee now stands in recess, subject to the call
of the chair.
[Whereupon, at 3:18 p.m., Wednesday, May 23, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene subject to the call of
the Chair.]