- HEARING TO REVIEW ANIMAL PEST AND DISEASE PREVENTION AND RESPONSE CAPABILITIES
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
HEARING TO REVIEW ANIMAL PEST AND
DISEASE PREVENTION AND RESPONSE
CAPABILITIES
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON LIVESTOCK AND FOREIGN AGRICULTURE
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
MAY 21, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-7
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-522 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota, Chairman
DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas, Ranking
JIM COSTA, California
Minority Member
MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania
JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
FILEMON VELA, Texas
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD,
STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
Arkansas
ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
Vice Chair
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER, Virginia
DOUG LaMALFA, California
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois
ANTONIO DELGADO, New York
TED S. YOHO, Florida
TJ COX, California
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
MIKE BOST, Illinois
ANTHONY BRINDISI, New York
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
JEFFERSON VAN DREW, New Jersey
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
JOSH HARDER, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
KIM SCHRIER, Washington
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
ROGER W. MARSHALL, Kansas
CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
DON BACON, Nebraska
SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
DUSTY JOHNSON, South Dakota
AL LAWSON, Jr., Florida
JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
JIM HAGEDORN, Minnesota
JIMMY PANETTA, California
ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
CYNTHIA AXNE, Iowa
______
Anne Simmons, Staff Director
Matthew S. Schertz, Minority Staff Director
______
Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign Agriculture
JIM COSTA, California, Chairman
ANTHONY BRINDISI, New York
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina,
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
Ranking Minority Member
TJ COX, California
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
JOSH HARDER, California
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
FILEMON VELA, Texas
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
ROGER W. MARSHALL, Kansas
CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
DON BACON, Nebraska
JIMMY PANETTA, California
JIM HAGEDORN, Minnesota
Katie Zenk, Subcommittee Staff Director
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Conaway, Hon. K. Michael, a Representative in Congress from
Texas, opening statement.......................................
11
Costa, Hon. Jim, a Representative in Congress from California,
opening statement..............................................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
3
Peterson, Hon. Collin C., a Representative in Congress from
Minnesota, opening statement...................................
9
Rouzer, Hon. David, a Representative in Congress from North
Carolina, opening statement....................................
4
Witness
Ibach, Hon. Greg, Under Secretary, Marketing and Regulatory
Programs, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.;
accompanied by Burke Healey, D.V.M., Associate Deputy
Administrator, Veterinary Services, Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service, USDA.......................................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
7
Submitted questions..........................................
35
HEARING TO REVIEW ANIMAL PEST AND
DISEASE PREVENTION AND RESPONSE
CAPABILITIES
----------
TUESDAY, MAY 21, 2019
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign Agriculture,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:02 a.m., in
Room 1300 of the Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Jim
Costa [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Costa, Brindisi, Hayes,
Cox, Craig, Harder, Carbajal, Panetta, Peterson (ex officio),
Rouzer, Thompson, Hartzler, Comer, Marshall, Bacon, Hagedorn,
and Conaway (ex officio).
Staff present: Emily German, Matt MacKenzie, Katie Zenk,
Ashton Johnston, Patricia Straughn, Jeremy Witte, Dana Sandman,
and Jennifer Yezak.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JIM COSTA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM CALIFORNIA
The Chairman. The Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign
Agriculture will now come to order. This morning, we have an
opportunity to review animal pest and disease prevention
response capabilities in last year's reauthorization of the
farm bill that we all worked on together. There were some
changes and we made efforts to better assist America's poultry
industry, and the purpose of this morning's Subcommittee
hearing on Livestock and Foreign Agriculture is, in fact, to
determine how those changes are coming forth. I want to thank
our witness today for joining us to review the challenges that
faces American agriculture by animal pests and diseases, and
the ability for the United States Department of Agriculture to
control those challenges. It is an important topic that many of
us have followed these issues on behalf of farmers and ranchers
throughout the country, certainly in my district, and we in
this Subcommittee take responsibility to oversee the United
States Department of Agriculture's response to outbreaks that
occur nationwide, and obviously, we take that role very
seriously.
The livestock and poultry farmers throughout America are
facing difficult times for a number of reasons. Obviously, the
trade wars are having their impact: challenging markets. But
some have even been faced with issues of natural disasters of
floods and other kinds of impacts that they are facing.
The last thing we need to do then, is to have to deal with
another devastating animal disease outbreak. Clearly, that is
something that we want to prevent at all possible costs.
The USDA APHIS Veterinary Services have traditionally and
today play a critical role. Working with a host of stakeholders
in preventing, monitoring, and responding to disease outbreaks,
whether we are talking about livestock operations, large or
small are a part of this effort. I am glad that we have Under
Secretary Greg Ibach and Dr. Burke Healey with the Committee
today to testify.
As we speak, poultry farmers in California, I can tell you
from my own personal experiences, are dealing with an outbreak
of virulent Newcastle Disease. This Newcastle disease, since
May of 2018, over 400 cases of this disease has been confirmed
by the USDA, with all but two having occurred in California
flocks. Last week, I met with one of the effected egg farmer in
my office who told me that they had over 100,000 chickens that
had been contacted with the disease.
I think all of us fear that that can spread. Luckily, it
was detected and we were able to stop that in the case of that
outbreak in the San Joaquin Valley.
The poultry industry knows all too well what happens when a
disease gets out of control. Remember, we are only a few years
removed from the outbreak of avian influenza that claimed more
than 50 million birds and cost farmers millions of dollars to
eradicate in parts of our country. And by no means are poultry
farmers the only ones at risk.
Around the world today, pork producers are concerned about
the African Swine Fever, which has caused the loss of at least
20 percent of China's hog population, with more likely to come,
we believe, based on estimates. That already exacerbates the
hobbled demand for U.S. feedgrains in that country, which could
wreak havoc on the U.S. if it reaches our shores.
We are also conscious of the constant calculating threats
to cattle and other species, like foot-and-mouth disease,
cattle fever ticks, screwworm, and others. All of these are
potential causes of concern for our livestock industries.
As a conferee for the 2018 Farm Bill, it was a priority of
mine to make sure that livestock and poultry producers had new
tools to prevent these diseases, and the right resources to
fight them if they ever did. During that process, we have
created two new programs, and I am very interested this morning
to hear about the efforts to implement these two new programs:
the National Animal Disease Preparedness and Response Program,
and the National Animal Vaccine and Veterinary Countermeasures
Bank. We reauthorized the National Animal Health Laboratory
Network. We think all of these tools are very, very important
to ensure that we guard our livestock industries.
I am also proud of the bipartisan House-led effort to
secure $300 million in new funding for animal pest and disease
prevention control. I want to thank former Chairman Conaway and
certainly Chairman Peterson and others as we came together in a
bipartisan effort to do just that.
Today, I look forward to hearing how implementation of this
is going on, and those other important programs. I am going to
be focused on your timelines in terms of implementation of
these efforts within the USDA. I want to hear more on the
status of APHIS' efforts to prevent and respond to threats that
I have mentioned, as well as many others that keep America's
farmers and ranchers up at night. If they keep them up at
night, I can assure they keep Members of Congress up at night.
What is the USDA doing on the timelines to implement the
changes in last year's farm bill? Very simply stated, what are
you doing to implement the changes, and what are your
timelines? What can you tell the Committee this morning?
I think this is critical work. I am committed to staying in
touch with USDA. We will use this Subcommittee on a bipartisan
basis to ensure that we provide the proper oversight for our
livestock and poultry sectors to make sure that we get the
strategy straight and on the right track, and that we support
your efforts.
In closing, I would also like to get any thoughts that you
might have with innovations that are taking place in biological
technology. I think it shows promise and certainly, Dr. Healey,
I would like to get your thoughts and what promise it shows and
what the USDA is doing in that area of innovation as it relates
to biological technology.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Costa follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Jim Costa, a Representative in Congress from
California
Thank you for joining us today to review the challenges presented
by animal pests and diseases, and the ability of USDA to respond to
those challenges. It's an important topic and I have followed these
issues on behalf of the farmers and ranchers in my district throughout
my career. I take the responsibility to oversee USDA's response to
these outbreaks nationwide very seriously in my role as Chairman of
this Subcommittee.
Livestock and poultry farmers are facing tough times because of
trade wars and challenging markets. Some have even been faced with
natural disasters and other challenges. The last thing they need is to
have to deal with a devastating animal disease outbreak. USDA-APHIS
Veterinary Services play a critical role, working with a host of
stakeholders in preventing, monitoring, and responding to disease
outbreaks in livestock operations large and small nationwide, so I'm
glad to welcome Under Secretary Greg Ibach and Dr. Burke Healey to the
Committee today.
As we speak, poultry farmers in California are dealing with an
outbreak of virulent Newcastle Disease. Since May 2018, USDA has
confirmed over 400 cases of the disease, with all but two of those
cases occurring in California flocks. I had one of the effected egg
farmers in my office last week, who told me that he has lost more than
100,000 chickens to the disease.
Cases of the disease have appeared close to my home in the San
Joaquin Valley, the heart of California's poultry industry but luckily
it was detected and stopped. The poultry industry knows all too well
what happens when a disease gets out of control. Remember we are only a
few years removed from an outbreak of avian influenza that claimed more
than 50 million birds and cost farmers millions to eradicate.
By no means are poultry farmers the only ones at risk. Around the
world today, pork producers are concerned about African Swine Fever,
which has caused the loss of at least 20 percent of China's hog
population--with more likely to come--exacerbated the already hobbled
demand for U.S. feedgrains in that country and which could wreak havoc
on the U.S. if it ever reached our shores.
We are also always conscious of constantly circulating threats to
cattle and other species like foot-and-mouth disease, cattle fever
tick, screwworm, and others.
As a conferee for the 2018 farm bill, it was a priority of mine to
make sure livestock and poultry producers had new tools to prevent
these diseases from ever taking hold, and the right resources to fight
them if they ever did. During that process, we created two new
programs, the National Animal Disease Preparedness and Response
Program, and the National Animal Vaccine and Veterinary Countermeasures
Bank; and we reauthorized the National Animal Health Laboratory
Network.
I'm also proud of the bipartisan, House-led effort to secure $300
million in new funding for animal pest and disease prevention and
control.
Today, I look forward to hearing how implementation is going on
those and other important programs. I also want to hear more on the
status of APHIS's efforts in preventing and responding to the threats
I've mentioned, as well as the many others that keep America's farmers
and ranchers up at night. This is critical work and I am committed to
staying in touch with USDA and the livestock and poultry sectors to
make sure we get our strategy right.
With that I'll recognize my Ranking Member, the distinguished
gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Rouzer, for any opening remarks he'd
like to make.
The Chairman. With that, I would like to recognize the
Ranking Member, the distinguished gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Rouzer, for any opening remarks that he would
like to make.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID ROUZER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM NORTH CAROLINA
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you, Chairman Costa, for holding today's
hearing to discuss the latest animal health issues affecting
our nation's livestock industry, and to review the U.S.
Department of Agriculture's animal pest and disease programs.
This is really, really a critical topic. I would like to
say that food security is national security. There is no
question that the animal agriculture sector faces pest and
disease threats capable of devastating the rural economy and
our nation's food supply, and I might add, our general economy
as well.
In the lead-up to the 2018 Farm Bill, this Subcommittee
held several hearings to discuss the known and unknown threats
against the animal agriculture sector. Largely, as a result of
the effort of us here in the House of Representatives and the
body as a whole, along with the hard work by USDA and the
livestock industry, we made an historic investment in the tools
necessary for USDA and its state government and industry
partners to identify, diagnose, and respond to potential
outbreak as part of the 2018 Farm Bill.
In addition to the new authorities provided in the farm
bill, other provisions within the Animal Health Protection Act
affords the USDA broad authority to detect, control, and
eradicate pests and diseases affecting the livestock industry.
This robust animal health protection system will continue to be
tested, and we must work hard to ensure that we rise to the
challenge of combating threats like foot-and-mouth disease,
African Swine Fever, avian influenza, PEDV, and many others.
Now, I would like to thank our witness here today, Under
Secretary Greg Ibach, along with Associate Deputy Administrator
Burke Healey for taking the time to be with us. We look forward
to hearing an update on USDA's progress on these farm bill
implementation issues, and your continued efforts to protect
America's livestock industry.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, my colleague. I would
like to request that Members submit their opening statements
for the record so that our witness may begin his testimony to
ensure that we have ample time for questions for all of us.
With that, I would like to welcome the United States
Department of Agriculture Under Secretary for Marketing and
Regulatory Programs, Greg Ibach. In this role, the Under
Secretary has the oversight for Agricultural Marketing Service,
and Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, which includes,
as we noted in our opening statements, the Veterinary Services
team that we will be discussing today. I want to thank our
witness for being here, and the Under Secretary, as I noted, is
accompanied by Dr. Burke Healey, Associate Deputy Administrator
for Veterinary Services for Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Service, otherwise known as APHIS. Dr. Healey has firsthand
experience in responding to animal disease outbreaks, and I
look forward to his help in responding to questions that we may
have for you.
We will now begin with the testimony. Mr. Under Secretary,
you have 5 minutes. You know the rules here. When the light
turns yellow, you have 1 minute left, and we would like you to
focus on being concise and forthright, and we look forward to
the questions.
STATEMENT OF HON. GREG IBACH, UNDER SECRETARY,
MARKETING AND REGULATORY PROGRAMS, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, WASHINGTON, D.C.;
ACCOMPANIED BY BURKE HEALEY, D.V.M., ASSOCIATE
DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR, VETERINARY SERVICES, ANIMAL AND PLANT
HEALTH INSPECTION SERVICE, USDA
Mr. Ibach. Thank you very much, Chairman Costa and Ranking
Member Rouzer. Also, thank you to Chairman Peterson and Ranking
Member Conaway for being here today as well.
Thank you for the invitation to be here today to give you
an update on USDA's animal health efforts. I am Greg Ibach, the
Under Secretary for Marketing and Regulatory Programs. With me
today is Dr. Burke Healey, the Associate Deputy Administrator
for APHIS' Veterinary Services Program.
All of us have an important mission: to help our farmers
and ranchers provide high quality agricultural products to feed
and clothe the world. To do this, we must keep foreign animal
pests and diseases out of the country. Because our agricultural
products are clean and free of disease, we are able to maintain
and expand export markets.
Thankfully, USDA has a robust set of tools to fight these
pests and diseases that we continually evaluate and strive to
enhance. Our authority under the Animal Health Protection Act
allows us to create a comprehensive system of overlapping
safeguards. Before we allow anything into the country, USDA
evaluates the disease risk and designs import protocols backed
by the best possible science.
The Agriculture Quarantine Inspection Officers at U.S.
Customs and Border Protection are on the frontlines of this
prevention effort. They inspect cargo and passengers coming
into the country to ensure these import protocols are met. If a
pest or disease ever makes it into the country, our
surveillance and detection programs allow us to identify it and
swiftly begin a targeted containment, control, and eradication
response.
These tools have served us well. Using them, we have kept
serious animal diseases threats like foot-and-mouth disease out
of the country for 90 years. Today, the animal disease that
currently is most top of mind is African Swine Fever, or ASF.
We have been monitoring outbreaks of ASF in Europe and Asia for
a number of years. An outbreak in the U.S. would have severe
economic consequences, especially considering there is no
vaccine available.
While we are confident in the tools we have relied on in
the past, I would like to outline several steps we have taken
to enhance our safeguards against ASF.
Aside from our longstanding import restrictions, we have
worked with CBP to focus inspections on cargo and passengers
coming from high-risk areas. We are training 60 new detector
dog teams that help sniff out any illegally imported products
carried by passengers or in cargo. We are working to identify
high-risk pathways for illegal products, trace the origin, and
shut down those pathways. Simply put, we find smuggled items,
including meat, meat products, and take enforcement actions to
prevent bad actors from continuing to illegally move product
into the United States.
We have worked with producer groups and veterinarians to
stress the importance of biosecurity measures to protect their
animals from outside visitors, and to remind them of symptoms
to watch for and proper response activities if they suspect an
infection.
If under some unfortunate circumstance the disease does
come in, we will be ready. We have ramped up our diagnostic
capabilities at facilities affiliated with the National Animal
Health Laboratory Network. We have reviewed our response plans
with our state and industry partners, and have tested those
plans through exercises. We have more exercises planned in the
coming months, which will include international considerations.
ASF continues to be a worldwide concern. We have met with
and continue to work with our international partners. Just a
few weeks ago, I participated in an ASF forum in Ottawa to
further our efforts with Canada and Mexico, and to establish a
coordinated North American approach to ASF.
In addition to our ongoing ASF prevention efforts, we are
also actively working to combat virulent Newcastle Disease in
California. I am sure many of you have been keeping a close eye
on those efforts, and I am happy to answer any questions you
might have.
Finally, we are very appreciative of the resources provided
in the farm bill. As you know, the farm bill entrusted the
Secretary with significant discretion to prioritize funding for
what we call the three-legged stool. These three legs include
the Laboratory Network, the Animal Disease Preparedness and
Response Program, and the U.S. Vaccine Bank. We are evaluating
all the possible implementation options in hopes of designing
these programs for long-term success. We have met and continued
to meet with interested stakeholders to gain insight and
guidance from all segments of the industry to address these
various disease concerns.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement. I would be happy
to answer any questions that you or Members of the Subcommittee
may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ibach follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Greg Ibach, Under Secretary, Marketing and
Regulatory Programs, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Chairman Costa, Ranking Member Rouzer, and Members of the
Subcommittee, I am pleased to be before you today to discuss pressing
animal health issues and provide an update on the U.S. Department of
Agriculture's (USDA) efforts to address them. Secretary Sonny Perdue
has charged all of us at USDA to ``do right and feed everyone.'' It is
a mission that I, in my role as Under Secretary for Marketing and
Regulatory Programs (MRP), take to heart every day. At MRP we strive to
help our farmers and ranchers produce high-quality plants, animals, and
related products that are in demand all around the world, and to
protect and preserve export markets to facilitate the clean, safe trade
of those goods.
Central to those efforts is our ability to keep harmful foreign
plant and animal pests and diseases out of the country. One of the two
agencies I oversee, the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
(APHIS) leads those important actions. Given today's hearing topic, my
testimony will focus on APHIS' animal health function. Using its
authority under the Animal Health Protection Act, the agency has
created a comprehensive system of overlapping safeguards that protects
U.S. agriculture from foreign animal pests and diseases.
APHIS, using the best available scientific research, identifies
pests and diseases of concern around the globe and implements necessary
mitigations to reduce risk prior to entry of animals or animal products
into the United States. Upon entry, animals and animal products are
subject to inspection to ensure that importers are meeting our rigorous
animal health import requirements. APHIS trains specialists at its
partner agency--U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP)--to identify
and detect potentially problematic imports. Beyond import inspections,
CBP also employs airport passenger inspection programs, which include
the highly successful detector dog program, to help identify and
intercept illegally imported meats and other products that may harbor
disease.
Should pests or disease make it into the country, APHIS'
surveillance and detection programs allow us to identify them and
immediately initiate a targeted response program to swiftly eradicate
the pest or disease.
The importance of these programs has been evident in recent years.
The 2014-2015 outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza in the
Midwest was our nation's largest ever animal health disease outbreak.
The impacts to individual producers and taxpayers were significant, but
ultimately, USDA and our state and industry partners were able to
marshal all available resources to successfully combat the devastating
disease. Our efforts eventually proved effective, but there were many
lessons learned along the way--chief among them, the importance of
proper biosecurity. While our priority is always prevention, when an
outbreak does occur we can all work together to limit its spread and to
reduce the size of the impact.
In a more recent example of a highly successful response effort,
USDA was able to eradicate an outbreak of New World screwworm from the
Florida Keys in 2017. As soon as the livestock pest was identified--the
first identification in fifty years--USDA and its partners sprang into
action. Working with state and local partners, we began active
surveillance in the region to identify the pest's location and
conducted inspections of animals and pets in the area and those passing
through. To eradicate the pest, we used sterile insect technology,
releasing over 150 million sterile flies that killed off the small
population in a matter of months. Our swift efforts limited the spread
and effects of this devastating pest while minimizing trade
implications.
USDA is also in the midst of addressing an ongoing outbreak of
virulent Newcastle Disease (vND) in Southern California. Until the
outbreak began last May, we had not seen this disease in 15 years.
Using his emergency authority under the Animal Health Protection Act,
Secretary Perdue made available $45 million in emergency funding to
enhance our ability to fight this disease, which is mostly affecting
backyard poultry. We are working closely with our state partners to
enhance surveillance and detection activities and to ensure euthanasia
of potentially exposed birds. This funding has also allowed us to work
closely with commercial properties to strengthen biosecurity and to
increase outreach to backyard producers to help slow the spread of the
disease. APHIS has done a lot of work in recent years to promote
regionalization with our foreign trading partners, and thankfully, that
work seems to have paid off. Trade disruptions have been minimal with
most of our trading partners limiting export restrictions to the county
or regional level. Other than those directly affected by the outbreak,
most poultry producers have seen little impact from this disease,
thanks to our efforts.
African Swine Fever
Our overarching prevention strategies and lessons-learned from
these and related response activities have informed USDA's efforts to
address the growing threat of African Swine Fever (ASF). We have
effectively protected against ASF thus far, but its continuing spread
throughout Asia is of great concern. ASF is a highly contagious and
deadly virus that affects domestic and wild pigs. However, it is
important to note that this disease does not pose a risk to human
health, and it is not a food safety concern.
Nevertheless, should the disease ever enter our country, the
effects on individual producers, the thousands of businesses that
support the swine industry in their local communities, and the economy
at large, would be severe. There is currently no ASF vaccine, leaving
depopulation of infected and potentially infected animals as the only
viable method of eradication. A positive detection could have major
implications on trade--likely resulting in the immediate shutdown of
vital export markets. While we have worked hard to promote
regionalization and would push our trading partners to limit trade
restrictions, it would take time to fully restore these markets.
Despite these concerns, I want to provide some assurances. Even
before the recent ASF detection in China, USDA was closely monitoring
outbreaks of the disease throughout Europe and determining necessary
actions to keep this devastating disease out of the country. We have a
number of longstanding tools and processes in place that we continue to
evaluate and enhance.
First in our line of defense are our import restrictions. We
currently do not allow pork and pork products into the country from
China, and we have not in many years, due to the presence of other
diseases such as classical swine fever and foot-and-mouth disease. We
have kept these diseases out with the tools we have in place, and we
believe we can do the same with ASF.
Second are enhanced inspections and travel notifications. We worked
with CBP to ensure their focused attention on commodities and
passengers coming from high-risk areas. CBP looks closely at cargo
coming into the country from these areas to ensure no illegally sourced
meat products are coming in. Additionally, passengers CBP deems at
highest risk are subject to secondary agricultural inspections to
ensure they are not carrying meat or meat products that could harbor
the virus, or that other possible risks--such as on-farm visitation--
are mitigated.
Through its National Detector Dog Training Center in Georgia, APHIS
is training 60 additional beagle teams, up to a total of 179, for CBP's
use during inspections to detect and identify agricultural commodities
that may harbor pests and diseases, including ASF. These dogs are being
deployed at airports and facilities around the country. We have also
worked to notify international travelers--through voice announcements
and signage at ports of entry--of the potential danger of bringing in
seemingly harmless food items that may harbor and spread dangerous
pests and diseases like ASF.
Additionally, APHIS, through its Smuggling Interdiction and Trade
Compliance (SITC) program works to identify and close down high-risk
pathways for smuggled goods and products. This includes efforts to
track down meat and meat products smuggled into the country and
illegally sold at ethnic markets, and to take enforcement action
against those involved in those illegal activities.
Third, we have ramped up our ability to rapidly diagnose this
disease. We have greatly expanded the number of facilities affiliated
with our National Animal Health Laboratory Network (NAHLN) that can
detect ASF. We now have 44 laboratories and 170 laboratory personnel
approved to test for this disease allowing us the ability to review
over 38,000 samples a day and providing the surge capacity to quickly
diagnosis and swiftly eradicate the virus should it enter the country.
We have also worked closely with a variety of stakeholders to raise
awareness of ASF. We have engaged producer groups regarding the
importance of biosecurity and on-farm protocols to prevent the disease
and mitigate farm-to-farm transmissions. Additionally, we have worked
to ensure producers and veterinarians alike are familiar with ASF
symptoms and are aware of the proper response actions should they
suspect infection.
We continue to work closely with our counterparts in Canada and
Mexico to strengthen and coordinate prevention and preparedness
measures across North America. A few weeks ago, I attended the ASF
Forum, an international event hosted by Canada that included animal
health officials and agricultural leaders from around the world. We
discussed common concerns about ASF and the ways we all need to work
together to limit the disease's spread while still maintaining trade.
We are committed to continuing these important discussions and keeping
you and our industry partners apprised of their progress.
Finally, we have held and will continue to hold ASF response
exercises with states, and we have reviewed and updated our ASF
response plans to ensure our strategies for responding to ASF--which
are similar to how we would respond to many other foreign animal
diseases--are up-to-date and understood by everyone who would have a
role in carrying them out.
The Farm Bill and Animal Health
While we have a robust set of tools to address ASF and other
foreign animal pests and diseases under our existing authorities, I was
pleased to see and greatly appreciate the new tools Congress gave us as
part of the 2018 Farm Bill.
In addition to the increased support for the existing NAHLN, the
bill created two new programs: the National Animal Vaccine Bank and the
National Animal Disease Preparedness and Response Program (NADPRP).
NADPRP will help us keep foreign pests and diseases out of the country.
The enhancements to NAHLN will allow us to detect and diagnose disease
to improve our response capabilities. The vaccine bank will help us
recover from certain animal health diseases. Together, these three
programs will work together, building off our existing authorities and
tools, which enhances our ability to protect, preserve, and even
expand, foreign trading markets for the high-quality animals and animal
products our farmers and ranchers produce.
The vaccine bank, which is to be primarily focused on a vaccine for
foot-and-mouth (FMD) disease, will be an effective insurance policy
should that disease strike. FMD vaccine would provide an additional
tool to limit the spread of the disease and allow for a more rapid road
to recovery on a path that reopens export markets.
However, the vaccine bank will only be useful should the disease
enter the country. Thankfully, as with ASF, we have proven steps in
place to keep it out in the first place, and the NAHLN and the NADPRP
program will go a long way to helping us identify and close any gaps in
our animal disease prevention programs for FMD and other foreign animal
diseases. As we envision the NADPRP program, states, universities,
industry and other groups would suggest targeted projects and research
that would advance our animal health mission. After an evaluation
process, we would fund the most promising of those projects, relying on
our partners to carry them out, thereby expanding our ability and
knowledge with their expertise. We have had great successes with a
similar plant health program, and I am confident that these new
projects will prove equally as effective.
We recently held a listening session with stakeholders on these
programs and were encouraged to hear tremendous support for each of
them. Like you, we want them up and running as quickly as possible and
are in the process of evaluating all possible implementation options.
But as you know, the farm bill entrusted the Secretary with significant
discretion as to how to carry out these programs, and we want to ensure
we make the right decisions to set these programs up for long-term
success. We certainly appreciate the flexibility provided by the farm
bill and its no-year funding, and also your patience as we work through
this important process.
Conclusion
Whether it's our focus on addressing the growing threat of ASF, or
implementing the farm bill, USDA and our dedicated employees remain
committed to supporting our farmers and ranchers by keeping foreign
animal pests and diseases at bay. We have, and continue to build upon,
a robust set of tools and strategies for preventing and combating ASF
and other potential threats. These and similar efforts have proven
effective for years. With your continued support--and that of our
state, industry, and global partners--I am confident they will prove
successful for years to come.
This concludes my statement. I would be happy to answer any
questions that you or the Members of the Subcommittee may have.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Secretary.
I would like to, at this time, defer to the Chairman of the
Committee who has questions, and it is the appropriate
protocol. Chairman Peterson, you are recognized.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. COLLIN C. PETERSON, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM MINNESOTA
Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Ibach, for being here.
As you know, we had High-Path Avian Influenza in my
district and we learned some lessons from that, and that is one
of the reasons I was such a strong supporter of getting this
mandatory money in place so you guys can plan for the future.
In my district, the hog producers are very concerned about
this African Swine Fever issue, and I brought this up last
week, and I appreciate the efforts that you guys are making to
control the stuff coming in on the airplanes and so forth.
But what I am wondering is I have heard there is a lot of
research going into finding a vaccine, and that is underway, as
I understand it. But what other research or work are you doing
at USDA to try to figure out how to control this stuff if it
ever does get into the country and take a hold here? What kind
of work are you doing to understand how the virus moves from
herd to herd and how to clean up infected sites and all of
those issues that we learn about with the high-path AI? I would
assume the Chinese are dealing with this, so I just kind of
wondered where you guys are at and what your strategy is to put
this together so we are ready, God forbid, if this ever ends up
in the United States?
Mr. Ibach. You are correct that there is a lot of research
being done on all kinds of fronts with African Swine Fever.
African Swine Fever has proven to be a tough disease to find a
cure for, or a vaccine for, and even to understand completely
how we can decontaminate or disinfect a premises once it
becomes present in that building or facility.
On the vaccine side of things, we still believe we may be
as long as 8 years from finding a vaccine that is effective. We
are working on diagnostics right now in cooperation with Canada
through ARS research to try to have different tools available
to us to determine if the disease is present in a population.
Just as you mentioned with High-Path Avian Influenza, we
learned at that time that biosecurity measures were key. And
even though we thought we had good biosecurity measures in
place, we learned as the disease progressed that maybe we
didn't have quite the stringent measures that we needed to have
in place. And so, that is one thing that we hope we learned
from that experience that we are sharing with the swine
industry, and trying to work through at this time to make sure
not only do we have those biosecurity measures in place at the
border, but that we are also working with individual swine
producers across our country to make sure they are thinking
about how they are protecting themselves from exposure from
outside visitors that could bring the disease into their
operations.
Mr. Peterson. Are they engaged in this across the whole
industry? I mean, are they really paying attention at the
individual producer level?
One of the things we found out with the high-path avian
issue, we had a whole bunch of people staying in one hotel or
in one apartment building that were working at five different
farms, and they were coming in at night and so forth and going
back out. Is that kind of thing on the radar screen of the hog
producers? Are they being informed about this, and is their
industry focused on it?
Mr. Ibach. Yes. We are working very closely with the
industry. I probably speak almost personally once a week with
either a leader at NPPC or one of their veterinarians on staff
there. We continue to try to talk about all kinds of measures
that we will take if the disease does become diagnosed here in
the U.S., and so I think that we are very focused. The swine
industry is very aware of the devastating economic impact it
could have, not only on individual producers, but on their
industry as a whole, and our economy would feel it if we had a
widespread disease here in the U.S. I feel we are very focused
on communication and working together.
Mr. Peterson. Well, thank you, and thank you for what you
are doing to put this together. I think you put it on the fast
track, and hopefully nothing will come of it, but we are going
to try to be ready in case something does. Thank you for your
service.
Mr. Ibach. Thank you.
The Chairman. I want to thank Chairman Peterson for his
focus and his efforts on behalf of this Subcommittee, and all
the Subcommittees within our House Agriculture Committee.
Congressman Rouzer and I both, as I noted earlier, respect
protocol, and I want to therefore defer to the Ranking Member
of the House Agriculture Committee, Congressman Conaway.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM TEXAS
Mr. Conaway. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
you not saying you respect age or old age, whatever it is.
Greg, the veterinarians are a key part of everything that
we do. Particularly in rural America, there is a shortage of
livestock veterinarians that practice, I mean, we have some 43
counties in Texas that don't have a veterinarian, most of those
are in south and west Texas; we have 6,600 veterinarians in
Texas, and 180 of them practice in the livestock business. And
so, a little shout out to Texas Tech University for fighting
their way through the legislative process to establish a large
animal vet program there at Texas Tech to begin to try to meet
some of these shortages.
Are you seeing this same trend in other states besides
Texas? And then also, what are the implications for local
economies, animal health, and public safety if we don't have a
requisite number of veterinarians who service livestock?
Mr. Ibach. As director of ag in Nebraska previous to coming
to USDA, the shortage of large animal veterinarians was not
lost on me in that position. In fact, we utilized some of the
programs that Congress had authorized to be able to recruit and
retain large animal veterinarians.
Part of the shortage is that being a large animal
veterinarian puts you at odds with the elements in some of your
practice at times, and as vet school-screened students to come
into vet school, sometimes the students that are happy to be
out on a ranch in blizzards or in cold weather, rain, sleet,
and snow, aren't the same students that are going to score a
perfect score in organic chemistry or some of those disciplines
that I think have gained more emphasis in the selection
process.
In order to also help address the problem, not only the
programs that Congress has authorized, but also an emphasis on
aligning and selecting students that want to really be large
animal veterinarians is important.
Mr. Conaway. In Texas, I am a CPA and we periodically go
through, and the profession itself goes through, an analysis to
say at entry level point, what are those qualifications? What
are those deals that qualify folks? Is it a similar process for
veterinarians across the United States that would look at those
standards of what really is necessary to get somebody into vet
school?
Mr. Ibach. I think there is a lot of variation between vet
schools. Obviously, Texas Tech has taken a focus and looked at
large animal as a specific need and sought to prioritize that.
In other areas of the country in urban areas where small animal
practices are important too, maybe that same focus isn't in
place. I think that we need to look at the supply and demand of
each category of veterinarian and try to see how we best meet
that.
Mr. Conaway. I appreciate that.
Back on the African Swine Fever and the vectors by which it
gets here. I understand we import a significant amount of
organic feed from China. If that feed goes through some sort of
radiation process, does that change the standard of organics,
and what are we doing reference vectors other than meat that
might be bringing that disease to us?
Mr. Ibach. Organic feed and soybeans specifically has been
an issue or an area of concern for quite a while. And so, I
actually on the AMS side have access to looking at those
numbers of imports of organic products, and we have seen a real
downturn in the amount of organic products coming from China,
especially in the feedgrain side and the oilseed side of
things.
That is something that we also are working very closely
with the pork industry on, their concerns over that as well.
And we had them in a few months ago and actually talked about
17 different areas of concern. Feed was one of them.
As we look at trying to address the concerns in feed, we
don't have the same science to analyze the risk there that we
have in some of the other vectors that we are seeking to
control. And the swine industry is highly dependent on some
imports from China, especially in the micronutrient area. And
so, shutting down all imports of feed would actually hurt the
swine industry. We have agreed to work very closely with them
on research to try to determine what, if we did take measures
to address the concerns there, would actually be based in
science, and what actions we would take that would make a
difference. And at this time, in agreement with the swine
industry, we haven't taken any additional steps.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. All right. The gentleman yields back.
As I said in my opening comments, one of the focuses this
morning I wanted to do is to see where you are in terms of
getting the programs up and running as soon as possible. Can
you tell us what the timeline currently is with the National
Animal Disease Preparedness and Response Program, as well as
the National Animal Vaccine and Veterinary Countermeasures
Bank?
Mr. Ibach. We believe at USDA that all three legs of the
stool are important and play a role in the steps we are taking.
The Chairman. No, I know. You said that, but what is the
timeline?
Mr. Ibach. We are prepared to be able to meet our
expectations to invest at least the first $5 million in the
preparedness effort before the end of the year. We are meeting
regularly with not only the----
The Chairman. How about the countermeasures bank?
Mr. Ibach. The countermeasures bank, we are meeting with
poultry as well as swine and beef to understand how we might
balance that----
The Chairman. But you don't have a timeline there yet?
Mr. Ibach. We hope by the end of the year we might be
prepared to advertise or put out an RFP to----
The Chairman. And with the changes that have been made to
the National Animal Health Laboratory Network in the farm bill
last year, where are you in terms of implementing those
changes?
Mr. Ibach. We continue to invest money in the laboratory
network. Most recently, we invested money to be able to
increase the capability of that lab network to test for African
Swine Fever, and we are going to continue to evaluate where we
can bolster that network.
The Chairman. Well, many of us are hearing different things
from the industry folks that are dependent upon that.
What alarms me, Mr. Secretary, is that the President's
budget request for APHIS in the Fiscal Year 2020 does not show
any overall increase in spending from the 2018 levels. That
would be difficult enough, but in fact, it proposes to cut the
National Animal Health Laboratory Network, as well as other key
programs within your budget. The point of these new authorities
and funding was not to reduce the funding in existing areas or
to replace your current work. I guess what I am looking for, as
well as Members of the Subcommittee, what assurances you can
give me that the new mandatory money you are getting for the
farm bill will actually be used to improve our preparedness and
response capabilities, and not offset budget cuts in other
areas?
You have been around long enough to know the President
proposes and the Congress disposes, so we are working on the
budget, but I hope that we are going to have a budget that
allows you to implement the changes.
Mr. Ibach. As a livestock producer myself and a beef
producer, I understand the importance of animal health at a
producer level, as well as at a regulatory level. We look
forward at APHIS to being wise stewards of whatever----
The Chairman. No, I understand that, and you are
representing the Administration. I get that, but the bottom
line is, I certainly don't expect you to do more with less.
That wasn't why we made the changes last year.
Mr. Ibach. I understand that, sir.
The Chairman. And those are the things we are going to keep
coming back to you on this to see how that is going.
Let me get a little local here. As I noted, we had the egg
producers in here last week. Some folks got some nice omelets.
But one of my local producers complimented the USDA in response
to the outbreak, but they were frustrated that in terms of the
indemnities because of the avian flu losses that we had in
California, that they were based on prices that didn't reflect
the markets in California, which were higher in terms of the
reimbursement rates. Is there some way to make sure that
indemnities better match market values?
Mr. Ibach. That is one of our constant struggles, and the
indemnities is something that we have worked on to try to make
them appropriate without making them attractive to have animals
brought in to be able to take advantage of the indemnity.
When we look at production birds versus some of the
exhibition birds that we are looking at, there can be a wide
range in what producers deem the value of those birds to be.
The Chairman. No, I understand there is a dispute, but
obviously, we would like you to work that out and so that the
indemnity reimbursement is fair and equitable based upon
regional markets, and that is the question there.
I have also got a question with regards to foot-and-mouth
disease, which is a huge concern for cattle, sheep, and pork.
The recent Government Accountability Office made many
recommendations on how USDA could improve your preparedness.
What actions have you taken?
Mr. Ibach. Yes. To improve preparedness against foot-and-
mouth disease?
The Chairman. Right.
Mr. Ibach. I think that that is part of what we are
leveraging at the border, how we work with CBP to identify
countries that are of greater risk at perhaps being a vector
for it to come into the United States.
The Chairman. Chairman Peterson asked if I would yield, and
I would obviously always honor the Chairman's request.
Mr. Peterson. Just 10 seconds.
I forgot to ask, on behalf of Mr. Vela and myself, we have
been down looking at fever ticks in Texas. Would you give us an
update? Mr. Vela sent you a letter, but I would like an update
on what you are doing with fever ticks and how it is going to
play into whatever you are doing with this new agency.
Mr. Ibach. Yes, fever ticks continue to be a pressure on
our southern border, and we have worked very hard to try to
maintain that permanent quarantine zone.
I am also pleased to report that with the change of
Administration in Mexico, I had the opportunity to meet with
some of the leadership there, and they pledged their support to
try to do more on the Mexican side of the border, which would
be very helpful if they help push back the fever tick
populations from the border with what we want to accomplish
there.
The Chairman. Was the gentleman from Minnesota's question
answered?
Mr. Peterson. We are good.
The Chairman. All right. I now would like to yield to the
Ranking Member of the Subcommittee, Congressman from North
Carolina, Congressman Rouzer.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Obviously, African Swine Fever is a big topic of concern.
Certainly, in my State of North Carolina, we have a lot of pork
production in my neck of the woods.
Can you walk us through what would happen if ASF is found
in Mexico or Canada, and then follow up to that, do we have a
coordinated North American strategy with Mexico and Canada on
this issue?
Mr. Ibach. We are working on laying the groundwork to have
a coordinated strategy in place here in North America. We have
worked more closely with Canada up to this point in time
because of the live animal movement that goes back and forth
between Canada and the U.S., but Mexico is also a concern.
The first thing we would do if a disease was identified in
one of those countries is, after consultation with the CVO in
that country, decide what animal movement we needed to limit or
regulate until we were able to determine if they had controlled
and contained the spread of the disease in order to protect our
U.S. swine industry.
Mr. Rouzer. Do those two countries have the resources? Do
they have the apparatus in place to address it adequately, or
is it woefully inadequate?
Mr. Ibach. Canada has a very similar network in place that
we have in the United States. They have been very worried.
Their producers have been very worried because the export
market is a higher percent of their domestic production even
than it is for us, so it is very scary to them, and they have
worked very hard to be prepared.
Mexico, I know it is on their radar screen and they
participated in a symposium in Canada as well. We aren't as
familiar with where they are at, but do have confidence that we
would be able to work with them if they did diagnose the
disease.
Mr. Rouzer. You mentioned exports. Obviously, that is
important for us. Hypothetically, worst case scenario we have
an outbreak here in the United States. What do we have in place
from a trade perspective in terms of mitigating that trade
fallout?
Mr. Ibach. We are working on a regionalization agreement
with Canada right now that would allow us to try to establish
regionalization. As you know, in the poultry industry, we have
outbreaks of low-path AI that result in trade implications, but
because of regionalization agreements, we are able to keep
those at the county level, in many cases, sometimes at the
state level to those export restrictions. We want to be able to
establish that with pork as soon as possible. A lot of it will
depend on our early diagnosis, our ability to contain the
disease, and our ability to assure trading partners that we do
understand the nature of the spread of the disease.
Mr. Rouzer. Can you elaborate a little more on the
surveillance measures that you have in place, not only for
African Swine Fever, but the other diseases out there? What
APHIS is doing in particular in coordination with state
governments and private industry, and others?
Mr. Ibach. That is our major focus on surveillance as well
as being alert and vigilant for symptomatic expression of the
disease is very much reliant on our state partners. And so, we
are communicating with them. Part of the hope in the disease
preparedness portion of the farm bill that Congress identified
is to be able to work even more closely with those state
partners to give them more tools to develop a network that we
can rely on.
Mr. Rouzer. Is there a fairly large discrepancy between the
states or disparity between the states in terms of what they
have in place, and what are we doing to help equalize that?
Mr. Ibach. I think that the states have worked very hard,
especially those states that have a large livestock populations
that rely on them and are economically dependent on the
livestock industry. They have worked very hard to be prepared.
USDA has worked very closely with them and continues to
communicate with them to help them understand the importance of
being prepared. We have had a number of exercises over the past
decade, mainly focused on foot-and-mouth disease, but the
principles are the same if we would have another disease. The
same type of control and containment measures are universal.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you. Thank you both.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. All right, the gentleman yields back.
The Chair will now recognize the gentleman from New York,
Congressman Brindisi.
Mr. Brindisi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [audio malfunction
in hearing room] requirements are adequate to keep the U.S.
safe?
Mr. Ibach. I believe so. They are requirements that we have
relied on for years and decades, and for 90 years now we have
been able to keep foot-and-mouth disease out of the U.S. using
these protocols. In the face of the threat that African Swine
Fever poses right now, we have even raised the protocols and
the awareness of the protocols, our coordination with Customs
and Border Protection to have them be a full partner with us is
at an all-time high. And so, we are quite confident yet.
Mr. Brindisi. Outside of your testimony, what other types
of animal pests or diseases are of current significant concern
to USDA?
Mr. Ibach. Classical Swine Fever probably wasn't part of my
testimony. That is another disease that is prevalent in many
countries across the world that we are concerned about. Foot-
and-mouth, of course, is one of the diseases that we are
concerned about. PRRS we have here in the United States, but it
is more prevalent in other countries that we continue to be
concerned about as well.
Mr. Brindisi. I want to ask about something that is of
concern to folks on the East Coast, the long-horned tick. It is
an invasive pest from East Asia. It has been found in New
Jersey and other East Coast states, and as a representative
from New York with over one million head of cattle, that is
very concerning to me as well. The pest reproduces asexually,
which makes it particularly concerning to spread rapidly, and
according to the literature, it can transmit a wide variety of
diseases, especially for cattle.
What is the plan for making sure this tick doesn't become
an important U.S. vector of livestock disease?
Mr. Ibach. We have some experience in dealing with ticks
from our southern border and along Texas, and we will continue
to see whether or not we need to put control measures in place
in other portions of the United States to protect against other
ticks that could be of interest.
There may be an endemic population in some areas already,
and we need to do research to understand the threat that they
might pose.
Mr. Brindisi. Okay. I do want to just follow up a little
bit on the Chairman's questions, because I am also very
concerned about the President's budget request for Fiscal Year
2020, which reduces the activities of the National Animal
Health Laboratory Network by over $5 million per year.
Just outside my district is Cornell University, which is a
level 1 lab located not too far from my district, and they do
great work. With so many diseases of high concern present
around the world, why would you request this decrease,
especially after Congress strongly supported this function?
Mr. Ibach. Some of the shift was to be able to make sure we
had funds available for the NBAF facility that is being built
near Kansas State University. But we also do not take lightly
the importance of the lab network, and the importance of having
the proper diagnostic abilities located in all areas of the
United States.
Mr. Brindisi. Okay, and just really briefly, can you
comment on what you are doing to encourage veterinary workforce
training and recruitment in critical fields, because I am
hearing a lot about shortages throughout the country.
Mr. Ibach. Well thanks to Congress, USDA has several
programs available to it to be able to support especially large
animal veterinarians, and we continue to work with states to be
able to grant out those dollars and have them be effectively
used.
Mr. Brindisi. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back his time, and the
chair will now recognize the Congresswoman from Missouri,
Congresswoman Hartzler.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you.
The Chairman. The ``Show-Me State.''
Mrs. Hartzler. That is right, the ``Show-Me State.'' I
appreciate that, Mr. Chairman. I want to commend you for the
new surveillance program for the African Swine Fever. That is
very encouraging and very, very important, and I was interested
to hear about the dog teams that you have secured. I was just
wondering, how long will it take to get them trained and ready,
and when can we expect them at the ports?
Mr. Ibach. There are several components that go into it. We
are acquiring dogs right now. Some of those are shelter dogs,
when we can find beagles in the shelters that are of the right
age and health status to be able to incorporate into our
program. We are also working with Customs and Border Protection
to identify the handlers that get trained at the same time as
the dogs, and we already have identified some teams to be able
to put in place in the training program. And so, as they
graduate from that training program, we will be deploying them
periodically throughout the next year.
Mrs. Hartzler. How long is the training, when they go into
training?
Mr. Ibach. Six to 12 months, Dr. Burke says.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay, very good.
We have heard a lot of discussion here already about the
ticks, and this is something that is devastating this whole
country, but certainly my district, Lyme disease. I do believe
it is an epidemic, and it is impacting many individuals with
long-term health problems and as well as livestock. What
efforts has USDA found to be successful in controlling tick-
borne diseases in animals, and what experience does USDA have
to lend to the U.S. as a whole in controlling the spread of
Lyme and other tick-borne diseases, including to people?
Mr. Ibach. I might just make a few comments, and then I
will let Dr. Healey maybe go into more depth on this question.
But this is one of the cases where Secretary Perdue's one
USDA philosophy is very important to us. We work with ARS and
REE to understand the science and have research to be able to
base action at APHIS on.
Dr. Healey. Thank you. As you know, we have done several
projects in the past, so cattle fever tick being the most
visible one. That tick was throughout the South and was pushed
back to that small strip in Texas.
The challenge that we are having today is the tools that we
have used, and historically organophosphates and other types of
tools and coming up with new mechanisms and new tools. And as
the Under Secretary just identified, we are working with ARS to
develop new tools that we can utilize. Some of those are
vaccines that we can use. There are novel uses of current drugs
that are out there that we can utilize, but even going into
other types of materials that are not drugs, so essential oils
and things of that nature have even shown some benefit.
Trying to develop those better tools and tools for the
future that aren't going to be a challenge through the
regulations at EPA and the other types of environmental issues
that we can develop.
Mrs. Hartzler. Great. I have an entrepreneur in Missouri
that has developed a nutrition supplement that can be added to
feed for deer, domestic deer at this point, and it repels
ticks. And he shows a lot of promise there, so I may visit with
you back about that, because that might be something we can
utilize.
Just in the minute and a half left, I wanted to switch to
the announcement last week that a Chinese firm has entered into
a partnership with UK-based livestock genetics company to bring
to Chinese markets gene edited pigs resistant to the PRRS
virus, and also develop commercially available African Swine
Fever resistant pigs. And since it is so hard to seek approvals
from the FDA, it would place U.S. farmers at enormous risk and
disadvantage if other countries can access these innovations,
but U.S. producers can't. Can you detail what steps USDA has
taken to engage with the FDA to make them aware of the needs of
farmers, and has any work been done to try and find a more
workable regulatory pathway so our pork producers and farmers
have that same opportunity for those advanced genetics?
Mr. Ibach. I share your concerns that as we see the
innovation being identified in many cases here in the U.S. at
our research institutions, that we are seeing other countries
as offering the pathway to commercialization. Horned dairy
cattle are being commercialized in Canada. Brazil and Argentina
have both invited in gene editing for projects that they are
looking to commercialize. It could put U.S. producers at a
disadvantage.
At the same time, gene editing offers a great opportunity
to address some of the consumer concerns we have. If we can
eliminate disease through gene editing, we don't have to use
antibiotics to treat sick animals.
Some of the animal welfare concerns that are out there, if
we can suppress sexual maturity so that we can eliminate
castration, again is something consumers may find of value.
I think that gene editing is something that we do need to
work on together with FDA. We have had some very cursory
conversations with FDA to see what their vision for their path
forward on gene editing is. Perhaps there is an opportunity for
us to work together with FDA to find a solution similar to the
one we found with cellular protein where we split that
jurisdiction to work together to move it to commercialization
faster.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. The gentlewoman's
time has expired. We thank you for your responses.
The chair will now recognize the gentleman from California,
my neighbor, Congressman TJ Cox.
Mr. Cox. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for calling
the hearing today. Mr. Under Secretary and Dr. Healey, thanks
for being here. I appreciate the Chairman bringing up the
concerns of our California egg producers as they deal with the
outbreak of Newcastle disease on one side, and then the other
point that he brought up, looking for equitable indemnities for
lost production.
As you well know, the disease is a major threat to our
state's egg producers, and certainly once again, I want to
reiterate the need to prioritize a response for eradicating
this disease and certainly to look for the equitable indemnity
payments to better reflect market value of our California egg
prices, and certainly would like to see if you have something
you have written about that to get over to the Committee and to
our office.
With specific regard to the outbreak of Newcastle disease,
I heard during your testimony that the USDA recently tapped $45
million in existing funds to address the disease, particularly
in California. Could you tell me just a bit more about how
these funds are being used? When do you expect that they will
run out, if they will, and given these new resources, why do we
continue to see additional cases of the disease reported
weekly?
Mr. Ibach. Newcastle in that area of California, the three
southern counties that are mainly our focus area, we have had a
few outliers, but we have been able to crush those before they
spread outside of the areas in northern California, Utah, and
Arizona. But it continues to be a problem in southern
California.
We are partnering very closely with the California
Department of Agriculture and the state vet. It is a joint
project that we are working on together. In 2018 we supported
the plan that California had in place to work through the
problem, but we were unable to get our arms around it. Last
fall in cooperation with CDFA as well as with the national
poultry industry, we determined that a more 2003 modeled
program that was used back then when we had the last virulent
Newcastle outbreak was appropriate. We had some funding left in
the high-path AI category that with the permission of the
national poultry industry, we moved $45 million of those
dollars over to Newcastle. And so, we have begun a way more
aggressive approach to Newcastle.
As we have taken that more aggressive approach, we are
going to identify more positive flocks. Hopefully as we
identify those flocks and eliminate those flocks, as well as
depopulate dangerous contact flocks in the area, we will see
those diagnoses go down over time.
Mr. Cox. Great. From what I understand, the current USDA
policy for virulent Newcastle Disease calls for a fallow period
with no paid virus elimination funding, why would the USDA pay
for virus elimination for avian influenza, but not for virulent
Newcastle Disease?
Mr. Ibach. I will ask Dr. Healey to address that question.
Dr. Healey. The challenge is, as I am sure you are aware,
being from that area, is the neighborhood issue. And so, we are
finding very dense pockets of backyard birds, commercial birds,
et cetera, and the fallow period is the way that virus moves,
if we were to clean and disinfect and restock that premise
while the disease is still circulating in the neighborhood,
they would re-infect themselves and we would just have a never-
ending cycle. We have to use the fallow period in order to have
a break, if you will, in the disease cycle.
Mr. Cox. Great.
Under Secretary, you mentioned with APHIS you used the best
available research to guide your decision making, and can you
share just a bit on how APHIS decides what research is done
internally and also share specific ways the agency works with
other research areas at USDA, as well as universities and other
external research organizations?
Mr. Ibach. I will defer to Dr. Healey.
Mr. Cox. Sure.
Dr. Healey. The research that we are doing is collaborative
research, and bringing in through a variety of cooperative
agreements and other mechanisms of that type that reach out to
the states and universities to help assist us with those
research protocols.
Mr. Cox. Great, thanks. Thank you so much.
The Chairman. All right, the gentleman is yielding his
time, and the chair will now recognize the gentleman from
Kentucky, Mr. Comer.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Under Secretary
Ibach, it is great to have you here today.
In a previous life, I was the Commissioner of Agriculture--
--
Mr. Ibach. Commissioner, yes.
Mr. Comer.--in Kentucky, and you were in Nebraska. I
appreciate your strong ag background and the work you are doing
at USDA.
In Kentucky, we are major poultry producers. In fact, a lot
of people don't realize this even in Kentucky, poultry is the
largest agriculture crop in Kentucky by far. And all the
poultry processors in Kentucky are in my Congressional
district.
When I was Commissioner of Agriculture, we had an issue
with disease outbreak in some poultry houses. It was actually
West Nile virus outbreak, and with the state veterinarian's
office eradicated the birds and we were successful in the
eradication process, obviously, and the disease did not spread.
But that is one thing that our producers know, but a lot of
Americans don't know, that the prevention of livestock disease
outbreaks is one of the biggest roles that USDA and State
Departments of Agriculture play.
To go along with what Congresswoman Hartzler was saying
with respect to gene editing and disease resistant animals,
there has been a lot of roadblocks within the FDA from a
regulatory standpoint to prevent this or to slow the process
down. What are some things that we in Congress can do to get
the roadblocks out of the way to where we can progress with
this type of technological advancement?
Mr. Ibach. You have lots of options available to you, in
Congress. I know that as far as USDA is concerned, we are very
optimistic about what gene editing provides for in animals.
Earlier last year, a year ago in April, actually, the
Secretary moved forward with talking about gene editing in
plants where USDA has full regulatory authority, and we
announced that as if it was something that could be done
through a normal plant breeding process, but we could do it
with less generations or without losing yield or other benefits
through gene editing that we were not going to regulate that.
And so, that is very consistent with the path that much of the
Western Hemisphere is using in plant biotechnology, and
actually very consistent with where large parts of the Western
Hemisphere are landing on animal biotechnology as well.
Mr. Comer. Outstanding. My next question, I wanted to
obviously give a shout-out to one of the livestock diagnostic
labs in Kentucky is in my district. Murray State University has
the brand-new Breathitt Laboratory that we are very proud of. I
want to mention, as you know, but in the farm bill, we included
enhanced funding for the National Animal Health Laboratory
Network. I just wanted to say in my limited time that I look
forward to working with you to see that these labs continue to
succeed and stay at the forefront of playing that vital role of
livestock disease outbreak. And I didn't know if you had any
comments about that or anything that we could do to further
ensure that these livestock diagnostic labs continue to exist
and play the vital role that they serve in agriculture?
Mr. Ibach. As Director of Agriculture, again, I had the
experience of working with USDA cooperatively to make sure that
our lab in Nebraska was successful. But I also think it is
important that we have the capability to match the species that
are prevalent in the different states across the United States.
Not every lab needs to be able to do every test, but we need to
have the capability to match up with the threat, as well as the
workload or species load that might be prevalent.
I think that is part of the reason why as we evaluate the
three legs of the stool and how to divide those investments
between, when there are competing priorities. There is also the
need to be able to spread that initial investment that Congress
made available over the first 4 years of the program and not
exhaust it at the beginning, and be responsible with that. We
are working very closely with industry, with universities to be
able to understand how we make the right division of that
funding to be able to have the greatest impact.
Mr. Comer. Great. Thank you very much for your good work,
Mr. Under Secretary. We look forward to working with you in the
future.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back, and the chair will
now recognize the gentlewoman from Minnesota, Congresswoman
Craig.
Mrs. Craig. Thank you so much, and thank you, Under
Secretary Ibach, for being here today, and thank you to the
Chairman and the Ranking Member for holding this hearing.
The livestock industry is obviously incredibly important to
the economy of greater Minnesota, and obviously, it is
inextricably tied to animal health and disease prevention. In
Minnesota, we rank number one in the nation for turkey
production and number two in the nation for hog production.
Thankfully, this Committee demonstrated commitment to
animal health in the 2018 Farm Bill, and I look forward to
hearing about your agency's plan to fully implement those
programs in a timely manner.
Mr. Ibach, as you know, in 2014 and 2015 Highly-Pathogenic
Avian Influenza wreaked havoc on Minnesota poultry, resulting
in the loss of over nine million birds in Minnesota. The losses
in birds coupled with the impact on food processors, truckers,
and consumers totaled an estimated loss of $3.3 billion
economy-wide. What is your agency doing to prevent a similar
outbreak in the future, and how do you work with relevant state
and industry partners? What lessons learned would you share
with producers to improve biosecurity, as you mentioned in your
testimony?
Mr. Ibach. Yes, I think that that was unfortunately a great
opportunity for not only USDA and states to learn a lot about
an animal disease outbreak, but try to learn from it as well.
And so, we have worked very closely with the poultry industry
to help them understand the risk factors that maybe contributed
to the outbreak and the rapid spread of it, and try to help
them understand and work with us as we try to help them
increase biosecurity and prevention measures.
Mrs. Craig. Thank you.
To shift to swine for just a moment, we all know that
African Swine Fever continues to be an imminent threat,
especially of concern to my pork producers. Obviously, it would
be devastating to the economy if it arrived in the United
States. Can you tell us a little bit more about the work you
are doing abroad to work with China and address their likely
underreporting of ASF, and how could this impact the global
management of the disease?
Mr. Ibach. As far as working with China, we have offered
our APHIS veterinarians. We have international services
officers in place in Beijing that do other important work with
the import/export endeavors we have there, but we have offered
them as technical experts to China. Up to this time, China has
not accepted their assistance.
We have reached out in Vietnam and some of the research
that we are doing in conjunction with Canada with looking at
diagnostics for African Swine Fever. We are hoping to maybe
have the opportunity to field test in cooperation with Vietnam
to be able to verify that they are accurate or hone our
accuracy of those tests.
We are reaching out and trying to learn from what is going
on in China and Vietnam, and have had varying levels of success
with that cooperation.
Mrs. Craig. Thank you.
Just one final question. Chronic wasting disease, I know it
wasn't mentioned in your testimony, but it continues to
threaten southeast Minnesota. And frankly, it is just a matter
of time until we see it as severely as our neighbors in
Wisconsin have.
The University of Minnesota continues to be a terrific
partner in testing possible cases. Can you quickly comment on
the work your agency is doing to contain CWD and prevent the
spread into areas like my district in southeastern Minnesota?
Mr. Ibach. Our statutory authority is largely focused on
those captive herds, and we just released some protocols to put
in place, new protocols to be more responsive in those captive
herds. We are also working in cooperation with the greater
population to be able to do research to understand the disease
better and look for if not cures, ways to limit the spread of
the disease.
Mrs. Craig. Thank you so much, and Mr. Chairman, I yield
back the remainder of my time.
The Chairman. The gentlewoman yields back the remainder of
her time, and the chair will now recognize the gentleman from
Kansas, Congressman Marshall.
Mr. Marshall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome, Under
Secretary. It is always good to see you.
I am going to start off this conversation about one of my
favorite topics, and that is the Silicon Valley of bio agro-
defense research, which is Manhattan, Kansas, and we are so
proud of NBAF and what is going on there, that we are on time
and maybe even under budget. That is exciting. I am looking
forward to USDA doing a lot of research there.
Of course, folks back home are concerned about the funding
of it, and there is traditional funding through ARS, the
cooperative agreement, but we think there are other
opportunities as well, collaborative opportunities leveraging
that knowledge.
How does USDA see those opportunities beyond the
traditional funding?
Mr. Ibach. Actually, we are quite excited about those
opportunities as well at USDA, and APHIS and ARS work very
closely together with dividing up our animal disease
responsibilities in APHIS that occur in NBAF with the research
opportunities that ARS is in control of.
Actually tomorrow, Mr. Crosswhite sitting behind me is
going to go participate in a program that ARS is sponsoring
that we are bringing in biologics companies to understand how
the biologics development module can be used to leverage that
research to be able to determine how we can move that into
commercialization as rapidly as possible.
We are looking forward to hearing their ideas about how we
develop those cooperative ventures to be able to leverage and
get the most out of the facility.
Mr. Marshall. A quick follow up NBAF question: There is
still some animal research going to be done at Plum Island.
What additional research do you think--what differently will we
be doing in Manhattan as opposed to Plum Island?
Mr. Ibach. Manhattan gives us the opportunity to have our
first U.S. BSL-4 lab available to us, which means we will be
able to not only work on important animal diseases that we have
been working on, but we will be able to work on some zoonotic
diseases like Ebola that we haven't been able to do as much
research on at Plum Island. We are excited about the
opportunities that provides.
Mr. Marshall. Great. Going to my lightning round here, talk
a little bit about the FMD vaccine bank just for a second. A
March 2019 GAO report stated the USDA will likely face
significant challenges in pursuing its response goals of
detecting and controlling FMD quickly.
I have gone through several scenarios with folks back home.
It is a tough challenge. What would be the plan, moving
forward, to implement the FMD bank and get us where we need to
be?
Mr. Ibach. We are working right now to evaluate how we
might get the most bang for each dollar invested in a vaccine
bank. As you know, that vaccine has an expiration date of about
5 years, so we are looking at models that might allow us to be
able to purchase and then sell back the vaccine, and we are
working with companies to understand that.
Actually, not only important is the vaccine, but also
disease traceability and understanding and identifying where
the disease might originate, to be able to control and contain
it, and that is somewhere else that we are partnering with
Kansas right now and their traceability project, to be able to
help us.
Mr. Marshall. Yes, I am familiar with that.
Let's move on to African swine flu viruses for a second. Of
course, we are all concerned that we let some type of feed come
into our country. That is very upsetting. It would seem to me
it went the opposite way, if we had infected feed come through
the United States to other countries like China, they would
probably lock us out of their market. I hope we have a strong
enough response to that.
How are we doing on false positive, false negatives for
testing, and what are we doing for follow up on positive
samples?
Mr. Ibach. I will let Dr. Healey answer that question.
Dr. Healey. The testing protocols that we have used, we
essentially found zero false positives in our CSF-type tests.
Mr. Marshall. Wow.
Dr. Healey. This ASF that we are rolling out, that protocol
is essentially the very similar protocol, very similar testing.
We don't anticipate many of those. If we do find them, then of
course, we will follow back up with additional subsequent
testing in that screening test.
Mr. Marshall. Great. Just to move on quickly, the gene
editing versus an animal drug remains a big concern to folks in
Kansas. I will associate myself with the remarks made by
Congresswoman Hartzler, Mr. Comer as well. You have already
answered that, but I just can't tell you--we have only had one
food animal gene editing situation approved so far, so they are
not responding to our needs. Something different has to happen.
I think that USDA is probably the place. I don't think that
gene editing is an animal drug.
And finally, I have a question I want to submit for the
record for the veterinary biologics regarding adequate funding
for that research project as well.
Thank you for having me, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back, and the chair will
now recognize the gentleman from one of the nice parts of
California, the Central Coast, Congressman Carbajal from Santa
Barbara.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ibach, as we have seen in recent months, disruption in
vital export markets have caused American farmers, including
farmers on the Central Coast that I represent, severe economic
drawbacks that may continue to do harm to our agriculture
economy for years to come.
Under Secretary Ibach, you said that part of your mission
is to protect and preserve open markets for U.S. agriculture
products. Given the negative impact that the President's trade
war is having on American farmers, keeping markets open is very
important. What are the current priorities for APHIS to help
facilitate trade for U.S. farmers and ranchers?
Mr. Ibach. APHIS' responsibilities in trade are largely
focused around the phytosanitary and sanitary restrictions and
agreements we enter into with other countries around the world.
As we have seen the difficulties with China emerge and remain
in place, we have looked for opportunities to reach out to
other countries around the world to be able to break down those
sanitary and phytosanitary barriers and create new markets in
other countries.
Mr. Carbajal. Do you find that we are being successful?
Mr. Ibach. Yes, we are having some luck. We are making real
advancements on the PPQ side, the plant side. Not necessarily
the subject of today's hearing, but we are making progress with
many different products.
Mr. Carbajal. Great.
In your testimony, you highlighted multiple instances when
APHIS Animal Health Functions was successful in combating
potentially devastating disease from either spreading or
entering the United States. APHIS' role in proactively
monitoring animal health across the world is essential to
supporting safe imports and exports. In what ways has APHIS
elevated the importance of biosecurity to protect U.S.
livestock and the poultry industry?
Mr. Ibach. You are very correct. We constantly are
monitoring disease levels around the world. We do that out of
our Fort Collins headquarters facility there. And so, as we
identify potential threats, we evaluate the risks they pose as
far as either trade or travel of commercial passengers. And
then we work with Customs and Border Protection to be able to
make sure that we have them aware of the risks that we perceive
and try to eliminate and combat that.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. All right, the gentleman yields back, and the
chair will now recognize Congressman Bacon from the great State
of Nebraska.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just have to point out, Under Secretary Ibach is one of
our favorite sons of Nebraska. We are proud of him. We are
proud of what you are doing in the Administration, and how you
are serving our country and our agriculture.
The Chairman. I assume you say that as a friend.
Mr. Bacon. As a friend, yes. Then you get ready for the
hard question.
If I may, first of all, I just want to thank you for your
testimony on African Swine Fever and foot-and-mouth disease. I
think they are very informational, especially on the African
Swine Fever that we don't really have a known counter or a
vaccine for it.
Do you have adequate research dollars that we can put more
towards African Swine Fever, since we don't have anything to
counter it right now? Is there anything more that we can give
you, or what tools can Congress help you with in this regard?
Mr. Ibach. I think that is one of the things that we are
constantly working with ARS to be able to identify those
priority items to be able to shift research dollars into. We
also work cooperatively with other nations and universities to
be able to augment each other's research in those areas.
It is a balance of understanding how many dollars are
available, what is the best distribution of those dollars to
address all those? Obviously, there is never enough money to
fund all the research opportunities that are out there, but we
seek to find that right balance at USDA.
Mr. Bacon. Is there a higher priority for research right
now than African Swine Fever? I am just trying to get a feel
for what other things you are tackling.
Mr. Ibach. I would defer to Dr. Healey on that one.
Dr. Healey. Certainly, with the threat of it across the
globe that we are seeing and the recognition that it is a
worldwide issue, vaccine is a key concern.
The challenge we have is the various types. There are over
20 different types of African Swine Fever virus out there, and
it moves between them. It is not an easy virus to find a good
vaccine for, that is the big challenge.
Mr. Bacon. Regarding foot-and-mouth disease, it also has a
lot of different variants. We are much farther along, am I
correct, when it comes to identifying a vaccine?
Dr. Healey. Correct. In that one, there are multiple
different vaccines for each of the various strains, and as was
mentioned earlier, we are reaching out to Asia to try to get
some of those strains of that virus so we can determine how
that one plays into what is in Europe versus what is in Africa.
Mr. Bacon. I served in the military for about 30 years, and
when you look at a new weapons system, we try to project what
is the operational date of such a system, or a unit. What is
the estimated operational date for the foot-and-mouth disease
vaccine bank?
Mr. Ibach. We already have a North American vaccine bank
that is in operation right now that has some vaccines available
for us. Today, we would have with a limited outbreak a vaccine
available to us. We hope by the end of this year to be putting
out an RFP to be able to start the base for the U.S. one that
was funded in the 2018 Farm Bill.
Mr. Bacon. Are there any other tools you need from Congress
when it comes to foot-and-mouth disease? Are we giving you
adequate resources?
Mr. Ibach. The current disease prevention and surveillance
programs that USDA had in place augmented with the programs
that came in the 2018 Farm Bill give us a great set of tools to
be able to invest across the board, and they are sufficient at
this time.
Mr. Bacon. And just for folks that may not be as familiar
with foot-and-mouth disease, if we did not have the vaccine
bank, can you give our constituents an idea what would be the
impact if we had a foot-and-mouth disease outbreak in our
country without a vaccine bank?
Mr. Ibach. The vaccine bank gives us some great tools. Of
course, the impact of foot-and-mouth disease, if it does
present itself in the U.S., is going to be based largely upon
how it presents itself. If it is a single isolated outbreak in
a remote portion of the U.S. that we are able to identify and
there hasn't been livestock movement, a vaccine would be a
great tool to maybe cordon off and keep our risk into a very
small area.
If it is diagnosed in a sow unit that is sending feeder
pigs to multiple states over the course of a week, it could be
a very different outbreak to be able to control, contain, and
manage, and have a very different impact on the livestock
industry.
Mr. Bacon. Well, my time has expired. Thank you, and Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. The chair will now
recognize a good friend and person who represents that same
nice part of California, the Central Coast, Congressman
Panetta.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate this
opportunity to question this witness, who I also want to thank
for not only being here, but obviously, your preparation in
order to be here. Clearly based on your testimony and your
answers, you have done that, and so thank you very much.
As the Chairman said, I come from the Central Coast of
California, and as far as I know, Santa Barbara is not in the
Central Coast. Just let me make that clear, despite what the
Chairman said. He is being nice to my good friend and my
colleague, Salud Carbajal, on that, which we go back and forth.
But, there is a point to me saying that in the sense that
on the Central Coast, obviously as many of my colleagues know
well, it is known as the Salad Bowl of the World. We have some
livestock, there is no doubt about that. Little dairy, some
cattle in the southern part. But we have a lot of soft fruits
and vegetables, and as you know most likely, Mr. Under
Secretary, there was an E. coli outbreak in regards to the
product that we have on the Central Coast, although that
outbreak was not from the Central Coast. It actually took place
in Santa Barbara County when they eventually determined where
that outbreak was.
Yet when the outbreak happened, and when they saw it was
affecting outlets, understandably, for safety purposes, the
FDA, per the CDC, came down with a blanket exclusion of all
romaine right before Thanksgiving, as you remember.
Now, obviously that was an issue because clearly it affects
not just the consumers. It affects the growers and everybody
else who works in that chain.
I know that APHIS has been trying to work on encouraging
other countries to deal with regionality, basically trying to
make sure that you try to make it as specific as possible when
there is an outbreak of disease. I am going to continue to work
on this issue so we can deal with the traceability and so that
obviously with safety being the most important thing. We ensure
that there is the appropriate advisory in regards to certain
areas and certain food when this does happen.
Like I said, I know you are dealing with other countries
and trying to get them to be as specific as possible when
responding to disease outbreaks. And so, I was just wondering
if you could comment on those efforts, and how receptive these
other countries have been in regards to the regionalization as
a concept. If you could comment on that, Mr. Under Secretary.
Mr. Ibach. Yes. You are very correct in mentioning
traceability as probably the very foundation of being able to
regionalize, being able to protect the outbreak where it occurs
and contain that and let other areas of the California or the
United States be able to continue to sell into the marketplace.
And I think that is the same experience that we are having
internationally as well is that having traceability programs in
place, whether they be in fruit and vegetable industry or more
importantly in the livestock industry, and for this hearing,
has been a challenge for USDA. The poultry and swine industry
have been more embracing of traceability; although, I have had
some meetings with pork packers recently that aren't sure that
we have a sufficient traceability reporting timeline in place
to be able to really protect them. The beef industry, the
industry that I come from, has been slower to embrace
traceability, and I am working very closely with them to be
able to provide producer education to help them embrace
traceability over time.
Mr. Panetta. Okay, and just briefly, when it comes to these
types of outbreaks, can you just give us an idea of what USDA
is doing, what are the initial steps? How does it respond right
away when this type of outbreak occurs for this type of
disease?
Mr. Ibach. In an animal disease outbreak, USDA would first
get on site in cooperation with the state veterinarian to be
able to try to determine whether or not the disease is limited
to that one farm or operation, or whether or not animal
movement has caused it to spread. We would look at where
animals came into that operation from, and where they went to,
to be able to determine the scope of where we needed to go next
to try to do that, and that would be our very first step. We
would move on from there.
Mr. Panetta. Again, thank you, gentlemen. I yield back my
time, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back his time, and for
the chair's information, I do stand corrected. But where do you
believe Central Coast ends in California?
Mr. Panetta. Where the 20th Congressional District ends.
The Chairman. Oh, okay. I got that. I stand corrected. I
will try not to make that mistake again.
All right. The chair will now recognize the gentleman from
Minnesota, Mr. Hagedorn.
Mr. Hagedorn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Rouzer. I appreciate your testimony, Under Secretary. Thanks
for being here.
I represent the southern part of Minnesota, the 1st
District, and we have a heavy livestock production, number two
in the country for hogs, and also have a lot of poultry
production, especially turkeys.
I guess I will start there with this Newcastle virus or
whatever you are calling it. It appears to me, based on what
was presented, that most of the cases have been found in
California, almost all of them. Are they all related at this
point to chickens, or do we have turkeys as well? What is the
mixture on the cases that you found so far?
Mr. Ibach. I will try to characterize that, and then if
Burke wants to follow up a little bit, he can do that.
But so far, they are all pretty much in backyard flocks in
three southern counties of California. Those backyard flocks
represent exhibition birds, as they are defined by OIE. Many of
them are small, but some of them are backyard flocks that have
several hundred to low thousands of birds in them as well. We
have only had four commercial flocks affected by Newcastle so
far, and they have been in those three counties as well, and
so, we continue to work very hard to try to contain the disease
in that area. That is the reason why when the national poultry
industry saw that the measures that we had put in place last
summer weren't working to arrest the disease, that we brought
more funding in through the high-path funding to designate it
to that Newcastle effort.
Mr. Hagedorn. Okay. Your efforts to help prevent it from
spreading are letting people know across the country,
particularly in Minnesota, I take it, you are working with a
lot of the producers, but so far, you haven't seen anything in
the industry, just these kind of backyard cases.
Mr. Ibach. Yes, we have made the entire industry aware of
it. We have also put some movement and even disinfectant
protocols in place leaving those counties so that egg and egg
products and poultry and poultry products that are leaving the
infected area pose less risk to the rest of the United States.
Mr. Hagedorn. Switching gears over to the African Swine
Fever, I can tell you that the hog producers and farmers in
southern Minnesota, they are very concerned. And they
appreciate your work. They just want to make sure that we are
making sure that you are doing everything possible. I spoke
with you just a little bit before the hearing, and you said
that you are working across agency lines throughout the entire
Administration to make sure that you do everything possible to
protect our food supply and protect our agricultural interests.
In some nations, they are taking a pretty heavy-handed
approach against China. I know that from inbound flights to
Taiwan, for instance, that people are told that if they have
any Chinese pork products or anything of that nature, they get
a heavy fine, and there are public service announcements even
on the airlines. Should we be taking some of those types of
steps, or what are your thoughts on that?
Mr. Ibach. We have taken steps to increase the
communication to that passenger traffic moving in and out, and
there is additional signage and announcements that are being
made at airports to try to encourage those passengers if they
do have prohibited products to surrender those products at the
airport. Also, the dog patrols have been increased.
Probably the area that we also have really stepped up in is
within APHIS, we have a SITC division that actually goes out
into ethnic marketplaces looking for prohibited products, and
so we have focused now on looking in those ethnic marketplaces
that might be bringing in products from high-risk countries. In
some cases, we have identified these products that have been
smuggled into the U.S. We then do investigations to figure out
how they were smuggled into the U.S. And so, some of the
announcements that you have heard from Customs and Border
Protection about cargoes that have been intercepted that have
these prohibited products have been a result of those
investigations out into the country and the follow up from
those.
Mr. Hagedorn. Very quickly, maybe you can answer this for
the record.
We obviously don't want it coming directly into the United
States, and we work very closely with our trading partners to
the north and south, Canada and Mexico. They have some
significant hog operations as well. We don't want it there
either. We have a relatively porous border, I would say,
especially to the south. It would make it much easier to get it
in the country. Are we working with our trading partners? And
if you don't have time, I don't want to take up the Committee's
time. Maybe you can answer that for the record.
Mr. Ibach. We are working very closely with both Mexico and
Canada.
Mr. Hagedorn. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired, and we have
a wonderful arrival of the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Congressman Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Chairman, thank you so much. You are
kind. I apologize for----
The Chairman. Always glad to have you here.
Mr. Thompson. Right on time, I guess, from some
perspectives, but I wish I could have been here for other
questions. I just came from the Floor.
Mr. Secretary, good to see you.
Mr. Ibach. Nice to see you.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you for your leadership and your
service, it is much appreciated.
A couple items I wanted to touch on: As you know, Section
7209 of the farm bill provides high priority status for
specific research and extension initiatives, and I was pleased
that we were able to get into the farm bill designated Chronic
Wasting Disease in that farm bill that was signed by the
President mid-December of just this past year. Can you describe
what we can expect with research on this disease?
Mr. Ibach. I will start to answer that question and let Dr.
Healey finish it.
But as you know, APHIS' responsibilities are focused on
those captive herds, and we work closely with their state
wildlife agencies on the wild populations. We recently released
some new protocols for those captive herds that we think are
going to help us.
Dr. Healey will maybe elaborate a little bit on the
research that we are doing to try to identify how to maybe if
not find a cure for the disease, at least try to manage the
spread of the disease.
Dr. Healey. A couple things that we do. One is to build a
bank of tissues and materials so when we have an infected herd,
we go through that herd and identify the animals that are
positive, negative, and collect tissues from all them,
establish that bank, and make that available to researchers so
they can come in and ask for that material and actually know
that they are looking at lymph nodes or blood or whatnot from
an infected animal versus exposed animals, et cetera.
Additionally to that, we are working with the industry to
come up with other techniques to try to prohibit the disease
and learn about the disease. There are some disease resistance
and genotypes and things of that nature that show some promise.
Right now, it is more in white tail. We are also looking at
live animal testing and other mechanisms and more rapid
testing, as well as variety of diagnostics, and hopefully
develop eventually genetics and some prevention techniques as
well.
Mr. Thompson. Very good. I appreciate that. Certainly, it
is my priority. And for those who don't know, obviously this
impacts cervids and it is not limited to, but certainly in
Pennsylvania lose our white tail deer population and our elk
herd. And really, can be devastating economically and not just
to our deer farms, but obviously to our wild herds.
A couple of my priorities I would like to see us just keep
in mind. You have already kind of mentioned them, and Dr.
Healey, in your testimony. One is, we need to come up with a
live test. It is unacceptable to me that we suspect one animal
is sick; well, whether this is in a deer farm, or quite
frankly, in a wild deer population. There are a couple hot
spots in Pennsylvania right now, Bedford County and part of my
district in Clearfield County. The fact that we cull a herd and
then we test them and find that most of the ones, thankfully,
were not sick, but unfortunately, they are all dead because of
culling the herd. And so, a live test would be just a
tremendous service for both.
And then, of course, as you had mentioned, whether some
way, obviously in the deer farms, inoculation, but in the wild,
perhaps feed distribution or something to be able to address
that proactively. We do have a Chronic Wasting Disease Research
Act, H.R. 2081, a bill that I introduced here. It has great
bipartisan support, and we are hoping to build that basically
to provide $15 million towards research so we can look at all
aspects of the disease.
Under Secretary, thank you again for coming to Harrisburg
last year in the beginning of January when it is always not
necessarily warm and balmy.
Mr. Ibach. That was a really cold day.
Mr. Thompson. That was a really cold day, and that was for
our annual Farm Show listening session. It was great having you
there. Actually, your presence there was so monumental in terms
of having us, because since that session, we have seen
additional resources from USDA to help Pennsylvania deal with
the spotted lantern fly, which is just devastating to fruit
trees, grapes, hardwoods. Do you have any update on USDA's
efforts to help suppress this particular invasive species?
Mr. Ibach. We are continuing our partnership and working
with Secretary Redding--Commissioner, Secretary, Director, I
can't remember in Pennsylvania.
Mr. Thompson. Secretary.
Mr. Ibach. Secretary Redding to be able to invest some
additional USDA funds. Kevin Shea, the Administrator for APHIS,
was up with Secretary Redding as we kicked off this year's
efforts, and so we continue to want to work cooperatively with
Pennsylvania.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Well, we thank you for your contributions,
and the gentleman's time has expired.
Now before we adjourn, I want to recognize the Ranking
Member for any closing remarks that he may want to make.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
holding this hearing, and really enjoy working with you on
these issues. I really appreciate our two witnesses for being
here today. This is a really, really important topic, disease
prevention and surveillance, and I can't tell you how important
it is from the standpoint of my constituents back home. Of
course, you readily know that and understand the importance to
our agriculture sector, and as I said during the course of my
opening statement, food security is national security. It all
goes hand in hand, so thank you for being here. I appreciate
your testimony and answering the questions the way you did, it
was very informative.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. All right. I want to thank the Ranking Member
for the contribution that he has made, and staff, both the
Minority staff and the Majority staff of this Subcommittee for
the good work they have done.
Mr. Secretary and Doctor, I want to thank you for your
testimony today.
I do want to note, as we discussed in a lot of questions
that were asked by the Subcommittee Members in terms of the
USDA's preparedness that while the $5 million for the
implementation of the National Animal Disease Preparedness and
Response Program and your goal to have that implemented by the
end of this year is positive. We are going to stay on you on
that, because we think it is important. That is why we did
that.
I am still not really satisfied, frankly, with the answer
or the vagueness of the answer on the National Animal Vaccine
and Veterinary Countermeasures Bank, and we will follow up
there. As we noted earlier, the President's budget as proposed,
I don't think is going to allow you to do what we have tried to
change in last year's farm bill. And so, hopefully the Congress
will come together in a bipartisan budget that we ultimately
send to the President that will give you the resources to do
what is needed for America's agricultural industry as we talk
about the needs of the livestock industry throughout the
country. And of course, they were highlighted here today and we
will follow up on that. We wish you the best and continued
cooperation by all the Members of the Subcommittee. When we
work together, we get things done on behalf of American
agriculture. Please give Secretary Perdue our regards, and we
look forward to continuing this work.
The Subcommittee's hearing now is adjourned.
Yes.
Okay, let me note with the recognition of the Members, I
know I adjourned, under the Rules of the Committee the chair
will recognize that today's hearing will remain open for 10
calendar days to receive any additional material and
supplementary written responses from the witness due to any
questions posed by a Member of this Subcommittee.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:42 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Submitted Questions
Response from Hon. Greg Ibach, Under Secretary, Marketing and
Regulatory Programs, U.S. Department of Agriculture
Questions Submitted by Hon. Jim Costa, a Representative in Congress
from California
Question 1. Thank you for providing a broad outline of your goals
for implementation of the new National Animal Disease Preparedness and
Response Program and National Animal Vaccine and Veterinary
Countermeasures Bank, and the reauthorization of the National Animal
Health Laboratory Network. We understand that the implementation of the
two new programs will require careful consideration to maximize the
value of this new investment. In order to better understand the
implementation efforts remaining before you, please provide written
responses to the following inquiries:
Have you set any benchmarks for progress on the documentation
required for participation in the cooperative agreements as part of the
National Animal Disease Preparedness and Response Program? If so, how
much progress have you made? If not, how are you measuring your effort
to complete the cooperative agreement framework, and when do you expect
to begin engaging the partners identified in the 2018 farm bill?
Answer. APHIS has drafted plans for how it may implement and carry
out the National Animal Disease Preparedness and Response Program,
which includes internal timelines and milestones for its successful
implementation. Those plans are under internal review and discussion.
The bill specifically carves out a minimum of $5 million for this
program; we are committed to spending at least that amount this
calendar year on important animal health projects as we continue to
build an effective long-term program. We anticipate beginning
discussions with stakeholders as outlined by the bill in order to
identify program priorities this year.
Question 2. Have you set any benchmarks for progress on completion
of the regulatory structure surrounding the creation of the National
Animal Vaccine and Veterinary Countermeasures bank? If so, how much
progress have you made? If not, how are you measuring your effort to
create the bank?
Answer. APHIS has also drafted plans for how it may implement and
carry out the National Animal Vaccine and Veterinary Countermeasures
Bank. Those plans are under internal review with the goal of issuing a
sources sought notice covering the initial purchase of foot-and-mouth
disease vaccine by the end of 2019.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Filemon Vela, a Representative in Congress
from Texas
Question 1. An external team assembled by APHIS completed a review
of the CFTEP in March 2019, citing program advancements in recent years
and overall lending strong support for continued operations as
currently structured. An internal team is now working to complete a
separate review of the CFTEP, and there is word of yet another review
team to be dispatched from the administrator's office. The health and
marketability of our nation's livestock is at stake, and the success of
the CFTEP is dependent on the combined efforts of APHIS, the state of
Texas, and the livestock industry.
What is the USDA-APHIS stance on supporting the Cattle Fever Tick
Eradication Program (CFTEP) in Texas? Why the concern and review of
this particular program?
Answer. APHIS remains a strong supporter of the Cattle Fever Tick
Eradication Program (CFTEP), which has been successful in driving the
tick into a permanent quarantine zone along the Mexican border to the
great benefit of producers and ranchers in Texas and throughout the
United States. The program is instrumental in protecting the livestock
industry and in preserving export markets. The recent review of the
program should not be interpreted as a lack of support for the program,
but an indication that we want to make the program work effectively for
producers and the public, particularly given some of the challenges--
such as transmission by wildlife--the program faces. The review will
focus on processes and tools APHIS and its state partners can use to
stop infestations of the tick.
Question 2. An increasing number of Federal personnel are being
tasked to California for the vND outbreak response. While vND is a
serious disease threat to the U.S. poultry industry and warrants a
joint state-Federal-industry response, much needed resources are being
pulled from the TB eradication effort at a critical time. TB has
recently been detected in multiple large dairy herds in Texas and New
Mexico, and Federal resources are needed to mitigate the risk of
disease spread by regularly testing the affected herds and over 100,000
TB exposed cattle in Texas, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Kansas, and Colorado.
What is the USDA-APHIS stance on supporting bovine tuberculosis
(TB) eradication in the U.S.?
Answer. APHIS manages the National Tuberculosis Eradication
Program, and our goal remains the eradication of the disease from the
country. We continue to provide support to state and industry partners
through that program, including epidemiological support, indemnity as
appropriate, cooperative agreement funding, and assistance with
testing, diagnostics, and other laboratory services. We urge state
departments of agriculture to work with their wildlife and public
health counterparts to create comprehensive plans for managing wildlife
reservoirs; effectively use biosecurity and other mitigations; and to
harmonize interstate herd movement requirements. While there have been
a number of large affected herds in recent years, these eradication
efforts are not being impaired by the outbreak of virulent Newcastle
Disease (vND) in California. Funding for the vND outbreak has come from
a separate pool of emergency funding. In March, the Secretary announced
that he made available $45 million in emergency funding to address the
outbreak of vND, which had not been detected in the United States for
almost twenty years.
Question Submitted by Hon. Scott DesJarlais, a Representative in
Congress from Tennessee
Question. On May 20, 2019, the Tennessee Department of Agriculture
state veterinarian's office announced they are investigating an
outbreak of Equine Piroplasmosis (EP). Twenty-two racing Quarter Horses
have tested positive for EP in five locations within Bedford,
Rutherford, and Williamson Counties. The horses are all under
quarantine and being treated. Although this is breaking news, what will
USDA's involvement be in both this case and in preventing the spread of
EP in the United States?
Answer. Equine piroplasmosis (EP) is a tick-borne disease that
affects horses, donkeys, mules, and zebras. The disease is not endemic
in the United States, and we require that horses imported into the
country test negative for the disease. The disease is transmitted via
tick bites or through mechanical transmission by improperly disinfected
needles or surgical instruments. EP is a reportable foreign animal
disease, and suspected cases must be reported to state or Federal
animal health officials. If an animal tests positive, it must be placed
under quarantine and can either enroll in the APHIS-approved EP
treatment program, remain under lifelong quarantine, or be euthanized.
The APHIS-approved EP treatment protocol uses high doses of imidocarb
dipriopionate to permanently clear the organism from the horse. Treated
horses are released from quarantine once all diagnostic tests return to
a negative antibody status. Quarantines may last for 1 or more years as
antibody titers take time to reach negative levels. With respect to the
recent cases in Tennessee, APHIS has been managing these cases to
prevent any potential spread of the disease. These cases appear to be
related to each other, and the outbreak appears to be related to the
re-use of veterinary medical equipment among the horses.
[all]