- FILTERING PRACTICES OF SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
FILTERING PRACTICES OF SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
APRIL 26, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-56
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov
_________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
32-930
WASHINGTON : 2018
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
JERROLD NADLER, New York
Wisconsin
ZOE LOFGREN, California
LAMAR SMITH, Texas
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
STEVE KING, Iowa
Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
JIM JORDAN, Ohio
LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
TED POE, Texas
KAREN BASS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
CEDRIC L. RICHMOND, Louisiana
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina
HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York
RAUL LABRADOR, Idaho
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
ERIC SWALWELL, California
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia
TED LIEU, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
MATT GAETZ, Florida
VALDEZ VENITA ``VAL'' DEMINGS,
MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
Florida
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
JOHN RUTHERFORD, Florida
KAREN HANDEL, Georgia
KEITH ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania
Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff and General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
------
C O N T E N T S
----------
APRIL 26, 2018
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, Virginia, Chairman, Committee on the
Judiciary......................................................
1
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, New York, Ranking Member, Committee
on the Judiciary...............................................
3
WITNESSES
The Honorable Marsha Blackburn, 7th District of Tennessee, U.S.
House of Representatives, Panel 1
Oral Statement...............................................
5
The Honorable Jim Himes, 4th District of Connecticut, U.S. House
of Representatives, Panel I
Oral Statement...............................................
6
Lynnette ``Diamond'' Hardaway and Rochelle ``Silk'' Richardson,
Social Media Personalities
Oral Statement...............................................
9
Berin Szoka, President, TechFreedom
Oral Statement...............................................
11
Prof. Ari Waldman, Associate Professor of Law, Director,
Innovation Center for Law and Technology, New York Law School
Oral Statement...............................................
13
David Chavern, President and Chief Executive Officer, News Media
Alliance and American Press Institute
Oral Statement...............................................
14
FILTERING PRACTICES OF SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS
----------
THURSDAY, APRIL 26, 2018
House of Representatives
Committee on the Judiciary
Washington, DC
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in Room
2141, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bob Goodlatte
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Goodlatte, Smith, Chabot, Issa, King, Gohmert,
Jordan, Marino, DeSantis, Buck, Roby, Gaetz, Biggs, Handel,
Rothfus, Nadler, Lofgren, Jackson Lee, Johnson of Georgia,
Deutch, Bass, Jeffries, Cicilline, Lieu, Raskin, Jayapal,
Schneider, and Deming.
Staff Present: Shelley Husband, Staff Director; Branden
Ritchie, Deputy Staff Director; Zach Somers, Parliamentarian
and General Counsel; Bobby Parmiter, Chief Counsel,
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, Homeland Security, and
Investigations; Jason Cervenak, Counsel, Subcommittee on Crime,
Terrorism, Homeland Security, and Investigations; Beg Barr,
Counsel, Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, Homeland Security,
and Investigations; Paul Taylor, Chief Counsel, Subcommittee on
the Constitution and Civil Justice; Alley Adcock, Clerk; David
Greengrass, Minority Counsel; James Park, Minority Counsel;
Matthew Morgan, Minority Counsel; Danielle Brown, Minority
Legislative Counsel; Joe Graupensperger, Minority Counsel; and
Rachel Calanni, Minority Professional Staff Member.
Chairman Goodlatte. Good morning. The Judiciary Committee
will come to order and without objection the chair is
authorized to declare recesses of the committee at any time. We
welcome everyone to this morning's hearing on ``Filtering
Practices on Social Media Platforms''; and I will begin by
recognizing myself for an opening statement.
Today's hearing will examine how social media companies
filter content on their platforms. According to a February 2018
fact sheet published by Pew Research Center, today around 7 in
10 Americans use social media to connect with one another,
engage with news content, share information, and entertain
themselves.
In a survey released in March, Pew found that Facebook
dominates the social media landscape with 68 percent of U.S.
adults stating that they use this social media platform online
or on their cellphone.
This same survey found that nearly three-quarters of U.S.
adults use YouTube, a platform with many social media elements
including 94 percent of 18 to 24-year-olds. Also covered in
this survey was Twitter, which controls a smaller demographic,
but nevertheless attracts 40 percent of 18 to 24-year-olds to
its platform.
While it is clear that these numbers show that social media
platforms have direct control over incredible volumes of user-
created content, the method by which these companies manage
this content is far from clear. Facebook, Google, and Twitter
in many cases would like to appear as neutral channels.
YouTube, a subsidiary of Google, for example states that
its purpose is to give everyone a voice and show them the
world. But this goal and those of the others appear wildly
aspirational and do not reflect the true nature of the business
that these for-profit companies engage in.
In reality, these companies, like all other legitimate
businesses, are exercising great care and discretion to ensure
that their services are not abused. For example, we know that
they monitor content to ensure that no illegal activity such as
fraud, piracy, identity theft, and sex trafficking, among
others, is being committed on their platforms. This fact should
not surprise us. Indeed, they are required to do so.
However, beyond illegal activity, as private actors we know
that these companies manage content on their platforms as they
see fit. The First Amendment offers no clear protections for
users when Facebook, Google, or Twitter limits their content in
any way.
Moreover, they maintain terms of service pages which
contain rules that users must agree to abide by in order to use
their platforms, and at least in some cases, when content is
identified as violating a company's terms of service, it is
subject to human review.
There is, however, a fine line between removing illegal
activity and suppressing speech, and while these companies may
have legal, economic, and ideological reasons to manage their
content like a traditional media outlet, we must nevertheless
weigh, as a Nation, whether the standards they apply endanger
our free and open society and its culture of freedom of
expression, especially when it is through these channels that
our youth are learning to interact with each other and the
world.
Speaking before the Phoenix Chamber of Commerce in 1961,
Ronald Reagan observed that ``Freedom is never more than one
generation away from extinction.'' In a 2017 communication to
the Facebook community, CEO Mark Zuckerberg asked the following
question, ``Are we building the world we all want?'' That is
the very question presiding over this hearing today, and while
I am pleased to ask this question to our distinguished panel of
witnesses appearing before us today, it is unfortunate, despite
our repeated invitations, representatives from Google,
Facebook, and Twitter have declined to testify.
If this is any indication of their efforts to be more
transparent, then we all may already have our answer to Mr.
Zuckerberg's question. With that, I want to thank all of our
witnesses in attendance today and I look forward to your
testimony.
It is now my pleasure to recognize the ranking member of
the committee, the gentleman from New York, Mr. Nadler, for his
opening statement.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Priorities matter, Mr.
Chairman. Over the course of the past year, the majority has
refused to hold hearings to conduct oversight of any kind on
any topic related to social media. The majority has turned a
blind eye both to discreet cases, like the theft of millions of
Facebook user profiles by Cambridge Analytica, and to broader
questions, like the fraud policies that allow those user
profiles to escape in the first place.
Time and again, House Republicans have attempted to turn
the committee's attention away from these issues, either
ignoring or hoping to distract from the serious conversations
we should be having.
Over the past year alone, the majority has refused our
request to hold hearings on how Russian operatives leverage
social media to influence the 2016 elections, refused the
Congressional Black Caucus's request to hold hearings on how
those Russian influence pieces targeted minority voters,
blocked the minorities' access to those advertisements when
Facebook offered them to us since they were offered on the
condition that the chairman join us in requesting them, refused
to issue subpoenas or even ask really for information from
Cambridge Analytica and Giles Parscale, two consultants for the
Trump campaign that appear to have coordinated with foreign
actors during the 2016 campaign, premised those briefings with
various social media companies but never delivered, decided
that we should be the only committee of jurisdiction not to
hear from Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg, directly, after his
appearances before the House Energy and Commerce Committee, the
Senate Judiciary Committee, and the Senate Commerce Committee,
refused to call Cambridge Analytica whistleblower Christopher
Wylie before the committee for a transcribed interview, and,
just this week, declined my invitation to participate in an
interview with Mr. Wylie after Democrats arranged for the
interview on our own.
In short, House Republicans have no time for substantive
oversight of the Trump administration or election security or
privacy policy or even a discussion about the wisdom of
regulating social media platforms, but they have made time for
Diamond and Silk. They have prioritized this spectacle over
every other conversation we should be having today and should
have been having for the last year and a half.
Now, to be clear, Ms. Hardaway and Ms. Richardson are
entitled to say whatever they would like about President Trump
or anyone else, but the majority has called them here to stand
for the baseless preposition that Facebook, Google, and Twitter
are engaged in a Silicon Valley plot to censor Conservative
voices. Let us review the facts.
Based on what I understand to be a single communication
from Facebook, Ms. Hardaway and Ms. Richardson--in an email
that the CEO of the company has already admitted was sent in
error, our witnesses will claim that Facebook is censoring
their posts.
Of course, Ms. Hardaway and Ms. Richardson primarily make
that argument on Facebook where they have 1.4 million followers
and have posted as 100,000 likes and 60,000 shares. Nearly
350,000 additional users have liked their Facebook page in the
past 3 weeks alone.
Most of my colleagues on both sides of the aisle would kill
for that kind of reach on social media. The witnesses will
complain that Facebook has limited the ability of their
followers to interact with their Facebook page, but the data
show that their Facebook page received more total interactions
in March 2018 when they were supposedly being censored than in
March 2017 fresh off President Trump's victory.
So the censorship argument, the central thesis of this
hearing, does not hold up under even the most basic scrutiny,
which is not to say, Mr. Chairman, that the committee should
not have a hearing about how filtering works on private social
media platforms.
``Social Media Filtering Practices and their Effect on Free
Speech,'' the title of this hearing, is a fine topic for
discussion and one I would encourage you to schedule, but that
is not what today's hearing is about and the majority knows it.
The notion that social media companies are filtering out
Conservative voices is a hoax, a tired narrative of imagined
victimhood as the rest of the country grapples with a feckless
President and an out-of-control administration.
The majority designed this hearing to perpetuate that hoax.
Conservative commentary, including conspiracy theories of a
Conservative bent, regularly rank among the most far-reaching
posts on Facebook and elsewhere. To argue otherwise is to
ignore the facts or to act in bad faith or both.
And to make matters worse, the majority has prioritized
this hoax over matters that the committee should have
investigated long ago. Their decision to hold this hearing
while still ignoring questions of substance that have been
squarely before us for months does real and lasting damage to
this esteemed committee.
What are House Republicans so afraid of that they will not
even join us in asking questions about Facebook or Russian
advertisements or a host of other issues, some that I mentioned
earlier, that are clearly a priority for the public? Priorities
matter, Mr. Chairman. We should be holding a bipartisan hearing
on any one of a long list of other topics. We could have easily
worked on that project together. This committee can do better.
I yield back.
Chairman Goodlatte. With unanimous consent, I would like to
enter the following into the record, a letter with attachments
from Adriana Cohen, a syndicated columnist and Boston Herald
radio host, a statement from Corinne McSherry of the Electronic
Frontier Foundation, a statement from the Electronic Privacy
Information Center, EPIC, and a letter EPIC sent to the Federal
Trade Commission in 2011 regarding Google and search results on
YouTube, and a statement from the National Religious
Broadcasters.
Chairman Goodlatte. I would like to now welcome our first
panel of witnesses. Our first witness is the Honorable Marsha
Blackburn from the Seventh District of Tennessee, and our
second witness is the Honorable Jim Himes from the Fourth
District of Connecticut. Your written statement will be entered
into the record in its entirety and we ask that you summarize
your testimony in 5 minutes, and Representative Blackburn, we
will begin with you. Welcome.
STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Nadler,
and to my colleagues on the committee, thank you for inviting
me to testify at this hearing. I am honored to be here and talk
about online censorship.
There are growing concerns about how and why Big Tech
companies are making decisions to ban, deprioritize, or
otherwise filter completely legal speech online. When Mark
Zuckerberg testified earlier this month, every time someone
asked about censoring Conservatives, he said that Facebook
takes down bad content like terrorism. When he gave me that
answer, I responded that Diamond and Silk are not terrorism,
but this problem is more far-reaching than Diamond and Silk.
Last October, Twitter blocked my campaign launch video from
its ads platform due to my pro-life message. This ban
threatened the fundamental freedom to engage in political
speech. For example, broadcasters are forbidden under section
315 of the Communications Act from censoring the ad of a
political candidate even if it has disturbing content or
language.
Like social media platforms, broadcasters clearly are
private entities with their own First Amendment rights, but
even so, we recognize that some speech is so important that we
must protect its access to an important platform.
Twitter reversed its decision in my case, but the bans keep
coming. Just a few days ago, Google banned a large Lutheran
denomination from its ads platform. YouTube banned the entire
channel of Spike's Tactical, a well-known firearm manufacturer.
When bans get reversed, we are told, ``Well, mistakes were
made,'' but why is it that the mistakes nearly always seem to
run in one direction?
To make matters worse, many of these decisions are made
within the black box of an algorithm. Facebook recently tweaked
its algorithm to prioritize content that is, and I am quoting,
``Trustworthy, informative, and local,'' end quote. No one
knows exactly what that means, but we do know that since then,
there has been a significant reduction in traffic from Facebook
to some of the most prominent Conservative sites.
As chair of the Communications and Technology Subcommittee,
we held a hearing in November on algorithms. Our findings show
that Big Tech platforms are the new public square, and their
executives, as the gatekeepers, are the new governors, but
these governments do not have a First Amendment. Free speech as
a value is endangered even here in America and is nonexistent
in most of the world. We need to recognize that the global
reach of these companies creates overwhelming pressure against
free speech and we need to do a better job of counteracting
that pressure.
But section 230 of the Communications Act gives online
platforms a broad immunity from liability for user-generated
content except for a responsibility to take down certain
things, like child sex trafficking, theft of intellectual
property, or terrorism. This should translate into more
freedom, not less, for their users, but instead, we are seeing
more and more content censored by these new governors on some
very flimsy pretenses.
As such, perhaps it is time to review some of our
fundamental assumptions. I had the ability to fight back.
Diamond and Silk had the ability to fight back. But what about
the thousands of others being thrown out of our new public
squares for no good, definable reason? We are here today to
speak up for them and we are here today to speak up for free
speech.
I thank the committee for your attention to the issue. I
look forward to the discussion. I yield back.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you, Representative Blackburn.
Representative Himes, welcome.
STATEMENT OF HON. JIM HIMES, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM
THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT
Mr. Himes. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member
Nadler, and distinguished colleagues. When I came to the
Congress almost 10 years ago, I was overwhelmed by the
privilege of working here. Even now, I cannot quite shake the
feeling that we serve in the shadow of people like Abraham
Lincoln, Sam Rayburn, and Shirley Chisholm. Now I sit in front
of this storied committee with a simple message: the truth
matters.
This committee shapes our courts. It oversees the
enforcement of our laws. It balances our cherished liberties
with our need for security. To this committee especially, the
truth matters, yet today this committee meets to promote a
false narrative. It meets to continue the hoax, now fully
rebutted, that Facebook and other social media have mounted a
deliberate crusade to filter out Conservative opinion.
Congress and this committee should look hard at Facebook.
Over 2 billion people use it. The Kremlin used it to widen
American fault lines before an election. It has personal data
on all of us. People get their news from Facebook. That is huge
power. That power must be constrained by fairness, care, and
responsibility, and making sure that happens is our job.
Congress and the social media companies must make sure they
contribute positively to American life. Instead, today we will
amplify the financially lucrative and politically convenient
hoax that Facebook is purposefully censoring Diamond and Silk.
Let us spend a minute on the facts. Diamond and Silk got
into a complicated commercial dispute with Facebook about how
you can make money on their site. Facebook mistakenly told them
their content had been judged unsafe. Facebook publicly and
privately acknowledged their mistake, apologized, and reached
out to them by phone, on email, and on Twitter to work this
out.
And most importantly, as the charts next to me show,
Diamond and Silk suffered no decline in their interactions
online compared to such Liberal sites as Rachel Maddow and The
Young Turks.
[Chart]
Mr. Chairman, I was in business for many years. Assuming
that roughly half of Facebook users lean right, what possible
business logic is there in alienating half of your customers?
There is none. Those are the facts and that is the truth, and
the truth matters.
The problem is this particular truth is pretty boring. A
commercial dispute does not fire anybody up. It does not play
into the carefully manufactured fear of the American right that
everybody is out to get them. Never mind that the right
controls the White House, both Houses of Congress, more and
more of the Supreme Court, and governorships all over America,
never mind Sinclair, never mind the global Murdoch news empire,
the right must be under siege, because if there is no siege,
there is no fear and there is no anger.
And without fear and anger, well, people might not show up
at the polls. Without fear and anger, people might ask
themselves why we are mortgaging our children's future rather
than improving their education. They might wonder why we have
not lifted a finger to shore up Social Security. They might
realize that we have done absolutely nothing to rebuild our
ports and our highways and our railroads.
I was moved yesterday when President Macron of France spoke
to us. From where I sat, you could look just past him and see
the Marquis de Lafayette. Do you remember what he said? He
said, ``You can plan on fear and anger for a time, but they do
not build anything.'' Eventually everyone will know that the
charge that Facebook filters out Conservative commentary is
untrue, and that charge will go the way of Pizzagate and stand
down orders at Benghazi, of Obama wiretapping Trump and the
Vince Foster murder, and all of these conspiracies that sprout
around here like spring flowers. But in the meantime, we will
have put one more dent in our democracy.
Do not take it from this Democrat. Yesterday, Matt
Mackowiak, a Republican consultant and a veteran of the Bush
administration, wrote in the Washington Times, quote, ``our
obsession with political theater has brought us to the point
where now a respected and important House committee will spend
several hours taking testimony from two YouTube celebrities,
all done at taxpayer expense.''
President Macron said something else yesterday that sticks
with me. He said, ``Without truth, there is no real democracy
because democracy is about true choices and rational
decisions.'' The corruption of information is an attempt to
corrode the very spirit of our democracies.
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking Member, let's see past our
differences. Let us see past the nonsense. Let us put past our
differences to fight that corruption and that corrosion because
the truth matters. Thank you.
Chairman Goodlatte. I would like to thank our first panel
of witnesses for being here today, and since we do not ask
questions of Members of Congress, we are going to thank you and
excuse both of you.
I would now like to introduce our second panel. Our first
witness, Google, which has refused to appear today, is ranked
first in the world and in the United States for user traffic
according to Amazon's Alexa, which tracks such data. In
addition to being the top search engine in the world, its
subsidiary, YouTube, attracts 30 million daily visitors and
boosts a total of 1.3 billion users.
Google has been accused of maintaining bias against
Conservative views, both internally and on their platform. For
example, PragerU, a channel that features educational videos
featuring the world's best thinkers such as Harvard Law
professor Alan Dershowitz speaking about the founding of
Israel, was unjustly restricted by YouTube through a feature
intended to filter out, quote, ``Inappropriate content for
younger audiences.''
The list of restricted content according to PragerU
included videos title, ``Why America Must Lead,'' ``The 10
Commandments Do Not Murder,'' ``Why Did America Fight the
Korean War,'' and ``The World's Most Persecuted Minority:
Christians.''
According to Dennis Prager, PragerU's founder, ``Watch any
of our videos and you will immediately realize that Google/
YouTube censorship is entirely ideologically driven. For the
record, our videos are presented by some of the finest minds in
the western world, including four Pulitzer Prize winners,
former prime ministers, and professors from the most
prestigious universities in America.'' As a result, PragerU has
taken legal action in Federal court.
Our second witness today, which has also refused to appear,
is Facebook. Facebook's website, according to Alexa, ranks
third in the United States and in the world. It receives 1.4
billion daily active users and boasts that people can, quote,
``Express themselves freely,'' end quote, on its platform.
According to a report issued by Media Research Center, this
company suppresses pro-life advertisements in addition to
Conservative content. For example, quote, ``Both Right to Life
Michigan and the Wexford/Missaukee Right to Life were unable to
advertise on the site because Facebook did not support ads for
their business model,'' end quote. According the report,
Facebook only permitted the ads after media attention.
In addition to the suppression of Conservative and pro-life
content, Facebook has been accused of removing content related
to a police shooting that sparked overwhelming national
attention. In the summer of 2016, the aftermath of the tragic
shooting of Philando Castile was livestreamed through Facebook.
According to one description of Facebook's actions, quote,
``It suddenly disappeared from Facebook.'' A few hours later,
the footage reappeared, this time with a label affixed warning
of graphic content. In official statements, Facebook blamed the
takedown on a technical glitch but provided no further details.
I believe we will learn more about, quote, ``enforcement
errors,'' end quote, and ``technical glitches,'' end quote,
later in this hearing.
Our third witness is Twitter. Like our other invited
witnesses on this panel, Twitter refused to attend. According
to Alexa, Twitter's website ranking is 8th in the United States
and 13th in the world. In terms of traffic, approximately 8,000
tweets are sent per second.
In addition to the attacks on Representative Blackburn's
pro-life ads, Twitter has been accused of suppressing the pro-
life advertisements of Live Action. According to the report
issued by the Media Research Center, Twitter demanded Live
Action purge not only its Twitter, but also its website of a
multitude of content including ultrasounds in order for it to
advertise on the platform. Twitter was effectively trying to
force Live Action to stop promoting everything it did as an
investigative pro-life organization.
While this committee has presented the opportunity for
these companies to come and describe their filtering practices
and answer questions that members on both sides of the aisle
have about these practices, their refusal to appear only
creates more questions and more concerns. The committee has
resolved to have its questions answered directly by these
companies, and we will pursue whatever means necessary to get
those answers.
We now welcome our third panel of distinguished witnesses
who I believe are here. Thank you all for joining us today. If
you would all please rise, I will begin by swearing you in.
Do you and each of you swear that the testimony that you
are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, so help you God? Thank you very much. Let the
record show that all of the witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
Our first witnesses are social media personalities Lynette
``Diamond'' Hardaway and Rochelle ``Silk'' Richardson; our
second witness, Berin Szoka, the president of TechFreedom; our
third witness is Professor Ari Waldman, a professor of law and
the director of the Innovative Center for Law and Technology at
New York Law School; and our fourth and final witness of the
day is David Chavern, the president and CEO of News Media
Alliance and the American Press Institute.
Your written statements will all be entered into the record
in their entirety and we ask that each of you summarize your
testimony in 5 minutes. To help you stay within that time,
there is a timing light on your table. When the light switches
from green to yellow, you have 1 minute to conclude your
testimony. When the light turns red, it signals your 5 minutes
have expired.
Ms. Hardaway and Ms. Richardson, you may begin. I
understand you are going to share your 5 minutes.
Ms. Hardaway. Yeah, I think so.
Chairman Goodlatte. Welcome.
STATEMENTS OF DIAMOND AND SILK, SOCIAL MEDIA PERSONALITIES;
BERIN SZOKA, PRESIDENT, TECHFREEDOM; PROF. ARI WALDMAN
DIRECTOR, INNOVATION CENTER FOR LAW AND TECHNOLOGY PROFESSOR OF
LAW, NEW YORK LAW SCHOOL; AND MR. DAVID CHAVERN, CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, NEWS MEDIA, ALLIANCE AND AMERICAN PRESS
INSTITUTE
STATEMENTS OF DIAMOND AND SILK
Ms. Hardaway. We would thank the Judiciary Committee for
allowing us the opportunity to voice our concerns about
Conservatives being targeted and censored on social media
platforms.
Facebook, along with other social media sites, have taken
aggressive actions to silence Conservative voices such as
ourselves by deliberately restricting and weaponizing our page
with algorithms that censor and suppress our free speech. These
biased algorithms are tactics designed to pick up on key words,
thus telling the pages how to behave in ways that repress and
stifle expressed ideas, including shadow banning which blocks
our content from being seen by our followers while depriving
our brand through the demonetization of our videos.
Followers stop receiving notification of when we posted
videos and content followers were also mysteriously unliked
from our page. Subtly and slowly, Facebook used one mechanism
at a time to diminish our reach by restricting our page so that
our 1.2 million followers would not see our content, thus
silencing our Conservative voices. When we reached out to
Facebook for an explanation, they gave us the runaround.
Mark Zuckerberg testified before Congress and stated that
the most important thing he cared about was making sure no one
interferes in the 2018 elections, but after doing our research,
we wondered if Mark Zuckerberg was using Facebook to interfere
in the 2018 elections by labeling users' accounts as either
Liberal, very Liberal, Moderate, Conservative, or very
Conservative.
This is one of the main underhanded ways to censor
Conservatives. So if I am labeled as very Liberal without the
option to edit it, update, and correct the setting, then
algorithms are already put in place which allows advertisers
that have Liberal views services and causes to target at me.
And you can see the graph on the screen and it shows clearly
that our personal accounts have been already labeled.
[Graph]
Diamond and Silk's personal Facebook page has been labeled
by Facebook as very Liberal. Even though we are not very
Liberal, Facebook does not give us the option to change this
label to Conservative, making it less likely for us to see
advertisements, news stories, and services for a Conservative
point of view. If Facebook labeled our user accounts as very
Liberal and got it wrong, how many more other users' accounts
have they gotten wrong?
On September 7th, 2017, we received a message on our
Facebook page which stated that limits had been placed on
Diamond and Silk, and you can see pictures too. You can see on
picture three all of the complaints that have come in from our
followers where they are not receiving notifications. When
watching our videos, it stops. They cannot watch our videos.
We have also noticed how someone with a Liberal point of
view that spews hate against the President can garner up to 19
million views with only 539,000 followers, yet we have 1.2
million followers and only receive 13,000 views on a video, and
you can see that in picture four.
And then in picture five, you can see the comparison from
back then until today. Also, if you look at picture five, part
two, when we uploaded a video on March 4, with 1.2 million
people, we were only able to reach 37,000 views. But as soon as
Mark Zuckerberg and Facebook--this issue came to light and they
started taking those algorithms off, we uploaded the same video
on April the 12th and it was able to garner 400,000 views.
After looking at our analytical on picture five, part
three, after looking at our analytical you can clearly see that
the restrictions are back because after the 12th, everything
started going back downhill.
In 2016, with less than 1 million followers, our reach page
would garner 5 to 8 million people or more within a week. All
of that changed when the algorithms were placed back on our
page to suppress our reach.
YouTube also demonetized 95 percent of our videos in 2017,
categorizing it as hate speech even though our account was in
good standards. We also show that Mark Zuckerberg said that he
does not allow hate speech, yet when people say the words ``I
hate'' or ``we hate,'' those people also garner views.
Was it an enforcement error for 6 months, 29 days, 5 hours,
40 minutes, and 43 seconds of chatting and emailing about the
same issue and being told that my issue would be escalated to a
Facebook team, a spam team, the technical team, the appeals
team, the internal team, the policy team, only to be told on
January the 8th, 2018 that a request was never sent? And we
have the proof--see picture 10 and picture 11.
Censorship is no hoax. It is real. It is wrong for these
social media giants to suppress and disregard people by
diminishing and denying them their free speech. If social media
is supposed to be a place for all ideas or to express an idea,
then algorithms and tactics should not be in place to suppress
some ideas. Thank you.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you, Ms. Hardaway. Mr. Szoka,
welcome.
STATEMENT OF BERIN SZOKA
Mr. Szoka. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte, the Ranking
Member Nadler. Thank you for----
Chairman Goodlatte. Turn your microphone on.
Mr. Szoka. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte,
Ranking Member Nadler, for inviting me to testify here before
your committee today.
Mr. Chairman, it is a particular honor to testify before
your retirement. We at TechFreedom have not always agreed with
you over the years, but I have always considered you to be
among the most thoughtful members of Congress, a true lawyer's
lawyer.
I particularly commend you for the work that your committee
did over the last year on how to combat online sex trafficking.
The legislation produced by this committee was carefully
tailored to help prosecutors stop sites like Backpage and
ensure that victims receive restitution. Your bill, which I am
sorry to say was combined with another less thoughtful bill,
would have done so without disrupting the careful balance
struck by Congress in section 230 of the Communications Decency
Act of 1996.
So I am here today to remind lawmakers why Congress made
the right decision in enacting section 230 and to explain why a
Fairness Doctrine for the internet would be an even worse idea
than was a Fairness Doctrine for broadcasting.
In recent hearings with Facebook's CEO, lawmakers
repeatedly asked about Facebook's supposed political bias. As
the president of a small nonprofit dedicated to free markets
and constitutionally limited government in technology policy, I
have never encountered such bias. Yes, we struggled to get our
message out, but that is probably because our message is more
complicated than the sensationalism coming from advocates for
bigger government. We are, after all, lawyers and not
activists.
I often hear Conservative groups complain about the bias of
social media platforms, but from what I can see after a decade
in this field, their real problem is that they just do not use
social media well. And let us face it, the young people who use
social media best and reshare it most eagerly are
overwhelmingly leftwing. This is not the fault of Facebook,
Google, YouTube, or any other platform. It has just always been
true.
At the Zuckerberg hearing, I was dumbstruck to hear
Conservative Senators call for what amounts to a Fairness
Doctrine for the internet. First enacted in 1949, the FCC's
Fairness Doctrine was supposed to encourage robust debate in
broadcasting. Instead, it did the opposite. Broadcasters
avoided controversial topics. That enforced bland orthodoxy on
radio and television, entrenching what Conservatives still call
the mainstream media and stifling alternative voices like talk
radio.
It was President Reagan and his FCC who ended enforcement
of this insane policy, and yes, eventually Democrats saw the
light too. In 2011, it was President Obama's FCC chairman who
finally took the Fairness Doctrine off the books forever.
Yet now, apparently out of misdirected frustration, it is
Conservatives who are talking about reviving the Fairness
Doctrine, and this time for the internet and as a condition for
the protections of section 230. This idea would stand section
230 on its head.
In 1995, it was another Republican, Congressman Chris Cox,
who recognized that holding websites liable for content created
by their users would have the perverse effect of discouraging
websites from acting as Good Samaritans.
Section 230 avoids what has been called the moderator's
dilemma, ensuring that websites are free to remove
objectionable content without increasing their legal risk.
Facebook and other social media sites together employ literally
tens of thousands of moderators to remove everything from sex
trafficking ads to terrorist messaging. This simply would not
have happened without section 230's encouragement of non-
neutrality.
Consider Canada, where website operators have no general
shield from liability for defamation claims over third party
content. As one Canadian internet lawyer put it, ``The innocent
dissemination defense may be available, but it requires a high
degree of passivity and ignorance.'' I do not think anyone in
this room really wants passivity from social media platforms.
We want them to filter content, and there is just no way to
demand their political neutrality at the same time.
What President Reagan said about the Fairness Doctrine in
1987 remains true today. Quote, ``History has shown the dangers
of an overly timid or biased press cannot be averted through
bureaucratic regulation, but only through the freedom and
competition that the First Amendment sought to guarantee.''
But instead of encouraging competition, a Fairness Doctrine
for the internet would actually entrench today's tech giants.
No, of course they will not like having to justify their
content moderation decisions in court, and yes, they may very
well restrict political discussions on their sites just as
happened with broadcasting, but today's tech giants would be
able to manage vague, arbitrary, and open-ended legal liability
far better than any startup.
Congress should avoid doing anything that will hinder
competition online, and lawmakers should remember what the
Supreme Court said in 1943. Quote, ``If there is any fixed star
in our constitutional constellation, it is that no official
high or petty can prescribe what shall be orthodox in politics,
nationalism, religion, or other matters of opinion,'' unquote.
The Fairness Doctrine would do just that: prescribe orthodoxy.
This tired idea should be left in what President Reagan called
``the dustbin of history.''
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Szoka. Professor
Waldman, welcome.
STATEMENT OF ARI WALDMAN
Mr. Waldman. Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member Nadler, and
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for inviting
me to testify today. My name is Ari Waldman, and I am a law
professor at New York Law School.
My goal today is to help the committee understand
Facebook's editorial role, the dangerous implications of a
world without content moderation, and the serious privacy
implications of allowing Facebook and other social media
companies to exist in a regulatory void. We all may have a
First Amendment right, subject to some limitations, to say what
we want free of government intervention, but we do not have a
First Amendment right to Facebook's amplification of our words.
So let's talk a little bit about how and why platforms like
Facebook moderate content. We actually know quite a bit about
what they do, partly because of the work of my colleague, Kate
Klonick, and also because Facebook published 27 pages of their
moderation guidelines just a couple of days ago.
First, how? Content moderation is a complex ecosystem of
technology and people. Moderation sometimes happens before
content is published in that period between upload and
publication. This is the automatic process using data-trained
algorithms that screen out things like child pornography,
copyrighted material, or graphic violence.
But content moderation mostly happens after publication
where moderators either proactively remove content that violate
platform rules or reactively when users flag content that
violates Facebook rules. For this, Facebook employs a large,
layered team of people trained to do this work.
Platforms have normative and financial incentives to
moderate content. Every platform designs values into its code.
One of Facebook's central values is to bring friends together.
As a result, and in response to the manipulation of Facebook by
fake news sources, the platform redesigned its news feed to
privilege and prioritize posts from our friends rather than
from media or business pages. That is why engagement went down
for some of those media and business pages, not biased
moderation. The result is that lots of content gets filtered
out, but no more so from the right than from the left.
When victims of racist, homophobic, and sexist tweets and
comments post those comments to call out the aggressors, it is
often the victims that get suspended or banned. Activists
associated with the Black Lives Matter movement have reported
just as many, if not more, takedowns of images, of police
brutality, and racism than of any of the takedown anecdotal
evidence from the right.
Facebook has a long history of banning photos from
breastfeeding mothers. In 2014, the company suspended drag
performers for using their drag names. An advertisement for a
book featuring a queer vision of Jesus was also rejected. The
artist, Michael Stokes, who is best known for his portraits of
soldiers wounded in battle has seen his portraits of queer
soldiers taken down and his account blocked. At a minimum,
mistakes happen on the left just as they happen on the right.
Consider also what social media platforms would look like
without content moderation. Gendered cyber harassment
proliferates when platforms like Twitter and 4Chan do nothing.
They become havens of hate that function to silence women and
others' voices, as my colleague, Danielle Citron, has found.
Queer-oriented geosocial dating apps that ignore content
violation like racists and transphobic profiles become havens
for nonconsensual pornography and cause untold emotional damage
to victims.
So why does this happen? Any content moderation that occurs
algorithmically is subject to problems inherent in machine
learning, biased data, inability to understand context, for
example. Data-trained algorithms that determine what we see on
our newsfeeds also cannot tell the difference between two media
articles of widely different veracity. All they know is that a
herd of highly motivated users and tight hyper-partisan
networks are clicking on it and sharing it. To the algorithm
and to Facebook, this is great.
Engagement is at the core of the business model. The
problem is designed in. When humans act, maybe content
moderation is more art than science, and Facebook does not
employ enough Rembrandts. Mistakes happen. Those mistakes are
far more likely, the evidence shows, to burden marginalized
populations, not Conservatives.
Content moderation on Facebook is part of a larger
narrative about how we lack even reasonable regulation and thus
allow Facebook to take a cavalier approach to our privacy, our
safety, and our civic discourse. This was on stark display when
Facebook allowed data on 87 million of its users to be accessed
in violation of its terms of service.
So although the evidence is not there to suggest systemic
bias when it comes to content moderation, there is evidence
that Facebook, when left to its own devices, cares very little
about the safety of our data. It only cares about collecting
it. Reasonable steps must be taken to reign in Facebook's near-
unlimited power to violate our trust. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you, Professor Waldman. Mr.
Chavern, welcome.
STATEMENT OF DAVID CHAVERN
Mr. Chavern. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member
Nadler, and members of the Judiciary Committee. Thank you very
much for inviting me to testify at today's hearing.
My name is David Chavern and I am the president and CEO of
the News Media Alliance, a nonprofit trade association
representing over 2,000 news organizations across the United
States and the world. Our members include some of the largest
news organizations covering events around the globe as well as
local publications focusing on issues that impact communities
and daily lives and citizens of every State. Quality journalism
is essential to a healthy and functioning democracy, and my
members are united in their desire to fight for its future.
Too often in today's information-driven environment, news
is included in the broad term of digital content. It is
actually much more important than that. While low-quality
entertainment or posts by your friends might be disappointing,
inaccurate information about the world can be immediately
destructive. Civil society depends on the availability of real,
accurate news.
The internet represents an extraordinary opportunity for
broader understanding and education. We have never been more
interconnected or had easier access to information or quicker
communication. However, as currently structured, the digital
ecosystem gives tremendous viewpoint control and economic power
to a very small number of companies. That control and power
must come with new responsibilities.
Historically, newspapers controlled the distribution of
their product. They invested in the journalism and then printed
it in a form that could literally be handed to their readers
directly. No other party decided who got access to the
information or on what terms. The distribution of online news
is now dominated by the major technology platforms. They decide
what news is delivered and to whom, and they control the
economics of digital publishing. The First Amendment prohibits
the government from regulating the press, but it does not
prohibit Facebook and Google from acting as de facto regulators
of the news business.
Neither Google nor Facebook are or have ever been neutral
pipes. To the contrary, their businesses depend on their
ability to make nuanced decisions through sophisticated
algorithms about how and when content is delivered. The term
algorithm itself makes these decisions seem scientific and
neutral. The fact is that, while their decision process may be
highly automated, both companies make extensive editorial
decisions about relevance, newsworthiness, and other criteria.
The business models of Facebook and Google are complex and
varied. However, we do know that they are both immense
advertising platforms that sell people's time and attention.
Their secret algorithms, and they are secret, are used to
cultivate that time and attention, and we have seen many
examples of the types of content favored by these systems,
namely clickbait and anything that can generate outrage,
disgust, passion.
The systems also favor giving users information very
similar to what they had previously consumed, thereby
generating intense filter bubbles undermining common
understanding of issues and challenges.
All of these things are antithetical, actually, to a
healthy news business and a healthy democracy. Good journalism
is factual, verified, and takes into account multiple points of
view. It takes a lot of time and investment. Most particularly,
it requires someone to take responsibility for what is
published.
Whether or not one agrees with a particular piece of
journalism, my members at least put their names on the product
and stand behind it. Readers know where to send their
complaints. The same cannot be said about the sea of bad
information that is delivered by platforms in paid priority
over my members' quality information.
Honorable members of this committee, too much is riding on
these issues to let them pass without action. The major
technology platforms are no longer new or inconsequential; the
choices they make have tremendous influences on the
sustainability of the news business and many other industries
across our economy.
We offer no easy answer to the ultimate regulation of these
companies. In many ways they present absolutely novel
challenges to policymakers. However, with respect to the topic
for today's hearing, a strong first step would be a simple
acknowledgement of the immense filtering and decisionmaking
power that both companies possess and exercise today.
Neither company is neutral and it is wrong to pretend they
are. And from that flows a clear need for both companies to
have enforceable standards on their algorithmic decisionmaking,
particularly as to fairness and openness, and systems and
policies that award original, quality information and content
provided by trusted news organizations employing professional
journalists.
With respect to the latter, we wish to express strong
support for H.R. 5190, the Journalism Competition and
Preservation Act of 2018, recently introduced by Representative
David Cicilline. We believe this bill would go a long way
towards reducing the imbalances in the current system of
content distribution. Thank you very much.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chavern. We will now
begin questioning under the 5-minute rule, and I will begin by
recognizing myself. Ms. Hardaway, Ms. Richardson, thank you
very much for your testimony and I am sorry you have been
through the experience you have been through. Are you aware of
other people on the internet--Conservatives, Liberals,
anybody--who have also been censored by social media?
Ms. Hardaway. Well, we are looking at people like Governor
Sarah Palin, just a lot of people that have been censored.
Ms. Richardson. Yes. Even down to the President of the
United States has been censored as well with him having over 23
million people on his platform unable to garner a million views
on a video. Within an hour before the censoring he was able to
do that. Now he cannot do that.
Ms. Hardaway. So, yes, there is a lot of Conservative
voices that are being censored.
Chairman Goodlatte. Do any of your friends or family or
fans reach out to you when they tried to view your content but
could not?
Ms. Hardaway. Oh, absolutely. We get tons of either
emails--go down the side of our Facebook page on our polls.
Okay, ``You all did not show up in my news feed.''
``I cannot find you all,'' or ``I put you in search. I
could not find you all.''
``It took me a long time to find you all.''
``You all are not coming up.''
Ms. Richardson. We also put out a video where somebody made
a video where they tried to follow our page, and the way that
Mark Zuckerberg and Facebook have their settings set, you click
on follow but it defaults back to just standard. It would not
let people stay on follow. And then whenever you click on
follow to follow our page, for some people that were able to do
so, they did not get a notification whenever we post our posts
on our Facebook page.
Ms. Hardaway. And can I just clarify? Facebook says in
their ruling that if you like and follow a page, that you are
supposed to receive a notification whenever we drop content.
What is the purpose of them following and liking a page? That
is the purpose of them following and liking a branding page,
because they are going to see and view your content.
So it is not fair for Facebook and Mark Zuckerberg to think
that they can dictate to people and tell people what they can
and cannot see in their newsfeed. I thought this was a platform
for all ideas.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you. I think all of our witnesses
have had very valuable testimony, and I agree with a great deal
of it. Mr. Szoka, I agree with you. We should not have a
standard set for the internet like we used to have for
broadcast media.
Mr. Waldman, I agree with you that these companies are
going to do this. They are going to be expected to do it. But I
am most fascinated by Mr. Chavern's testimony and I want to get
into the issue of what we do about it when people are wronged,
like Ms. Hardaway and Ms. Richardson have been wronged.
Right now, citizens can hold newspapers and other media
groups legally accountable if they do certain things in their
newspaper, whether it is publishing false information, showing
indecent content, they use materials or photos they are not
authorized or did not pay to use, and so on. Tech platforms are
currently making in-depth decisions like newspapers make about
what information users receive and how they receive it, often
driven by financial and other unknown motives.
So, Mr. Zuckerberg himself has repeatedly said that his
platform is responsible for the content that they host. Should
the tech platforms be subject to the same content regulations
and civil penalties and libel and slander that those who
produce the content are responsible for?
Mr. Chavern. Well, thank you very much. I think we ought to
acknowledge that these are novel businesses, right? People say
are they media companies? Are they publishers? They are really
attention businesses. They want more of your attention and they
will feed information to get more of that attention.
I think we all have to be concerned about paths that would
lead to them having more overt control over content or being in
the content businesses. I am not sure I am excited about----
Chairman Goodlatte. How do we avoid that?
Mr. Chavern. Well, I think we can start by making them
responsible for the power and decisions they have today.
Chairman Goodlatte. And how do we do that?
Mr. Chavern. We will start by the algorithms, as we say--
these rules that they determine. They sort of talk broadly
about them but nobody really knows what is in them. They are
secret rules and if you have secret rules, you do not get the
benefit of the doubt.
I think they have to start by being much more transparent
about their decisionmaking and actually having enforceable
standards about that decisionmaking, about things like fairness
and openness.
That is the first place to start, because that is what they
do today and they have to be responsible for what they can do
today and they really are not. They have rules that nobody
knows what they are. They have impacts that we can only vaguely
tease out. They have to be responsible for their moderation of
the content.
Chairman Goodlatte. Should that come about by legislative
action or by judicial decisions based upon breach of contract
or libel or slander or----
Mr. Chavern. I think, frankly, there are many ways to get
there but we are going to keep having hearings like this as
long as nobody knows how the secret rules are being applied. If
you have secret rules, you are always not going to get the
benefit of the doubt. And we are going to have to, either
through legislation or through their own actions or could be
other options, get to where there is much more transparency
about their decisionmaking. They are responsible for
prioritizing quality content, but as indicators of trust and
not other kinds of content and ultimately answerable for these
decisions they make, because currently right now they are not.
I mean, we are just sort of guessing about what their
algorithms do.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you. Mr. Nadler.
Mr. Nadler. Let me begin by clearing up one important item.
Essential thesis of this hearing seems to be that social media
companies use complex algorithms to suppress Conservative
voices on the internet. Set aside for the moment whether or not
you approve of filtering practices and content moderation
generally.
Mr. Waldman, yes or no: Is there any compelling evidence
whatsoever to support the notion that Facebook, Twitter, or
Google intentionally suppress Conservative content on their
platforms?
Mr. Waldman. No.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. Mr. Chavern, I hear your concerns
about the effect of content filtering on the news media but yes
or no: Do you have any evidence that Facebook, Twitter, or
Google intentionally suppress Conservative content?
Mr. Waldman. We have not looked, I have not analyzed that.
Mr. Nadler. So the answer is no?
Mr. Waldman. No.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. Mr. Szoka, you represent an
organization that represents a Conservative point of view. Yes
or no: Do you have any evidence that Facebook, Twitter, or
Google intentionally suppress Conservative voices on the
internet in particular?
Mr. Szoka. No, Congressman.
Mr. Nadler. No. Thank you. Absent any evidence on this
front, let's move on. I would like this panel's help with the
subject matter this committee should be addressing today.
Mr. Waldman, earlier this week we met with Cambridge
Analytica whistleblower Christopher Wylie. According to Mr.
Wylie, SCL Group, a British company acting under the name
Cambridge Analytica in the United States, operated as what
Steve Bannon called a propaganda machine in the service of Mr.
Bannon, the Mercer family, and eventually candidate Donald
Trump.
That propaganda was built in large part on information that
Cambridge Analytica misappropriated from millions of Facebook
users. We should be holding a hearing on this topic, but the
majority did not even send staff to listen to Mr. Wylie's
testimony when we had him the other day.
Mr. Waldman, what does Cambridge Analytica tell us about
Facebook's privacy policies and why should this committee
prioritize those issues?
Mr. Waldman. Cambridge Analytica's ability to access 87
million, information on 87 million shows us that Facebook does
not really care about our privacy. What allowed Cambridge
Analytica to access that information was that the quiz, the
psychological quiz allowed the designer to scrape information
through Facebook's API. And the only reason why that exact
situation, the exact Cambridge Analytica situation cannot
reoccur today is because Facebook decided to just fix that and
just stop third-party apps from allowing them to scrape
information that way.
So, that shows us that we are entirely at the mercy of
Facebook's good graces to decide if they are going to allow
this or if they are not going to. So, in this situation we are
allowing Facebook to exist in kind of a regulatory void, as I
mentioned, that leaves our data insecure.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. And what precautions, policies, or
security protocols can Facebook and other social media giants
use or require to prevent unauthorized third parties acquiring
user data for commercial, political, and nefarious purposes?
Mr. Waldman. Well, I think we have to start at Facebook
actually enforcing its rules. We learned shortly after the
Cambridge Analytica fiasco that Facebook has an internal
procedure where people are supposed to check up on the data
usage of third-party applications. There is an entire team
about it.
One of the former employees wrote an op-ed, I believe, in
The Washington Post, that described yes, this was my job, but I
was told that I really should not be walking through all the
steps that I am supposed to. So all they did was call someone
up and say, ``Hey, are you using this data in the wrong way,''
and then never followed up.
So, at first we have to make sure that Facebook is engaging
the tools that they have in order to make sure that this data
is not being used improperly.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. Now, looking back at the election in
2016, the Russian disinformation campaign may have reached over
126 million Facebook users; accounted for more than 1,000
videos in YouTube and included hundreds of thousands of
messages and posts on Twitter. That accounts just for the three
companies that were invited here today and whom I suspect would
have come had Republicans shown that they take this subject
matter seriously.
Mr. Waldman, the Russian company indicted by the special
counsel's office for conspiracy to defraud the United States,
the conspiracy at the heart of the special counsel's work,
spent an estimated $100,000 on Facebook ads. What information
does this committee need from Facebook in order to determine
the impact and reach of that ad by--quickly, if you could,
because my time is running out.
Mr. Waldman. Sure. We need what money was spent, where the
money came from, what companies were involved, and what banks
were involved; the way they were targeted; the algorithms used;
and how that information was propagated.
Mr. Nadler. Okay. I have one final question of a more
general nature, again to Professor Waldman. Everybody here; Mr.
Szoka, Professor Waldman, Mr. Chavern has said there is no
evidence that they have seen that Facebook intentionally
discriminated against Conservative views. But let's assume they
had. Let's assume they had. Facebook is a private company.
Sinclair discriminates against Liberal views. Is there any
difference in principal? Should we permit--let's assume we
decide that Facebook was completely discriminating against
Liberals or against Conservatives. Should we do anything about
that?
Mr. Waldman. There is an editorial----
Mr. Nadler. And the same question for Sinclair, for
example.
Mr. Waldman. There is an editorial----
Mr. Nadler. Or Fox.
Mr. Waldman. There is an editorial role here. That is what
companies that host content do if they embed those particular
values into their design. I am not sure that it is this
Congress's or this committee's role to say that Facebook has to
have X-amount of voices from the Conservative side and X-amount
of voices from the Liberal side.
Mr. Szoka. Congressman, I think I have made it clear that I
think the fairness doctrine in whatever context is a terrible
idea. The government has no business policing speech, period,
but I do want to emphasize, Congressman Blackburn noted earlier
that there are certain rules on the books about broadcast
speech. Those rules have survived scrutiny only because the
Supreme Court has refused to grant full First Amendment rights
to broadcasters. I think that decision, Red Lion, from 1969, is
outdated.
But I just want to emphasize that we run into a real danger
in these discussions of people saying well, why can we not have
a certain regulation that exists for broadcasting? Why can we
not have that for the internet or newspapers? And the answer is
very clear because the internet, newspapers, and all other
media other than broadcasting are fully protected by the First
Amendment. Those rules would never survive First Amendment
challenges if brought in court when applied to the internet.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. My time has expired.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you. Without objection I would
like to submit two publications for the record. One is
``Censored: How Online Media Companies Are Suppressing
Conservative Speech,'' by the Media Research Center; and the
other is in an op-ed by Patrice Onwuka in The Hill titled
``Diamond and Silk Offer Chance for Bipartisan Pushback on
Social Media Censorship,'' in which it notes that in 2016 a
coalition of over 40 left-leaning groups called on Zuckerberg
to ensure that Facebook implements an anticensorship policy
that honors and respects black lives. And in 2017 over 70
social justice groups wrote to Zuckerberg, again calling out
the consistent and disproportionate censorship of Facebook
users of color. Without objection they will be made a part of
the record.
Chairman Goodlatte. The chair recognized the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Smith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I do not
have any questions, but I do have a statement that I really
address to the missing panel, and you have to wonder what were
they afraid of?
Mr. Chairman, the censorship of Conservative voices by
social media has become more frequent and the consequences more
serious. Social media companies have repeatedly censored,
removed, or shadow-banned Conservative journalists, news
organizations, and media outlets that do not adhere to their
political views.
Google's new fact-checking feature appears to target
Conservative websites. Several Conservative-leaning outlets,
such as The Daily Caller, are routinely vetted by Google for
their content. Equally partisan sites, such as Vox, The
Huffington Post, Daily Kos, Mother Jones, and other leftwing
outlets and blogs are not given the same treatment.
In March Twitter censored a Drudge Report tweet of the 2020
campaign slogan ``Keep America Great'' as politically sensitive
content. Unfortunately, we can expect to see a lot more of
these examples in the future. Facebook recently announced this
month that it would cut news articles' share of the newsfeed
from 5 percent to 4 percent. Facebook would boost certain
trusted news outlets and suppress other less trustworthy
sources.
The term trustworthy is defined by Facebook, of course. A
tech website, The Outline, found that the algorithm changes
implemented by Facebook have disproportionately harmed
Conservative publishers on its social media platform. They are
getting fewer readers while their Liberal counterparts have not
been impacted to the same degree.
And who are making these decisions? The Media Research
Center found that Liberal Twitter advisors outnumber
conservations 12 to 1. Twelve U.S. members of Twitter's trust
and safety council, which helps guide its policies, are
Liberal, and only one is Conservative.
Also alarming are the guidelines being written by these
companies to define what is hate speech and what is fake news.
Facebook's newly published community standards, which guide
what content is allowed and what is prohibited, defined these
terms for the American people. The Media Research Center has
outlined how these hate speech guidelines can target
Conservatives.
For example, expressions of contempt, such as ``I oppose
gay marriage,'' could put social Conservatives at risk. These
new guidelines appear to protect illegal immigrants. Saying
illegal immigrants should return to their country of origin
would result in a violation of guidelines on Facebook. And if
someone called an illegal immigrant who has not paid taxes but
gets government benefits a free rider, that would be considered
hate speech, according to Facebook.
According to a 2017 Gallup poll, almost 60 percent of
Americans are worried about the problem of illegal immigration.
So, if those Americans were to post their concerns on Facebook,
they would be accused of hate speech. A majority of Americans
could be censored under Facebook's guidelines.
As private companies, social media can censor or suppress
anyone they want. That is their First Amendment right to
freedom of speech. But they should be held accountable by the
American people, and the public should realize they are getting
slanted information. If social media companies continue to
silence Conservative viewpoints, millions of Americans should
either support alternative platforms or boycott the biased
media.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will yield back.
Chairman Goodlatte. Sure. Thanks. The gentleman recognizes
the gentlewoman from California, Ms. Lofgren, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think there are
important issues to be examined when it comes to social media
platforms. I do not know that the topic of today's hearing is
really one of them. But I do have a question and I do not know
whether you, Professor Waldman, or Mr. Szoka, are the right
witnesses to answer.
One of the reasons why the influence of the Russians
resonated so well from their point of view was the use of bots
in amplifying false narratives. And the question is what
jurisdiction, if any, do we have to regulate, essentially,
bots, false personas on a platform?
I am not sure this is a great hook, but it occurred to me
that all of the social media platforms have value based on
their reach. And if, for example, you have a 2 billion person
follower but 40 percent of them are not real, that that is an
issue that relates to your stock value and really is a
misrepresentation of value to investors.
I wonder if you have thoughts on how we might either
regulate or work with social platforms to reduce or eliminate
false persona or bots on social platforms.
Mr. Szoka. Congressman, thank you for the question. I just
want to note at the outset that when we do that, we run the
risk of restricting anonymous speech online. And I will note
that Facebook and Twitter have chosen very different
approaches, and that to me is the free market at work. Facebook
is a community where everyone is supposed to use their real
name; Twitter is not. And Twitter is, for that reason, much
more vulnerable to the use of bots.
Ms. Lofgren. If I may, I am not talking about anonymity. I
am talking about false persons. Now, if you are Twitter and you
say, you know, I have got a billion followers but half a
billion do not exist, what does that say about your share
value?
Mr. Szoka. Well, the problem, Congressman, is
distinguishing the fake follower from a real person. You know
the old joke that on the internet no one knows you are a dog--
you could also say no one knows you are a bot. It is not easy
to identify those accounts, and the more we pressure those
companies to do that, the more we put them in a position of
being accused of censorship, because they will inevitably make
mistakes.
So, of course, there are things that they could be doing,
but this is a difficult technological problem and I am frankly
very uncomfortable with the idea that the government, whether
it is through the SEC, which indeed has started sending letters
to companies. They sent one to Yahoo yesterday about a failure
to notify its investors about a data breach. There are many----
Ms. Lofgren. Well, a data breach is a very different issue.
Mr. Szoka. They are very different.
Ms. Lofgren. My time is almost up. I want to let Professor
Waldman, who looks like he has something to say on it also to
comment.
Mr. Waldman. Thank you, Congresswoman. I remember that
cartoon, and the internet is a lot more mature today. Our
technology----
Ms. Lofgren. Actually, everyone knows you are a dog, so.
Mr. Waldman. The internet is a lot more mature today. The
technology is a lot better today. I take the example--I think
there is a role for regulatory agencies like the FTC to play,
but we can also take the example of now Senator but then
Attorney General Kamala Harris in California, who recognized
issues with the technology companies that she had a
responsibility to regulate.
Got them in a room together and decided these are the tools
that we need to work together on. We need to make sure that
gendered cyber harassment is not proliferating nonconsensual
pornography, et cetera, and together, using the stick of
potential AG enforcement under California Online Privacy
Protection Act and other regulatory tools, she got companies
together to come to an agreement about how they are going to
use technology to make their platforms safer. I think we could
do that too. Let's try to first work with technology
companies----
Ms. Lofgren. Well, I come from Silicon Valley, so----
Mr. Waldman. Yeah, of course.
Ms. Lofgren. So, I am, you know, this is not a new concept
to me. But the real question, I guess, is in terms--I do not
think it is that difficult to identify bots, honestly. I mean,
you know, maybe at some future date people will become more
creative and it will be more difficult, but it is not so
difficult now.
And the question is what is the standard of knowledge for
the companies, especially publicly traded companies, and what
is their liability exposure in terms of securities. And maybe
we need a securities expert to help answer that. My time is
expired, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Goodlatte. The chair thanks the gentlewoman and
recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Chabot for 5 minutes.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will go to Ms.
Hardaway and Ms. Richardson, I think better known as Diamond
and Spice, first, if I can. Diamond and Silk. My apologies.
Hopefully I get the rest of it right.
Ms. Hardaway. That is all right.
Mr. Chabot. Mr. Nadler introduced and asked the other three
gentlemen about whether there was any evidence of Facebook or
others blocking Conservatives and they indicated no, they did
not really have anything there. But he did not ask you those
questions and it is my understanding that you have personal
knowledge of this; in fact, experienced this yourselves, being
blocked because it actually happened to you. Is that correct?
Ms. Richardson. Yes, that is correct. And very deep in the
settings of Facebook there is a setting called your categories,
which Facebook labels individual account as either Liberal,
very Liberal, Conservative, or very Conservative.
Our personal Facebook account has been labeled very
Liberal, thus meaning that anybody that is advertising or wants
to advertise, that is the only type of advertisement that we
will see on our Facebook page.
So, if you are in a Conservative and you are advertising as
a Conservative, your reach will not be far. The reason being is
because there are individual Facebook pages that have been
labeled as very Liberal.
Now, with this particular setting, we cannot change it, we
cannot correct it, we cannot update it. This has been a default
setting set by Facebook for individual personal pages. With
that setting set, if you cannot change it, then guess what?
Facebook controls what you see.
Ms. Hardaway. That is right.
Mr. Chabot. Let me move on, if I can. It is my
understanding that you comment, talk about a whole lot of
different things, and one of those is President Trump, is my
understanding.
Ms. Hardaway. Yes, we do.
Mr. Chabot. And I think, in general, you tend to agree with
and agree with some of his policies and have been generally
pro-President Trump. Is that accurate?
Ms. Hardaway. We love our President. We love his agenda. We
love this country.
Mr. Chabot. And others have found fault with that, is my
understanding. You have been criticized by some for that point
of view. Is that correct?
Ms. Hardaway. But that is their problem--not ours.
Mr. Chabot. Right.
Ms. Hardaway. That is right. Because this is our platform.
Ms. Richardson. That is right. We do not solicit our page
to them.
Mr. Chabot. Right.
Ms. Richardson. They come to our page and there is
something called troll farms, where people come to our page and
deliberately--and they thumb down our page. Facebook has a
mechanism sitting there that when you thumb down our page you
come to our page deliberately, thumb it down. Then there is an
algorithm that is put in place where if you get too many thumbs
down, now your page is restricted, blocked, your posts
disappear, and then shadow banning is there, where we can see
our posts but anybody else cannot see our posts.
Ms. Hardaway. Right.
Mr. Chabot. And do you think it is unsafe or it is hate
speech to offer a positive view of our President?
Ms. Hardaway. Excuse me?
Mr. Chabot. Do you think some people--certainly you do not
think that it is unsafe or hate speech to be positive about the
President. Right?
Ms. Hardaway. It is not unsafe or is it hate speech.
Mr. Chabot. Right.
Ms. Hardaway. To love this country and love and stand
behind the President of the United States. When Obama was in
office, if we had to get behind him, why not get behind this
President right here?
Mr. Chabot. Yeah. Let me follow up. And then some other
things that you talk about: You have talked about, I think that
you believe that we should control our borders. As a country we
have a right to do that.
Ms. Hardaway. Absolutely. Do not you----
Mr. Chabot. Yup.
Ms. Hardaway. Is not this place controlled? When I came up
here today security had to check us out.
Ms. Richardson. That is right.
Ms. Hardaway. We just could not walk up in here. Do not you
secure your house? The border should be secured.
Ms. Richardson. And another thing--if illegal aliens do not
have a right but if illegal aliens can come here to American
and obtain the American dream, why cannot Diamond and Silk?
Ms. Hardaway. That is right.
Mr. Chabot. Very good. And some other things that you
discuss, my understanding is, things like protecting the
unborn. Is that something that you have discussed in the past,
that you think we ought to protect those that have a right to
have life? Is that something that you----
Ms. Hardaway. Absolutely.
Ms. Richardson. Everybody has a right to life.
Ms. Hardaway. Yeah. And, first of all, those are our
beliefs.
Mr. Chabot. Right.
Ms. Hardaway. And we have a right to those beliefs.
Mr. Chabot. Right.
Ms. Hardaway. What is wrong with the way we believe? Why is
it now in this country whatever used to be right is wrong and
what is wrong now is right? If I have a belief, that is my
belief, but nobody has a right to censor my free speech.
Mr. Chabot. Yeah.
Ms. Hardaway. Nobody has a right to do it. And to
maliciously and deliberately do it is what really irritates me.
It just irritates me.
Mr. Chabot. Very good. Thank you. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Goodlatte. Chair thanks the gentleman. Recognizes
the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We could
be here for a lot of reasons this morning. We could be looking
into the manipulation of Facebook by the Russians to help
Donald Trump get elected. We could be looking into the Russian
interference with the presidential election. We could be
looking at Russian hacking into State election processes. We
could be talking about, in this committee, legislation to
protect the Mueller investigation. None of those areas has this
committee been involved with during the last 15 months that we
have been in session.
We could be talking about gun control. We could be talking
about the Dream Act in this committee. No hearings whatsoever,
but what we are dealing with today, we are giving a platform to
Diamond and Silk, and you ladies are very impressive to me. You
have taken something and you have moved forward with it,
exercising your First Amendment rights and you have made a ton
of money off of Facebook. Is that not correct?
Ms. Hardaway. Absolutely not, because Facebook censored us
for six months.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Well, now, Donald Trump introduced
you all at a rally last year and he introduced you all saying
that you were very popular and you had made a ton of money
based on your affiliation with him. Is that not correct?
Ms. Hardaway. Let me tell you what he was talk----
Ms. Richardson. That is not what he said.
Ms. Hardaway. He was calling those things that were not as
though they were, is what he was doing then.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Okay. But he has given you----
Ms. Hardaway. But Facebook censored us for----
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Hold on one second.
Ms. Hardaway [continuing]. For 6 months.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Hold on one second, ma'am. The
point I am trying to make is you all have been bashing Facebook
and you have been making a ton of money. Is that not correct?
Ms. Hardaway. No.
Ms. Richardson. Excuse me.
Ms. Hardaway. No, no, no, no, no.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. You have not been----
Ms. Hardaway. I will say it to the community.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. You have not been making a ton of
money based on your bashing of Facebook?
Ms. Hardaway. No, no, no. We did not bash Facebook. What we
did, was we brought it to the light----
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. But have you been making a ton of
money?
Ms. Hardaway [continuing]. On how Facebook has been
censoring Conservative voices like ourselves for 6 months.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Have you been making----
Ms. Hardaway. Twenty-nine days, 5 hours, 43 minutes and 40
seconds. That is what they did.
Ms. Richardson. Now, I can tell you something. We did----
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Have you been making money? Have
you been monetizing or----
Ms. Richardson. They will not let us monetize on Facebook.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. So you have not been----
Ms. Hardaway. They stopped it.
Ms. Richardson. They stopped it.
Ms. Hardaway. For 6 months, 29 days.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. So, they have been messing with
your money, then?
Ms. Hardaway. Exactly.
Ms. Richardson. That is exactly what I was going to say.
Ms. Hardaway. They limited our page, is what they did.
Ms. Richardson. And you, too, did also by de-monetizing 95
percent of our videos for no reason at all, deeming it as hate
speak.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. But you are still selling
merchandise on----
Ms. Hardaway. But even if we sell merchandise, that does
not have anything to do with Facebook. Facebook censored our
free speech and shame on the ones that do not even see that we
have been censored. Yeah, when the Black Lives Matter people
complain about it, oh, everybody is up in arms.
Let me just say this here. If the shoe was on the other
foot and Mark Zuckerberg was a Conservative and we were
Liberals, oh, all fences and all chains would have broken
loose. You know it and I know it. But what I find appalling is
that these Democrats, they do not want to take up for our
voices because we support the President.
Ms. Richardson. Democrats would be in the street right now
marching and calling him all types of racist.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. I would like to give you a little
bit more time. I would like to give you a little bit more time
but I have got to move on. I have only got a minute left.
Ms. Hardaway. Okay.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. But I appreciate you all for your
entrepreneurial spirit.
Ms. Hardaway. That is part of the American dream.
Ms. Richardson. And we want to attain it too.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. And we are giving you a tremendous
platform with this hearing to make a ton of money when it is
over.
Ms. Richardson. That is right. And I hope everybody who is
on Facebook can follow us and----
Ms. Hardaway. Yes. That is right. That is right. Because
that is what it is supposed to be about.
Ms. Richardson. That is what it is supposed to be about.
Ms. Hardaway. It is supposed to be about the attainment of
the American dream. We are African American women.
Ms. Richardson. That is right.
Ms. Hardaway. If illegal aliens can come over here and
build businesses. Why cannot we? We were born on this soil. Oh,
you do not have a right to silence my voice. Absolutely not.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. I have always heard, though, that
diamonds are a girl's best friend.
Ms. Hardaway. They are and they are hard, too, and if I
have got to be hard and be firm with you, I will. You are not
going to brush us off and dismiss us----
Ms. Richardson. No, you are not.
Ms. Hardaway [continuing]. Like we do not have merit here.
These people censor us for no reason. They put limitations on
our page for no reason, and that was wrong.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. But rather than diamonds, you are
seeking money with Facebook. Is that not correct?
Ms. Hardaway. Well, you know what? If Facebook is a
platform for you to make money, then so be it. Everybody else
does it.
Ms. Richardson. That is right.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Well, I respect----
Ms. Richardson. And do not stop us from making any.
Ms. Hardaway. And do not make us feel guilty because we and
other people that have built their brand page want to make
money. We spent plenty of money.
Ms. Richardson. That is right.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. All right. Okay. I am with you on
that. I am just astounded that this committee would stoop to
this level to be positioning you all to make more money.
Ms. Hardaway. We really thank the committee for allowing
us.
Ms. Richardson. For little voices like ours. It is little
voices like ours.
Ms. Hardaway. Because it was not you. You did not do it.
Chairman Goodlatte. The time of the gentleman has expired.
I thank the exchange. The gentleman asked the questions; the
ladies answered his questions. And the chair now recognizes----
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. I thank the chairman.
Chairman Goodlatte. The chair now recognizes the gentleman
from Iowa, Mr. King, for 5 minutes.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me see. I am almost
tempted to yield my time back to Mr. Johnson, but----
Ms. Hardaway. Bring it.
Ms. Richardson. Come on.
Mr. King. Instead, before I forget, I have some documents I
would like to ask consent to enter into the record. The first
one is from Mr. Jim Hoft of The Gateway Pundit, St. Louis. And
he is the one who initiated the beginnings of this hearing
today. He has taken a pretty hard hit himself in multiple
different ways, and I have watched as his views have gone from,
been dropped down from 33 percent--Facebook page was 33 percent
of the overall views--down to 3 percent.
Ms. Richardson. That is right.
Mr. King. One-eleventh of what it was. That would be
evidence of censorship, in my opinion. A number of other
comments in there that I would like to introduce that into the
record along with a Christian publisher says Google banned it
over faith we express, which illustrates that quoting the Bible
can get you censored in this country.
And there are multiple charts here delivered by Gateway
Pundit of other--here is Gateway Pundit's traffic. Here is the
President's traffic, which the gentleladies expressed in their
testimony. The Young Conservatives' traffic, which went from
around five and three-quarter million down to essentially
nothing.
In a similar period of time, multiple other sites,
Conservative sites all of them, the graphics in the charts--it
is the best material out here that quantifies this impact, I
think, produced by Mr. Jim Hoft, and I hope that one day he can
come and testify before this Congress as well, because my
private conversation with him has been very powerful. And I ask
unanimous consent to introduce these documents into the record,
in hearing no objection.
Chairman Goodlatte. Without objection, will be made a part
of the record.
Mr. King. I am sorry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And now,
where do I go with this? My first thoughts are this. I am
thinking about a situation like Jim Hoft and Gateway Pundit--
the fourth most influential Conservative pundit throughout the
last election cycle--watching his traffic be cut to one-
eleventh of what it was just on Facebook alone.
And I do not see that Jim Hoft has as much television
presence, perhaps, as Diamond and Silk have. So I wanted to ask
you, Ms. Hardaway or you, Ms. Richardson, if you did not have a
spot on Fox News, if you had to rely on just watching your
traffic go down on YouTube and on Facebook and on Twitter and
wherever else, would you have a chance to have a voice to
express this or could it be that because you had another outlet
this issue came up far enough that now America is watching?
Ms. Hardaway. Absolutely.
Ms. Richardson. Absolutely.
Ms. Hardaway. Because we had another outlet--because the
Republicans, certain Republicans spoke out about it and took up
for the little voices like ourselves, is how this came to
light.
Ms. Richardson. That is right.
Ms. Hardaway. It is not--when they deemed us unsafe to the
community, it would have been that. They told us we could not
appeal. We would have been out. And this is what happens,
oftentimes, with people in our country, particularly
minorities, where these big giants, they take and they put
their feet on your neck.
They pull the rug right up from under you and then dare you
to move. You know, they tell us to pull ourselves up by our
boot straps, but how can we do that when they take those same
straps and use them to hang us out to dry? That is not fair and
that has got to stop in this country. And it stops today.
Ms. Richardson. With everybody.
Mr. King. You know, I really appreciate the way you look at
the American dream. I want my right to earn the American dream.
Ms. Hardaway. That is right. That is right.
Mr. King. And is there any difference in your mind between,
say, Facebook and Twitter and YouTube--those, we will call them
utilities--not necessarily public utilities, but utilities. Is
there any difference between them and, let's say, UPS and
FedEx? If you are making your living selling things and
shipping out on FedEx, is that any different than it is making
your living by pitching a message out through Facebook?
Ms. Hardaway. Absolutely, because listen, these platforms
have it where you can monetize. You can make money off of these
platforms. So, if you are building your brand and you are
pumping money into building your brand, it is not fair for
somebody to change the rules in the middle of the game. And I
think that is what is happening with certain American--with the
American people, some of them. You change the rules in the
middle of the great game and then people are left out to dry.
That is not fair.
Mr. King. Let me clarify this question. What if you are
producing a product, and maybe it is a home, little garage
factory, or a larger factory, and you are shipping that product
out on FedEx and FedEx decides you are Conservative, so we are
not going to deliver your product to your customers. Is there a
difference between what is going on with Facebook and what
would be going on under that circumstance?
Ms. Hardaway. Well, that would be to me discrimination.
Ms. Richardson. Yeah. It is on both--discrimination on both
sides.
Ms. Hardaway. On both sides. And listen, wait a minute.
This is for all voices. No voices should be censored.
Ms. Richardson. None.
Ms. Hardaway. This could be bipartisan. I do not care if
you are on the left or the right, the deal is, is that no
voices should be silent, and you should not be discriminating.
It is a platform to express ideas, express all ideas.
Ms. Richardson. All ideas.
Ms. Hardaway. Not just one side.
Ms. Richardson. That is right.
Ms. Hardaway. Not just put it where it is one-sided, where
I am just seeing Liberal group views, where you have my account
deemed Liberal when I am very Conservative. I am a Republican,
but you do not have that up there. And why are you making those
decisions for me? Why did not you give us the opportunity to
put in what we are, our political affiliation? And what does
our political affiliation have to do with Facebook? Just think
about that.
Mr. King. I want to let you know that I tweeted you out to
see if you were blocked on mine and you are still alive on my
Twitter, so thank you very much. Appreciate your testimony and
I yield back.
Chairman Goodlatte. Would the gentleman yield for a----
Mr. King. I would yield to the chairman.
Chairman Goodlatte. I just want to thank the gentleman for
yielding and take note that it would be nice if these three
companies were here to explain themselves and their policies
and whether they truly are fair to people all across political
spectrums, because I put in the record Liberal organizations
that were concerned about this too. They set themselves up as a
platform. They need to promote free speech, not stifle it.
Ms. Hardaway. Right.
Mr. Nadler. Would the gentleman yield for a second?
Chairman Goodlatte. The gentleman controls the time, but I
yield him.
Mr. King. I yield. I yield.
Chairman Goodlatte. It is up to you.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. I just want to point out one thing.
Ms. Hardaway and Ms. Richardson have had interesting testimony
about their interactions with Facebook, and maybe Facebook has
treated them unfairly and maybe not. I do not know. But that
does not establish a pattern, which is the subject of the
hearing. Every one of our other witnesses said there is no
evidence that Facebook is discriminating against Conservative
views in any way.
There may be Liberal people who have had the same types of
problems or not, and I have sympathy for our two witnesses, Ms.
Hardaway and Ms. Richardson, for their difficulty with
Facebook. But the basic thing is here no pattern has been
established showing anything at all other than there was--that
these two ladies have had a problem with Facebook. Maybe
Facebook for some reason does not like them or whatever. But in
any event, no pattern has been established. I thank the
gentleman for yielding.
Mr. King. Reclaiming my time. The documents that I
introduced into the record do establish that pattern.
Ms. Hardaway. That is right.
Ms. Richardson. Exactly.
Mr. King. And I hope you pay attention to that. And I thank
you and I yield back.
Chairman Goodlatte. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The chair recognizes the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Jackson
Lee, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, thank you so very much, and
let me also acknowledge my commitment to the First Amendment
for all of the witnesses that are here, and our pointed
questions to Ms. Hardaway and Ms. Richardson, obviously,
because they come with important critiques that we need to
address, and we need to address it fairly and we also need to
get the facts.
Before I do that, Mr. Chairman, I would like to pause on my
time because I would like to acknowledge Takala Ann Allen and
Madison, who are take-your-daughters-to-Congress, and I think
Ms. Husband with a young lady here in the back. And I want them
to stand and I want to acknowledge that this is Madison's
birthday. Ladies, stand up.
I know you can hear me. There you are. Thirteen--and you
stand up, too. Thank you. Thank you so very much. I could not
imagine a better place for them to view democracy. You may be
seated. This is democracy in a judiciary committee meeting
room. Let me----
Ms. [unidentified speaker]: Will my colleague yield for
just one second? I would like to introduce my daughter as well.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I would be happy to yield. Mr. Chairman,
are you pausing on my time, please? I need to--she wants me to
yield for her to introduce her daughter.
Chairman Goodlatte. Oh. Yeah. It will not count against
your time.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Okay.
Mrs. Handel. Tatiana, stand up. From Philadelphia. Thank
you for being here. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you and be happy. In any event, I
think it is important to note two things. One, there is a
question of this hearing as to establish whether there was a
pattern. I think that is very important. I think we would
probably have to have 10 hearings and I do not view this
hearing as particularly important.
I do want to take note of the fact, Mr. Chairman, that the
Senate has just passed, out of committee, the special counsel
legislation, of which it would be appropriate for us to hold a
hearing on the special counsel legislation to protect Special
Counsel Mueller. That is in fact a bipartisan bill with a
number of Republicans on it. So, I hope--and let me make a
formal request that we do so and mark up that bill that had
been introduced by Mr. Nadler.
I would also like to introduce into the record articles
from Ms. Hardaway and Ms. Richardson dealing with expressions
of dismay or disagreement with a number of entities. I ask
unanimous consent to introduce exclusive ``Diamond and Silk
Crash Hillary Clinton's Race-Baiting''; ``She Is Not Our Slave
Master''; ``Diamond and Silk Criticize Michelle Obama''; and
then of course ``A Message for Oprah''. I ask unanimous consent
to put these in the record?
Chairman Goodlatte. Without objection.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. And I think that it is clear
that there is a First Amendment protection that you all deserve
as I deserve it, as the witnesses deserve it. So let me pose
these questions. Ms. Hardaway, have you ever been paid by the
Trump campaign?
Ms. Hardaway. No. We have never been paid by the Trump
campaign.
Ms. Jackson Lee. You have never been paid by the Trump
campaign.
Ms. Hardaway. We have never been paid by the Trump
campaign.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Not $5.00? Not $100?
Ms. Hardaway. We have never been paid----
Ms. Jackson Lee. What about $1,274.94?
Ms. Hardaway. We have never been paid by the Trump
campaign.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me ask a specific question--$1,274.94?
Ms. Hardaway. We have never----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Ms. Hardaway [continuing]. Been paid.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Ms. Hardaway, my understanding is that you
received the now-infamous email from Facebook, the email
calling your page unsafe on April 8th, 2018?
Ms. Hardaway. No.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Is that correct?
Ms. Hardaway. No, no, no, no, no, no. That was not April
the 8th. We received that on April the 5th, 2018.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Now, on April 11th you appeared
on ``The Ingraham Angle'' on Fox News to discuss this matter.
The host, Laura Ingraham, asked did you get contacted by
Facebook and has this been reversed? Had you been contacted by
Facebook?
Ms. Hardaway. We were contacted via Twitter on April the
12th.
Ms. Jackson Lee. You responded, ``We have not been in
communication with Facebook. We have not been contacted. We
have not spoken to anyone over the phone.''
Ms. Hardaway. That is true. We had not been in contact with
them. We have not spoken to anyone over the phone.
Ms. Richardson. Right. They say it was in direct
communications with us and we had not been in direct
communications with them.
Ms. Jackson Lee. But did you, on that show, say that you
were not contacted?
Ms. Hardaway. We were not contacted. We were contacted on
the 12th. We were contacted on the 12th via Twitter.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. So, are you saying that you did
not lie on that show or you did lie?
Ms. Hardaway. We did not lie on that show. We did that show
on the 11th. We were contacted by Twitter on the 12th--by
Facebook on the 12th via Twitter. And when we looked in our
verifies, there they were.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Is it your testimony today that as of
April 11th, when you went on Ms. Ingraham's show and said that
Mr. Zuckerberg had lied about trying to contact you, that
Facebook never reached out to you or Ms. Richardson about this
issue?
Ms. Hardaway. Mark Zuckerberg said that they were in direct
communication with us, like they had spoken to us. They did not
do that.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Did you get information from Zuckerberg or
Facebook----
Ms. Hardaway. No.
Ms. Jackson Lee [continuing]. By, however, any means of
communication?
Ms. Hardaway. No.
Ms. Richardson. No.
Ms. Jackson Lee. You just said you got it through Twitter.
Ms. Hardaway. We got it through Twitter on the 12th, on
April the 12th.
Ms. Richardson. The next day.
Ms. Hardaway. Hold on for a moment. Ms. Jackson, do not try
to mince my words. Let me explain to you this here. April the
5th, 2018, they took and they deemed us unsafe to the community
and told us it was not appealable.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And you got in contact and----
Ms. Hardaway. That was April the 12th, is when they----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Ms. Hardaway, I am the one asking
questions. You are in a judicial committee hearing, and I
respect you and you are going to respect me. Now, my question
is have you gotten contact from Facebook? And Ms. Richardson
may want to answer it. Have you?
Ms. Hardaway. No.
Ms. Richardson. No.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. And you are saying, under oath,
that you did not, and so the Twitter is not communication? That
is a tool of communication.
Ms. Hardaway. The way you are asking that question is a
little confusing and you are mincing words right here.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Have you gotten any communication from
Facebook?
Ms. Hardaway. On April the 12th via Twitter.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And what mode was that?
Ms. Hardaway. That was via Twitter.
Ms. Richardson. Via Twitter.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. And so you got information. So
your testimony that you did not is not truthful.
Ms. Hardaway. That is truthful.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me move on to Professor Waldman.
Mr. Gohmert [presiding]. Time of the gentlelady is expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I asked that my introduction of my two
young ladies not be attributable to my time.
Mr. Gohmert. How you use your time is yours and that did
count on your time.
Ms. Jackson Lee. That is not the case.
Mr. Gohmert. Yes, it is.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Professor Waldman, I would like you to
answer this question.
Mr. Gohmert. Time of the gentlelady has expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee. If Facebook attempts to answer the
question or respond----
Mr. Gohmert. The time of the gentlelady has expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Is that legitimate that Facebook can in
fact----
Mr. Gohmert. The time of the gentlelady has expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Is that legitimate that Facebook can in
fact----
Mr. Gohmert. The time of the gentlelady has expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Be held to a standard when they are trying
to correct problems?
Mr. Gohmert. If we are going to get through all the
witnesses we have to observe these time guidelines. We cannot
give everybody 2 extra minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, I asked for the chairman to
have gotten out of the seat when he said yes, and the staff is
standing here and they need to be able to speak up. I want this
question answered by Mr. Waldman.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, madam.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Waldman, will you answer that
question, please?
Mr. Gohmert. Time of the gentlelady is expired. There may
be time after everybody else has----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Waldman, please answer the question.
You are not going to be penalized.
Mr. Gohmert. Time of the gentlelady has expired.
Mr. Waldman. Facebook has an opportunity to make those
decisions for its own [inaudible]. They do not do it in a
biased way.
Chairman Goodlatte. At this time we will recognize Mr.
Biggs for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Mr. Waldman.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This has been very
interesting. I want to make clear, I keep hearing the Democrats
say that all three of the male witnesses has testified that
they have seen no evidence of any kind of bias against
Conservative thought on these platforms. That is true, I think,
with Mr. Szoka and Mr. Waldman. Mr. Chavern indicated, I think,
that he had not indicated----
Mr. Chavern. We had not examined the question.
Mr. Biggs. They had not examined the question, so that to
me is kind of a misrepresentation that we have heard
consistently from our friends across the aisle all hearing. So,
thank you for clarifying that, Mr. Chavern.
I also want to add some additional information with regard
to what we have seen here today. There are other reported
instances besides Diamond and Silk's. I appreciate all five of
you being here today.
The Sportsman's Shop is an instance that they had, they
noticed one day their Facebook advertisements promoting the
sale of American flags had been removed. And after reaching out
to Facebook they noticed that all of their advertising
capabilities had also been made unavailable. This is a problem
and Facebook provided the indication that anything linking to
sales of firearms would be blocked henceforth, but not with
companies like Dick's and Cabela's. This is kind of a--to me
that is an indication of bias.
Gizmodo has reported as well that news curators within
Facebook have also admitted that they do suppress Conservative
thoughts and ideas, and there has been some work done by other
researchers, who have indicated that just under half of U.S.
adults use Facebook for news. They are massively influential in
news but when they changed their platform, we saw from January
2018 a steady decrease in the top 25 biggest publishers on
Facebook. They moved from many of the Conservative links, such
as Fox News, Western Journal, et cetera--they moved
consistently post change further down that list.
Now, I do not think anybody has isolated the variables
necessarily, to say that the audience may have changed, but it
does provide some correlative indicia that the result of that
algorithmic change by Facebook impacted the dissemination of
Conservative thought and ideas, and that is what we are trying
to get at today. We are not trying to get into the issue of
privacy. That has been going on and other issues, and that is
an issue that we can take care of as well.
George Upper, the executive editor of Western Journal, has
said, ``This algorithm change, intentional or not, has in
effect censored Conservative viewpoints on the largest social
media platform in the world. This change has ramifications that
in the short term are causing Conservative publishers to
downsize or fold up completely, and in the long term could
swing elections in the United States and around the world
towards Liberal politicians and policies.''
Mark Zuckerberg said that, ``We have ruled out a number of
changes to newsfeed that try to boost in the ranking broadly
trusted news sources.'' The one thing that is interesting here
is he does not indicate his definition of broadly trusted news
sources until he gets to this: Wall Street Journal or New York
Times. And he says, ``Even if everyone reads them, the people
who do not read them typically just do not think they are good,
trustworthy journalism.''
And I do not know if that is true, either. But the point is
they control this massive platform. They make money off this
massive platform, and they then in turn regulate that platform
themselves as right now I think it is their right to do. I
think it is their right to do. The problem is they hinder, and
perhaps deliberately so, the ability of others to pursue their
ideal.
Now I just wanted to quick point out, I think that it is
very interesting because this was reported April 25th in
Google--or excuse me, in Western Journal--that Google rejects
permission to publishers that----
Mr. Gohmert. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. Biggs [continuing]. Because they mention Bible and
Jesus.
Mr. Gohmert. The time of the gentleman is expired. Thank
you. The chair recognizes Ms. Jackson Lee for a unanimous
consent request.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much. I
just wanted to indicate to the witnesses that I want to make
sure the First Amendment applies to all. I want to put it into
the record, however, for Ms. Hardaway and Ms. Richardson that
it may be these numbers up or down, but they have 650,000 on
Twitter; 1.5 million on Facebook at this time; 140,000
subscribers on YouTube; but I think they have grown in their
Facebook numbers in the last 3 weeks upwards of 350,000. Let's
let the First Amendment be the guiding post for these hearings.
Mr. Gohmert. Was that a unanimous consent request? It does
not sound like it.
Ms. Jackson Lee. That is a unanimous consent. I asked--it
is a unanimous consent. I am submitting these numbers into the
record.
Chairman Goodlatte. Well, they have already testified to
something different, so I would have to object to that being
submitted.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well, I have a right to put the materials
in the record.
Mr. Gohmert. Absolutely.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thanks. So, I ask unanimous consent.
Mr. Gohmert. But with the testimony of others not as if
that is--yeah, so we will allow that into the record.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gohmert. And I did want to make sure the gentlelady
understood the time of the gentlelady was paused for 30 seconds
earlier, so with the introduction, the applause, you did get an
extra 30 seconds in addition to another minute and a half after
the gentlelady--so the gentlelady had 2 more minutes than
anybody else will have today.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, thank you so very much.
Mr. Gohmert. At this time the chair recognizes Mr. Deutch
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks very much
to all of our witnesses for being here today. Mr. Chairman, I
represent the city of Parkland, Florida, where on Valentine's
Day this year a young man walked into Marjory Stoneman Douglas
High School with an AR15 and killed 17 people in 6 minutes and
20 seconds.
For hours students across the campus ran in fear, hid for
their lives, hid in closets, inside locked classrooms. Now, the
student survivors of Marjory Stoneman Douglas have received a
lot of attention, not merely because of the attack and because
they were there that day, but because of how they have
responded. And that is because they have grown up in a world
where mass shootings are relatively common. In many deeply
disturbing ways they were prepared for this event.
And in the days after, having grown up in an active shooter
world where they all had active shooter training and,
nevertheless, watched their friends die beside them--in the
days after the shooting they did not hold back. They documented
the reactions of their classmates as amateur reporters. They
spoke out across the media. They called out this Congress's
failure to do anything to stop these tragedies or this
committee's only action on gun laws, opening up every State in
the country to the lowest common denominator through concealed
carrier reciprocity.
I am tremendously proud of these students, but some people
have used social media platforms to attack them. They have been
called crisis actors. They have been called tools of the left.
They have been disparaged and they have been defamed.
David Hogg, 17 years old at the time of the shooting, was
depicted as Adolph Hitler. Emma Gonzalez was shown ripping up--
this was a video she posted--ripping up a target. Then there
was the photoshopped image of Emma Gonzalez ripping up the
United States Constitution. This is real. This is bogus.
And yet, and yet, this was circulated over and over and
over again on the internet to willing viewers who were ready to
accept it. The images went viral. Millions of users saw them in
minutes. Truthers have spread lies, claiming that the event
never happened. That the 17 people who were gunned down in my
community did not die. That made the rounds on the internet.
Just like they did and continue to do about the 20 6- and 7-
year-olds who were slaughtered at Sandy Hook. That is all
published on the internet.
So, I appreciate the conversation on free speech, but I
would like to inject another concept into today's debate. That
is the concept of morality. I would ask Professor Waldman
first, is there a consideration of morality by the tech
companies whose platforms are used to spread this vile and
outrageous and offensive garbage that attacks kids and denies
the very existence of a horrific event that tore the heart out
of my community?
Mr. Waldman. Facebook likes to call itself a neutral
platform only when it suits them, in situations like this where
terrible pictures get proliferated through their platform. But
they know as well as we know that the problem is designed-in.
Facebook likes when those images get spread around because they
want the additional engagement. They want the clicks. They want
the hyper-partisan networks to spread this around. So, they are
not thinking about what is right and what is wrong.
Mr. Deutch. Well, let me ask you a question. Are they under
any obligation--I already asked about the moral obligation--is
there any legal obligation to protect either the individuals
attacked or others from this sort of ugly and defamatory
content?
Mr. Waldman. They are under no legal obligation to do so.
Mr. Deutch. And is it--Mr. Chavern, if they are publishers
and all of our witnesses have acknowledged the role that the
technology companies play in distributing news. If they are
distributing news, do they have some editorial responsibility
to ensure that this type of, in this case, of the manipulated
images, that this never appears and that the invocation of Nazi
imagery also not appear. Is there any obligation to do that?
Mr. Chavern. Well, they express editorial control, and this
gets to the heart of my testimony in the sense that that kind
of content through propulsion and the algorithms crowds out the
content of my members; crowds out, by the way, the journalism
that was done in your community about what happened, such that
there was a built-in preference for content that drives
attention but may not be accurate or correct.
Mr. Deutch. This last question. Is it censorship to expect
that this image, this false image, be taken down the moment it
appears?
Mr. Chavern. I think I would come at it a different way in
that I think there is a responsibility to give at least much
emphasis on content from responsible sources than to what we
have is the opposite, is highlighting irresponsible sources.
Mr. Deutch. Irresponsible and----
Mr. Gohmert. The time for the gentleman has expired. I
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
There is a story from Facebook--I mean about Facebook on
Fox News, where they list a number of things, like Lawrence
Southern [phonetic sp] was suspended because of criticizing
censorship, giving a specific example of that.
The administration of a pro-Trump group was banned for
saying Trump is not anti-Muslim, but he is anti-Isis.
Facebook locked the kids out that posted videos supporting
Rudy Giuliani's criticisms of Obama, calling it suspicious
activity.
Facebook approved Christian hate groups--and I am not even
going to mention the names, they are so vile--coming after
Christians but shut down Christian groups quite often. And
examples are given like Kirk Cameron's movie, ``Unstoppable''.
Christopher Campbell was blocked for 30 days for expressing
his opinion that attacks in Cologne, Germany and the right to
bear arms.
Canadian censor--was censored for criticizing Prime
Minister Justin Trudeau's response to refugee shootings.
I mean there are lots of examples. And if you could indulge
me, Mr. Szoka, Mr. Waldman, and Mr. Chavern, if you would look
over to your right at these two ladies, I just--well obviously
Mr. Waldman can then like to--well, thank you.
But anyway, I just wanted you to see evidence of improper
censorship. They are walking evidence of Facebook censorship. I
know you say there is not any evidence, but there is and it has
been given here today. It will continue to surface in the
future.
And I would like to also point out just an observation I
have had: Alan Keyes, Clarence Thomas, they are heroes of mine,
and they can let you know that nobody--and Silk can
substantiate it--I do not think there is anybody in America
that suffers more vile reproach and bigotry than black
Conservatives. And if you throw Christianity on top of black
and Conservative, you are just at the bottom of the pile. Alan
Keyes has certainly experienced that. Clarence Thomas has as
well.
I did want to ask Ms. Hardaway and Ms. Richardson, you paid
Facebook for your posts to be boosted on their platform.
Correct?
Ms. Hardaway. Sometimes we do.
Mr. Gohmert. But you had an agreement for content promotion
with Facebook. Was there not an example where you paid them to
boost your platform and it was not boosted?
Ms. Hardaway. Well we paid them to boost our platform, but
it did not reach. And the reason why it did not reach is
because they have labeled accounts as very Liberal that is not
very Liberal. So, of course, your stuff is not going to reach.
Ms. Richardson. And they also placed limits on our page.
They have a little red sign there on the top of our Facebook
page that stated that it was limited.
Ms. Hardaway. Right. They did that. And I just need to
clarify something, because I do not like to be called a liar.
Facebook did not reach out to us until--via Twitter on April
12th. The last time we heard from Facebook was on April 5th,
when they deemed us unsafe to the community.
Mr. Gohmert. Well when the Twitter was posted, was that
posted only to you, where only you could see it? Or was that
for everybody to see?
Ms. Hardaway. We have a verified account, so when we went
into our verified, that is when we saw it. And we were very
transparent, because we put it out there online for everybody.
Mr. Gohmert. But other people could see that.
Ms. Richardson. Yes.
Mr. Gohmert. So it was not just a communication to you; it
was communication to the world.
Ms. Richardson. It was on--that is right.
Mr. Gohmert. You were not singled out. They did not
specifically communicate to you?
Ms. Hardaway. No. We were no----
Mr. Gohmert. They put something out to the world to make it
look like they were----
Ms. Hardaway. Absolutely. Because they had got caught in
the hot seat. Mark Zuckerberg had lied. Maybe he got it from
his PR people. We do not know. But they were never in direct
communication with us. And I just clarified that.
Mr. Gohmert. Let me just point out. You know, FedEx, UPS,
they hold themselves out as getting your package where you want
it to go. But suppose they started saying, ``You know what? If
you are a Conservative, if it is a Conservative destination, we
are not going to deliver it.''
I mean it seems like Facebook, YouTube, some of these are
holding themselves out to be a public platform and be a public
square, when actually they censor, they set up algorithms to
determine who gets more--I mean it would be like saying you
have a public square, but we are going to put you on the public
square in a soundproof booth.
So, in my last 10 seconds, let me just say I am not for
more government regulation, but I do think since they are
deciding what goes on and what gets censored, they should be
liable. And I am working on laws to make that happen.
And with that, I would recognize Mr. Jeffries for 5
minutes.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank all of
the very distinguished witnesses for your presence here today.
A question for Mrs. Hardaway. Have you ever publicly
expressed an opinion about the presidency of Barack Obama?
Ms. Hardaway. No, because I was not into politics or
anything like that. So when you say--wait a minute. Hold on.
When you say public--well, not when he was in office.
Let me back up. If I had something to say, it was during
the election when they were running.
Mr. Jeffries. And what was that opinion?
Ms. Hardaway. That I did not think he was a good President.
He did not do anything for the black community. Look at the
people from Chicago, and he was from Chicago. So I had a very
vocal opinion. But while he was in office, like before the
election, I did not publicly say anything because I just was
not into it----
Mr. Jeffries. Appreciate that.
Ms. Hardaway [continuing]. Until Donald Trump came along.
Mr. Jeffries. Now are you familiar with a governmental
entity called the Federal Election Commission?
Ms. Hardaway. The FEC, I am.
Mr. Jeffries. And are you aware that presidential campaigns
are required to submit what is called campaign finance
disclosure reports with the FEC?
Ms. Hardaway. Yes.
Mr. Jeffries. And those FEC disclosure reports detail
contributions made to the Trump campaign. Are you aware of that
fact?
Ms. Hardaway. It could be. I mean, okay.
Mr. Jeffries. And the FEC reports also publicly disclose
what is called expenditures or disbursements made by the Trump
campaign. Are you aware of that fact?
Ms. Hardaway. Well, I keep hearing it. I heard somebody put
out a news article that that was out there, but----
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. Let me enter into the record, Mr.
Chairman, I ask unanimous consent for what is called the post-
general election FEC report, filed by the Trump campaign on May
12, 2017.
Ms. Hardaway. Can he tell me how much----
Mr. Jeffries. Sir? Mr. Gohmert?
Mr. Gohmert. Without objection. Thank you very much.
Mr. Jeffries. Now Ms. Hardaway, I think you stated on the
record today at least three times, ``We were not paid by the
Trump campaign.'' Is that correct?
Ms. Hardaway. That is correct.
Ms. Richardson. That is correct.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. Now are you aware that your testimony
today is under oath, subject to the penalty of perjury?
Ms. Hardaway. Yes. We are aware of that.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. Now the FEC report dated May 12, 2017
states that on November 22, 2016, the campaign of Donald J.
Trump for President, Incorporated paid Diamond and Silk
$1,274.94 for field consulting. Are you familiar with that?
Ms. Richardson. We are familiar with that particular lie.
We can see that you do look at fake news. What happened is--and
what should have happened is you should have come to our mouths
to see what exactly happened before a false narrative was put
out there about the $1,274.94.
So, let me explain right now to you and the world----
Mr. Jeffries. Hold on one second, because I want to give
you an opportunity to explain, which is why I am asking the
question.
Ms. Richardson. Right.
Mr. Jeffries. I am actually trying to figure out, are you
calling this FEC document fake--well actually, let me get
some----
Ms. Hardaway. We are not calling them fake.
Ms. Richardson. We are not calling them fake.
Mr. Jeffries. Let me give you an opportunity to respond. I
am struggling. I am really just trying to figure out. Right?
Because you have an FEC document that clearly indicates that
the two of you were paid for field consulting by the Trump
campaign. That is just one document. There may be others that
are out there.
And presumably this was a document filed with genuineness
and authenticity by the campaign of the President that you so
love. And so I am just trying to figure out----
Ms. Hardaway. We understand that this was----
Mr. Jeffries [continuing]. Who is lying here? Is it the
Trump campaign, or----
Ms. Richardson. No. Wait, wait, wait.
Mr. Jeffries [continuing]. Is someone not telling the
truth?
Ms. Richardson. Nobody is lying. However, there may have
been a mistake from the Trump campaign when they wrote what the
$1,274.94 was for. Actually, this was because we was asked to
join the Women for Trump tour back in 2016. And Ms. Laura Trump
asked that our airline tickets be refunded back to us because
we paid for those tickets when we went from New York to Ohio.
I have the email right here which substantiate what
happened on September 11th, whenever Laura Trump wrote to Alan
to tell them to reimburse us. So that $1,274----
Mr. Jeffries. I appreciate that explanation. Now let me
just ask you one final question----
Ms. Hardaway. No. It was for a reimbursement.
Mr. Jeffries. I understand.
Ms. Richardson. That is right. Not field consultant.
Ms. Hardaway. We have never been paid by the Trump
campaign.
Mr. Jeffries. I appreciate that, and I am just trying to
figure out whether, consistent with what the President
indicated, he urged you to monetize your support for him. And I
am just trying to figure out----
Ms. Hardaway. He urged us to monetize our platform and
there is nothing wrong with that. As you as an African-
American, you are not going to make us feel guilty because we
are going to get out here and we are going to take advantage of
these platforms and monetize, just like everybody else do.
I do not see you walking up to a white person and say,
``Oh, you should not be monetizing that.''
Mr. Jeffries. No. No.
Ms. Hardaway. So why are you, as an African-American----
Mr. Jeffries. Let me just----
Mrs. Roby [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Hardaway [continuing]. With us monetizing.
Mr. Jeffries. I respect your game.
Mrs. Roby. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Hardaway. It is not a game. It is not a game.
Mr. Jeffries. I am trying to get an understanding of
whether----
Mrs. Roby. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes. First, I want to thank Chairman
Goodlatte for calling this hearing and also being open to
listening to all of the witnesses' testimony here before the
committee today on this very important issue that we must get
right.
The rights we hold as Americans should be upheld whether we
are speaking words in an open forum, writing words in a book,
or typing words online. So we have to uphold our First
Amendment and its protections in all aspects of our society.
While I did not get the opportunity to ask my colleague,
Marsha Blackburn, a question, I am very glad that my friend and
colleague had the opportunity to come before our committee
today and discuss her own personal experience as well as her
work here in Congress to be an advocate for an open and fair
internet.
As Representative Blackburn explained, she had her pro-life
message about fighting the disgusting practice of the sale of
baby body parts stricken from Twitter because it was deemed
inflammatory and would cause a negative response.
It is appalling to see that the very unborn children who
cannot yet speak for themselves and has an advocate fighting
for them to only be erased by others. I am proud to be
unapologetically pro-life, and I strongly believe that our
online platforms must be neutral public forums which would
allow us to continue to speak out for the unborn.
I am glad that all of you are here today and have had the
chance to express your own unique circumstances with content
uploaded on various online platforms. Your perspective is
extremely valuable to this very important conversation.
I would like to direct my question to Mr. Chavern--did I
say that correctly--today. And I apologize, there are a lot of
hearings going on right now, so you have seen members come and
go. But I had the opportunity to hear firsthand from Michael
Galvin and Ray Kroft the president and editor respectively of
my hometown paper in Montgomery, Alabama, the Montgomery
Advertiser. And as members of the news media alliance they have
shared with me some of the concerns that you have expressed in
your testimony today.
I would like to ask you to use the remainder of my time to
expand upon how apps and tech platforms are impacting local and
regional journalism. With that said, before I turn it over to
you to finish out my time, I just think that this is a very
important conversation again, and I am grateful for the
opportunity.
I hope that this is the beginning of more conversations. As
we have seen across many different platforms, as technology
continues to progress it is important that Congress is
listening and taking notes.
And so, I will leave you the rest of my time to expand upon
your testimony, but although the chairman is not here, he knows
that I hope that we will continue to have more conversations
along these lines.
And again, I thank you each for being here with us today.
Mr. Chavern. Thank you very much. Very kind of you.
Fundamentally, as the communications and media world is
progressing, Google and Facebook are the primary distribution
mechanisms for news online. That is how people get their news.
But the rules under which Google and Facebook manage their
content emphasize low-quality news options and make it very
difficult for people who are actually in the business of
journalism and paying journalists and doing real reporting from
making that a sustainable business.
And if present trends continue, you have these huge
incentives for really low-quality, bad information online that
pushes out actually verified quality journalism. And that is
not just bad for our business. Right? That is extremely bad for
our civil society.
You know, we will get to a place--people's curiosity about
the world, what is happening in their communities, will always
be there. The question is what will satisfy it? Will actually
professional journalism satisfy it, or will it be free garbage
that feeds inherent need for people to feel passionate and
angry about something.
Mrs. Roby. So setting a good example--my time is about to
expire, but again, I look forward to continuing this
conversation down the road. And again, I appreciate you all
being here today.
Mr. Chavern. Thank you.
Mrs. Roby. I now recognize Mr. Lieu for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.
This is a stupid and ridiculous hearing. The only reason I
am still here is I want to enter some facts into the record; at
least try to salvage some of this hearing.
So, I want to put in the record an article from USA Today,
December 5, 2017. It talks about the top two U.S. elected
officials. Can I put that in the record? Okay. I will enter it
later.
The top three elected officials. Number one, Donald Trump;
number two, Vice President Pence; number three, Speaker Ryan.
The notion that social media is somehow censoring Conservative
folks is ridiculous. And three witnesses today have testified
that that is not happening. And we do not do laws by anecdote;
at least I hope I do not. And we should not.
But there is a more fundamental problem. The First
Amendment applies to the government. Can we just get that
clear? It does not apply to the strict content of private
companies. So let us just go through something very simple. And
I will ask you, Mr. Szoka. We do not tell Fox News what to
filter. Right?
Mr. Szoka. Correct.
Mr. Lieu. And we cannot tell Facebook what content to
filter; the government cannot. Right?
Mr. Szoka. Correct.
Mr. Lieu. That would just be flat out unconstitutional.
Right?
Mr. Szoka. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lieu. We cannot force Facebook to carry Diamond and
Silk if they choose not to. Is that right?
Mr. Szoka. Correct.
Mr. Lieu. You know, I have seen places that regulate
content on the internet and the media. North Korea, Russia,
Iran. We do not want to be like that. Why are we having a
hearing about regulating content? It is unconstitutional to
begin with. But let us go a little further into this.
Everyone has a right to monetize. So Facebook monetizes.
You know how they do--you know how I can get stuff out on
Facebook and make sure lots of people see it? I pay for it. You
pay for ads. And then they send it out. They do not care. The
notion that somehow Facebook has to carry certain people and
promote them is ridiculous. They do not have to do that.
Twitter does not have to--these are private companies. They are
not like UPS or FedEx. They are like publishers. They are like
the media. And the fact that we are here debating should we
regulate content of the internet is completely ridiculous.
I do not know why the Republicans want to even think about
doing this. What makes America great is we get to say stuff and
not have the government intervene. And yes, do I think it is
bad that there is no regulation on the internet? Probably. But
you know what is far worse? Is to have the government regulate
it. Who is going to decide? How do we even write a bill about
how we force Facebook to carry certain people or not? Or
Twitter to carry certain people or not? Or to promote people
more or less? I do not know how you could write a bill like
that.
And this entire hearing makes no constitutional sense to
me. So I want to get some more facts into the record here. So
Mr. Szoka, the Communications Decency Act. It is true, is it
not, that that is largely one of the things that caused the
internet to expand and grow?
Mr. Szoka. It is the law that made the internet possible.
Mr. Lieu. And one of the prime features of that act is we
are not going to go ahead and regulate and sue companies based
on content. Is that not right?
Mr. Szoka. That was a Republican idea in 1996.
Mr. Lieu. Exactly. And when we tried this regulation of the
media through this stupid fairness doctrine, it was Reagan that
said, as you said, it should go into the trash of history.
Right?
Mr. Szoka. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lieu. I always thought that the Republicans stood for a
limited government; not having the government intervene into
the aspects of private companies. I do not know why we are here
at a Republican controlled judiciary committee talking about
intervening into what Google or Facebook or Twitter or any
other type of community should do or should not do. We should
let the marketplace and ideas go out there.
But guess what? If Facebook is not into that, if they want
to write algorithms that promote certain things--let's say they
want to write an algorithm that promotes cats. Can the
government stop them from doing that?
Mr. Szoka. Thankfully not.
Mr. Lieu. And let's say Facebook figures out, you know,
promoting cats gets a lot more people to sign on to Facebook
than promoting Diamond and Silk. Can the government intervene
and stop Facebook from doing that?
Mr. Szoka. No.
Mr. Lieu. And let's say Twitter figures out, you know, we
are going to promote nice, cuddly images of furry animals
rather than dismembered body parts. Can the government say you
can not do that?
Mr. Szoka. No.
Mr. Lieu. And let's say Google has decided, you know, we
are just not going to carry people that talk about Pizzagate
anymore. Can the government say you cannot do that?
Mr. Szoka. No.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. I yield back.
Mr. Rothfus [Presiding]. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair recognizes themselves for 5 minutes.
Mr. Szoka, you submitted testimony. In your testimony you
gave a thoughtful analysis of congressional intent. Can you
describe the approach courts have taken to determining when
interactive computer service providers have immunity under
section 230?
Mr. Szoka. Thank you, Congressman. That is an extremely
thoughtful question. This is exactly where people get confused.
Section 230 is not an absolute immunity. It does not
exclude criminal prosecution, and it depends on two things.
First of all, you are only immune against civil litigation or
State criminal prosecution for content created by third
parties. Once you take a role in helping to create the content,
once you become responsible for development of that content,
even in part, you are no longer immune.
So if Facebook starts actively creating content or editing
user content in a way that changes meaning, or creates its own
political content as it creates videos today, none of that is
protected by section 230.
Mr. Rothfus. Is there consensus among the courts on that
analysis?
Mr. Szoka. This is crystal clear. The courts have touched
upon the term neutrality, but if you read those cases, it is
very clear that they meant something completely different. What
they meant was that the tools, for example, that Roommates.com
used were tools that were not ``neutral'' because they required
users to actually commit housing discrimination. That was a
nonneutral search tool, but that is very different from
political neutrality.
The whole point of the statute is to give service providers
immunity in making decisions about removing objectionable
content. That is crystal clear.
Mr. Rothfus. Well how does--again, neutrality does not
appear in the statute. But how does it factor in to 230?
Mr. Szoka. Well, if anything, section 230 is designed to
encourage nonneutrality, to say to service providers, website
operators, that they can make whatever decisions they want
about removing content, and it is up to them. The only----
Mr. Rothfus. Do you ever cross a line, though? Does it ever
cross a line where an algorithm or something can be doing that?
Mr. Szoka. There is one other line in the statute, which is
that the immunity we are talking about here, section
230(c)(2)(a), requires good faith. There is not a lot of case
law on that because most of the case law is on the prime
immunity, 230(c)(1). But good faith has been--for example, the
courts have said things like if you were acting in
anticompetitive ways, that would not prevent an antitrust suit
against you.
But there is no case law to suggest that good-faith
requirement requires political neutrality. And I think that
implying that would be unconstitutional. It would put the
government in the position of determining what speech is
appropriate and what speech is not.
Mr. Rothfus. One of the things that, you know, I have been
concerned about is the violent and extremist content that is
out there. Your testimony referenced a news story that Facebook
added 3,000 employees last year to help screen for violence.
Again, this is an issue that we have in our culture.
What is your assessment of social media platforms'
screening procedures for filtering and removing content that
displays extremist or violent content?
Mr. Szoka. That they probably need to do more. I am a civil
Libertarian, but as Congressman Lieu mentioned, this is not an
issue of the First Amendment. I think these platforms have a
moral responsibility to filter out content like that. And that
is why section 230 is there, so they can make those decisions
without fearing increased legal liability.
But it is not for the government to dictate to them how
they do so.
Mr. Rothfus. You know, one of the things I have seen over
the last 10, 15 years in our culture is this demonization,
where the right demonizes the left, or the left demonizes the
right. You cannot even have a policy difference anymore.
And I am wondering, Ms. Hardaway and Ms. Richardson, do you
feel as though you have been demonized?
Ms. Hardaway. Oh, absolutely. Our brand has been tarnished;
we have been lied on; they are saying it is a Facebook hoax.
This is not a hoax. People's lives and livelihood have been
damaged from what these giant techs do to people. They pull
rugs from up under them. And then I hear people say well, oh,
this is a private entity. This is not public.
Well they went public in 2012.
Mr. Rothfus. This is a separate issue. There is a cultural
thing going on out there where it is not okay just to have a
disagreement anymore.
Ms. Hardaway. Right. Right.
Mr. Rothfus. You know, people have legitimate policy
disagreements in our country.
Ms. Richardson. If this was a platform for all ideas, then
anything about my political--I should not be categorized
through Facebook based on my political affiliation.
Ms. Hardaway. Right.
Ms. Richardson. There should not be a mechanism placed
there with Facebook to say what my political affiliation is.
Ms. Hardaway. And we should start learning how to agree to
disagree so that we can get along in this world, so that we
will not bicker back and forth. We should use this here as a
bipartisan effort to bridge the gap so that we all could have
free speech. And we should act like it does not exist. We
should act like that we are not being censored. That is what
really irritates me and infuriates me.
Mr. Rothfus. My time is expired. The chair recognizes the
gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Raskin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. I wanted to
echo our colleague, Mr. Lieu, and saying that I am a little bit
astonished that we have descended to the level of political
theater and spectacle in this committee when there are so many
important issues that we have not dealt with. For example, a
universal criminal mental background check on firearm
purchases, which is supported by 97 percent of the people, or
what we can do to defend the Mueller investigation against
continuing political attacks.
But in any event, we are where we are. And I wanted to
start with something Mr. Gohmert had said. He quoted a Fox News
story about apparent reprisals or intimidation against a
Facebook employee for political purposes. And then I quickly
pulled up an article about political intimidation or reprisals
against a Fox News employee for political reasons because she
wanted to do reporting about climate change.
Is there anybody on the panel who thinks that the
government should be compelling Fox News to allow for the use
of the words climate change or for stories about climate change
if they do not want to run it? Is there anybody thinks that
that is the role of the government? Okay.
And is there anybody who thinks it is the role of the
government to be compelling Facebook to follow some other
ideological or political policy? Okay.
So we all seem to agree, then, that the First Amendment is
what operates in this field. And then the question of the
government's role turns on the role of Section 230 of the
Communications Decency Act, to which we have started to
discuss.
As I understand it, there is two parts to it. One is that
the internet service providers and social media are not legally
responsible for third-party content. But the other part of it
is that they are not responsible if they decide to censor
content based on it being pornographic, vulgar, profane, or--I
think it is written in very vague, broad terms--or any other
objectionable reason.
I wonder if anybody wants to quickly opine on the
constitutionality of that provision, because essentially what
we are doing is we are taking what we have defined as a media
entity that is protected by the First Amendment in other
contexts, but then we are uniquely and selectively insulating
them from legal liability for certain kinds of things, even not
just in the case, I think, Mr. Szoka, you are talking about,
where they did not know about what was going on, but if they do
know what is going on, they could still be insulated legally
from it.
And I wonder if anyone thinks that that creates
constitutional due process problems from the standpoint of
someone who believes they have been libeled, or someone who
thinks that they have otherwise been a victim of illegal
conduct by one of the covered entities. If both of you take a
shot at it.
Mr. Szoka. So I take your point. I want to emphasize here
that section 230 does not stop anyone from suing the person who
has defamed them. So that is just off the table.
The question is can you hold a third party responsible.
And I would just emphasize that Congress understood that if
you held the third party responsible, you would discourage them
from being Good Samaritans.
Mr. Raskin. But that is true of newspapers and TV just as
well. I mean in New York Times v. Sullivan, the Supreme Court
said the New York Times could be held accountable if it knew
that it was publishing defamatory content.
This seems to insulate the internet providers even when
they know that something, for example, is defamatory, saying
well, they have got a right to publish it anyway.
Mr. Szoka. And the crucial difference here is the Congress
understood in the bipartisan bill of 1996 that if you treated
online service providers as if they were newspapers, at the
scale of the internet where you could have billions of users
and decisions that are made in real time, that you would not be
able to have the newspaper screen content the way that service
providers online screen content, the way that newspapers screen
letters to the editor, because of the scale involved. And that
as a practical matter, you would simply see online discussion
of controversial topics cease. That user forums would no longer
be available.
Mr. Raskin. But you would agree, then, that does make it
sound a lot more like a public utility, the way that Ms.
Hardaway and Ms. Richardson are talking about it. They are
making it sound there as if well, we are going to create
special rules for them because everybody uses it and the volume
of traffic is such----
Mr. Szoka. No, sir. This protection applies to websites
large and small. The smallest blog is actually the best, sir.
They are the ones that need section 230.
Mr. Raskin. No. I agree. It is all the blogs. But it is on
the internet as opposed to, you know, the newspapers are
responsible for what they publish, whether it is the New York
Times or it is a community newspaper; whether it is a big
reporter or small reporter.
Mr. Waldman. If I may, I respect Mr. Szoka's opinion. And
Mr. Szoka is one of our greatest experts on section 230; he
works on it a lot.
I have a slightly different view. I think his history is
right. One of the reasons why Congress got together back in the
1990s to make this law, those reasons do not really apply. The
internet was quite different in the mid-1990s than it is now.
We have a far more mature and a technologically different world
that minimal changes to section 230 would not upend these kind
of--not upend the kind of robust internet speech world that we
have now.
It would, however, allow some changes; would, however, pull
back on this overbroad interpretation that the courts gave
right after section 230 and allow more marginalized voices to
have themselves heard.
Mr. Rothfus. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
recognizes the gentlewoman from Washington, Ms. Jaypal, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here. I very much appreciate it.
I will say that I share my colleague's frustrations that
this committee has turned into a bit of a theater, and I am
embarrassed, quite honestly, that this is where we are as a
Judiciary Committee with the tremendous responsibilities that
we have.
I would remind the public that the Senate Judiciary
Committee literally just approved, in a 14 to 7 vote,
bipartisan legislation that protects special counsel Robert
Mueller's investigation. That is what the Senate Judiciary
Committee did in a bipartisan vote, because the Senate, on both
sides of the aisle, seems to understand that we have deep
responsibilities here as a committee.
And for this committee to have a hearing that is supposedly
on Conservative biases has allowed some important information
to emerge, but in completely the wrong frame. We could be
discussing serious issues around these platforms, and as we
have been having some discussion with some of our witnesses,
how do we address some of these big questions? Because really,
there are tradeoffs; there are pros and cons. And we have
consistently had to balance how we think about free speech,
which has been a preeminent right in this country, with some of
the challenges that come with that free speech.
And so, Mr. Chairman, we have submitted on our side
numerous requests and letters to have this committee focus on
hearings around Russian interference into our elections. We
have consistently asked for this committee to have hearings
about the fact that 17 intelligence agencies in this country
concluded that there was interference in our elections.
We have consistently asked for--and I asked Attorney
General Jeff Sessions when he testified before us--can we count
on you to work on election security so that we can ensure that
our elections are protected. And he said yes, we need to do
that. We have not done that yet.
That still has not happened. We have not even had a hearing
on that topic. You know, and we could be having a hearing as
the Senate did on this bipartisan legislation. We have the same
bipartisan legislation introduced in the House. But we have yet
to see any movement in this committee on that.
And if we were truly serious about looking at how these
filtering practices affect people on both sides, as you ladies
said, that this should not be a partisan issue, then we would
have not just Diamond and Silk here, but we would have Black
Lives Matter, civil rights groups, groups representing Muslims,
immigrants, the LGBT community. Because if we are going to talk
about supposed censorship, not just of Conservative voices,
then we should talk about how this is appearing on the other
side.
We should be, for example, talking about things that are
discussed in this letter that I would like to ask unanimous
consent, Mr. Chairman, to introduce this letter to the record.
This is a letter from numerous civil rights groups to Mr.
Zuckerberg and Ms. Sandberg about their concerns about
censorship--or promotion of certain views on Facebook and what
Facebook's responsibility should be.
Mr. Rothfus. Without objection.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And in this, though,
they take a very different approach to what we have seen from
Diamond and Silk. They actually say look, we understand this is
complicated. We would like to discuss this with you. We would
like to address these concerns in a setting that allows us to
have a real conversation. They are not trying to use this to
get more followers to their sites; they are not trying to
monetize in different ways, you know, what is happening on
these platforms. But they are saying let's have a real
discussion. And I wish we were doing that today.
There has actually been great testimony. There are things
each of you have said that I really agree with. And I would
like to turn to Mr. Waldman, because I was reading your written
testimony, and in your written testimony you note that social
media content posted by people belonging to marginalized groups
are often ``squeezed at both ends'' by content moderation.
Can you just explain a little bit more? And we do not have
much time, but you have about 45 seconds or so.
Mr. Waldman. Thank you. Thank you for the opportunity to
expand on that.
Very briefly, the point I was trying to make is that when
there is too much content moderation, or too much
``censorship'', the voices that tend to be more victimized by
that censorship or by that moderation, tend to be marginalized
voices; the clear voices, women, those who are dissenting from
a majority view.
When there is too little content moderation, when you turn
platforms into the worst darkest corners of fortune, it is
anyone who has the largest and loudest megaphone that gets to
control the narrative. And that also victimizes and silences
women and LGBT individuals through harassment.
So this story, if we are going to talk about content
moderation, the focus I think needs to be on how do we get
voices that are so rarely heard, marginalized voices, to be
heard on these platforms.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you.
Mr. Rothfus. The gentlewoman's time has expired. The chair
recognizes the gentleman, Mr. Cicilline, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
first associate myself with the remarks of many of my
colleagues that the Judiciary Committee that has the
responsibility of addressing legislation to protect the special
counsel investigation, comprehensive immigration reform, common
sense gun safety legislation, protecting our electoral system,
and criminal justice reform, just to name a few. And we cannot
seem to get a hearing and a serious examination of any of those
issues, but here we are today.
And it has been 2 weeks since Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg
appeared before our colleagues in the Senate Judiciary
Committee, the Senate Committee on Commerce, and the House
Committee on Energy and Commerce in the wake of the Cambridge
Analytical scandal.
It has been over a month since Facebook met with our staff
and left many questions related to this scandal unanswered. As
I noted in the context of request that Mr. Zuckerberg appear
before this committee on this matter, Facebook's breach of
America's trust is a direct consequence of its dominance online
that must be investigated by this committee.
More than 200 million Americans have Facebook accounts, and
three-quarters of them visit the site daily. And more than half
of Americans access news through Facebook and its subsidiaries,
Instagram and WhatsApp, and controls nearly a quarter of the
digital advertising market, which is highly concentrated.
Facebook also collects and mines every person's data across
the internet, even for people without Facebook accounts, and
creates shadow profiles with untold data points about people
who have deleted their accounts or never signed up for Facebook
in the first place.
At the same time, Facebook has become too big and complex
for any executive team to manage responsibly; has provided a
back door through which America's enemies can attack our vital
social and democratic institutions as the nonpartisan Open
Markets Institute has noted.
We should have an active role in examining these issues to
ensure that our system of competition is working effectively.
Increasingly it is clear that privacy and competition are
interdependent conditions for protecting rights online.
Rather than examining these serious issues and considering
legislation intended to address these concerns, this committee
is holding a hearing intended to perpetuate an entirely
debunked narrative about two online social media personalities.
This is a sad day for our committee. Nonetheless, I will do
my best in my questions to make this time useful. So I am going
to turn first to you, Mr. Chavern. I would like to begin by
asking you about the impact of Facebook's gatekeeper power over
America's access to trustworthy sources of news.
And thank you for your reference to our legislation, and
what affect does this centralization of America's access to
quality journalism have on public trust, the marketplace of
ideas, and our democracy. And I know you represent a number of
publications around the country, so your views on this are
particularly important.
Mr. Chavern. Thank you very much. If I could give you an
example. Recently Facebook announced that they were going to
accord higher priority to ``local news''. That may or may not
be a good thing. It will certainly change the news that people
are exposed to, and it will have economic impacts, maybe good
or bad, on a whole range of publishers.
What do we not know? We do not know what priority means. Is
that a little bit or a lot? How does that work? We do not know
what local means, by the way. And we have no say or insight or
ability to have a conversation about it. They established the
rules in very vague ways and then apply them to, in particular,
what I care about, the news publishing business, and change the
news experience for citizens across the U.S.
Mr. Cicilline. And how would the Journalism Competition and
Preservation Act, which I introduced and you referenced, allow
publishers to band together to negotiate with platforms to
improve the quality, accuracy, attribution, and
interoperability of news help protect a free and diverse press?
Mr. Chavern. Well the one great thing we do as an industry
is we provide a lot of great quality content on to the
platforms. One thing we cannot do under the current law is
collectively talk to them about things like what just happened
with the algorithm. And the Act would allow us to do that and
even the playing field even just somewhat to a better future
for journalism.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. Professor Waldman, you noted in
your written testimony that a recurring theme of Mr.
Zuckerberg's testimony was a desire for Facebook to give
Americans more control over their data. In fact, you note that
he used the word control 54 times in his testimony.
But is the truth not that Facebook and other technology
companies have the final say about whether people can move
their key information to competing service, or communicate
across platforms. And do you agree that limitations on people's
control over their data can block new competitors, including
platforms that might be more protective of consumer's privacy
and give consumers more control of their data from entering the
market.
Mr. Waldman. I agree. I think Facebook's obsession with, or
Mr. Zuckerberg's obsession with giving people control is
completely illusory. In fact, what he means is allowing us to
click left to right, or toggle left to right on an ``I Agree''
button about terms of service, and then we agree, give over
control, and then we never have control again.
Mr. Cicilline. And do you agree that giving people the
tools to easily switch and communicate across services with the
right security protection in place will remove barriers to
meaningful choice and competition on line, that idea of
portability.
Mr. Waldman. I think that is worth further exploring. And I
think Europe, in its general data protection regulation, has
been exploring that for years. And that is going to take effect
in just under a month.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you so much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Rothfus. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
recognizes the gentlewoman from Florida, Ms. Demings, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Demings. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
to our witnesses for being with us.
Before I get into my question, I cannot agree more with my
colleagues from Rhode Island and Washington State and probably
others who made the statement before I arrived that we have
some critical big issues that we deal with on this committee
and, you know, Russian interference, protecting the special
counsel, election security, but here we are. So thank you for
being here at our invitation.
My question is for you, Dr. Waldman. There are numerous
instances of reporting inauthentic accounts on Facebook and
various other social media platforms. In most cases, this
reporting is based on publicly available open-source
information.
If researchers that are unaffiliated with these social
media platforms are able to identify so many examples of
inauthentic accounts on public data sources, should the
companies not, themselves, have access to far more information,
including metadata associated with the creation of a page
profile account or bought, that they could use to identify and
remove inauthentic accounts?
Mr. Waldman. Absolutely. And we know that they have this
ability. A couple of years ago Facebook decided to aggressively
enforce its real name registration policy of all communities
against drag queens, because they were using their drag names
as opposed to their real names.
So we absolutely know that Facebook has the ability to
identify what are real accounts, what are not real accounts,
and when accounts violate their terms of service.
Ms. Demings. Could you give, based on your knowledge and
experience with this, could you give some examples of just what
Facebook could be doing more of to combat this problem?
Mr. Waldman. Sure. So there are multiple problems that I
think Facebook has the tools to combat. So with respect to fake
news, the proliferation of fake news on the platform, Facebook
could be doing a lot more about identifying where the money
from these posts come from; and identify, oh, this is a foreign
government paying for it, this is a foreign entity paying for
something, and then not allowing those sources to exist.
There are also studies done by professors at Northeastern
University as well as the University of Indiana that have
identified that a lion's share of fake news comes from just a
handful of sources, most of which are on the right. And if all
Facebook did was say these sources which are well known as
proliferating rumor, conspiracy theory, et cetera, are simply
not going to be allowed on our platform, we would go so far to
resolving the problem of fake news and its deleterious effect
on our civic discourse.
Ms. Demings. Thank you so much, doctor. And with that, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you. And I guess I get a couple of
questions here. So, Mr. Waldman, Professor, you say basically
the whole problem is right-wingers?
Mr. Waldman. Oh, I never said that. I said that there are--
--
Mr. Rothfus. You said if you eliminated this few group of
people on the right, that it would go a long way toward----
Mr. Waldman. It would. So the key point there is going a
long way, not that it would solve the whole problem.
Mr. Rothfus. Is a long way one percent, 99 percent?
Mr. Waldman. The researchers at the University of Indiana
identified that 72 percent, if I remember correctly, of fake
news, the proliferator on Facebook during the 2016 election
came from just a handful of sources, I believe it was eight,
seven of which were identified with far rightwing ideas.
Mr. Rothfus. Seventy-two percent sound right to you, or is
it 72 percent of a particular group of ``fake news'' studied?
Mr. Waldman. I am not an expert in this area, but the main
point here is that this is a problem; these sites have to
grapple with themselves. And quite frankly, I do not think this
is a job for Congress, to be interrogating websites as to their
content management practices.
Mr. Rothfus. You know, we do not build aircraft here, but
the FAA every time, and the National Transportation Safety and
so on, every time there is a plane crash, we have an obligation
to look into it. So I think for our two star witnesses here, do
you think that we have a requirement to look into when things
go wrong, essentially a plane crash of objectivity by new
media?
Ms. Hardaway. I do, especially with us being Americans. And
these are the representatives that are supposed to represent
Americans. And to offend us and make us think that we do not
matter, this is exactly why we voted for someone like Donald
Trump. This is exactly why. Because of stuff like this here.
This here, what we are talking about, is real. It was done
to us. And yes, it is your obligation to look into this, to
make sure that it is fair across the board.
Ms. Richardson. That is right. And if it is done to us, it
could be done to you tomorrow. So it is for everybody, not just
Diamond and Silk.
Mr. Rothfus. I think you make a good point. The professor
has his opinion and his facts, his sampling. But in the case of
Mr. Zuckerberg, when he said the Facebook team made an
enforcement error with regard to what happened to you two, what
do you think the error was? And I will just give you some
multiple choices. Do you think it was a coding error in their
algorithm; human error; or an employment decision error?
Ms. Hardaway. It was an employment lie. It was a lie. A
straight up lie. And just to go back real quick with the
Congressional Black Caucus, the notice that they wrote whenever
they wrote to Mark Zuckerberg talking about censorship with the
black voices.
That letter was written August 22, 2016 to Mark Zuckerberg
about censoring black voices. I just want to make sure that is
entered in. But this goes clear across the board, clear across
the board. This here was a lie. We have been back and forth
with Mark Zuckerberg and Facebook for 6 months 29 days 5 hours
40 minutes and 43 seconds, talking about----
Mr. Rothfus. You are accurate----
Ms. Hardaway. We have checks, we have emails back and
forth.
Ms. Richardson. Back and forth. They never gave us an
answer. They put restrictions on our page; they censored our
voices; they did not let our followers and our likes get their
notifications; we did not show up in their news fake feeds. And
that is a fact. And it is being done to other people as well.
Ms. Hardaway. Exactly.
Mr. Rothfus. So if I can summarize in my usual way,
basically your free speech was limited in a modern age in which
Facebook is a huge part of free speech, is it not?
Ms. Hardaway. Exactly.
Ms. Richardson. It was censored with those algorithms that
they put on our pages.
Ms. Hardaway. And it is going to come down to the point
that if measures are not put in place, we are going to have a
dictator here.
Ms. Richardson. That is right. Because, see, Facebook is an
entity that he can control the whole world. So if you are
taking and you are censoring some speech and letting others
rise, oh, we got dictatorship. This is not even. This is not an
even playing field.
And all we are asking, even out this playing field. Do not
silence some and uplift others. Even it out.
Ms. Hardaway. Especially having a bogus mechanism put in
place that categorize people's political affiliation. And you
have me categorized as very Liberal in my personal account. And
we are Conservatives.
Ms. Richardson. That is right.
Mr. Rothfus. You know, it is one of those real challenges
when they label anybody rather than allow each and every
individual belief. I always say, you know, what would happen to
poor Teddy Roosevelt if he came back today, because he was a
proud Liberal and did a lot of things that were very
individualistic.
Well my time will be the last time, so I will run over a
little bit. Professor, you know, I cast a hypothetical for a
moment and I want to make sure I give you an opportunity. When
you talk about the study out of Indiana and 72 percent, is it
reasonable to believe that is 72 percent of a very small amount
of what somebody decided was fake news; in other words,
President Trump finds an awful lot more fake news perhaps than
other people do. How do you know that they considered the
entire universe of deliberate inaccurate activity? And I put
that to any of our witnesses.
Mr. Waldman. Well it seems as if we exist in a world right
now where everyone's opinion about something can be considered
fact and that is simply not true. The way social science
research works is that you identify a corpus of data, and then
you do a study on it, and then you analyze that information.
So in these studies, what social scientists have done was
say use websites like Snopes or PolitiFact, or websites that
are recognized by people on both sides of the aisle as doing a
good job in identifying what news story is say true, or what
news story is a conspiracy theory.
So based on that analysis or categorization of the data,
then they determine what is and what is not.
Mr. Chavern. Yes, sir. I think this focus on averages
misses the reality of how this works. So what actually happens
on a day-to-day level is that users drive a lot of this. Users
can complain; they can report content that they think is fake.
And if someone reports, for example, as Gateway Pundit did that
the students in Florida were actors, were faking the whole
thing, right? Someone is going to report that. And it is not
surprising that that site is going to be downgraded because
users are reporting their content is fake.
These ladies have reported Pizzagate as a true fact, and
they have spread misinformation that has caused people to
report them. It is not for me to say whether they should be
taken down, and frankly, it is not for them to say.
Mr. Rothfus. I want to understand that in an organization,
Facebook, that has no fact checking the way a normal historic
newspaper would, where they actually hire people to ``fact
check'' complaints that can come from self-serving individuals
can drive the decision that something that somebody has done is
wrong. And that is what you are saying is it is based on the
opt in of people. Is that really fact checking?
I mean, to be honest, the New York Times printed 17
separate lies about me and retracted four of them, and the only
reason they did not retract the others is they called it
essentially poetic license when they said that my district
office was overlooking a golf course and a country club. Well,
you could not see it from the building. But if you were on
Google Earth, you could see that there was a golf course less
than a mile away. Unfortunately, I was overlooking a freeway
with a lot of freeway noise. And they said yeah. But, you know,
it had to read poetically.
Now if that is the New York Times, you are telling me that
people who simply are angry and complain is the way we are
going to get to fairness. Is the original intent not--and I am
going to ask a purely First Amendment question--that free
speech is a right to say things which people do not like, and
which at the time people may say is inaccurate, such as the
world is round; such as bleeding people is not good for health.
There are plenty of controversial things that were considered
untrue at the time they were said.
Mr. Chavern, you look like you are finally going to come in
and join this for a moment.
Mr. Chavern. Yeah. Happy to. I think--listen, and these
companies have rules that prioritize some kinds of speech and
not others, and they are allowed to have the rules. But you are
also allowed to ask how the rules work, and ask if they are
fair and what impacts they have on society. And these are not
startup companies anymore. They are massive enterprises that
control people's access to----
Mr. Rothfus. Are they not effectively monopolies? Do they
not have monopolistic power? If you are not on Facebook, you
may in fact be unelectable or unheard-of or and the like?
Mr. Chavern. Well there is definitely an argument that
their access to data makes it very hard for anybody to compete
with them. I mean how are you ever going to get enough data to
compete with them?
But the reality, just look at facts of the role they play
in the economy. Look at the facts of the role they play in the
news business. They are the primary distribution mechanism
online between these publishers and readers. And their rules
decide how that news is delivered.
Mr. Rothfus. Ladies, you know, one of the amazing things to
me is that nobody seems to want to call this very simply free
speech except you two; that understand that because you happen
to be Conservative, you found yourself--your speech being
deliberately looked at much with greater scrutiny; maybe not
exclusive to somebody on the left, but certainly you have been
poorly treated. And I think that has been well documented.
Ms. Hardaway. If I can also add that, you know, these
platforms allow us the opportunity to build our brand on their
platform. We do not solicit our page. People come to our page
to like and follow our page because they like and want to hear
our content.
It is not fair for someone else to come deliberately to our
page, thumb down our page, and then the repercussion of that is
our page being blocked. If anything, Facebook, YouTube,
Twitter, and these other entities should put in measures that
the person blocked themselves from seeing our content if they
do not want to see it, hear it, or read it.
Mr. Rothfus. Let me ask you one question, and I think it
was asked before I came back from--and I apologize because I
was at the White House with 45 Wounded Warriors being honored.
So I did miss the first part of this for a very good and
appropriate cause.
But, you know, there has been the question of whether or
not you ``put up fake news.'' Ask you straightforward, have you
ever done something that knowing more now you might have
written it differently?
Ms. Hardaway. Well, we do not--no. Because we normally make
videos. And these articles are what third-party articles that
we may put up occasionally. But we normally make videos. We do
our Facebook live. And we talk about politics and what is going
on in the world. We do whatever the next man is doing.
Ms. Richardson. And we are basically stating our opinion
about what is going on.
Mr. Rothfus. So it is fair to say that except for
expressing your First Amendment rights to an opinion, you have
never knowingly put up anything that was false or deliberate.
As far as I know you have never been sued for any kind of
defamation and the like?
Ms. Hardaway. Because anything that we put out, if we are
not sure-sure about--allege. I will always allege, unlike some
of these fake news sources that just put it out about us. But
they do not allege nothing, as if it is true. And I am, like,
none of that is the truth. None of that is true.
Mr. Rothfus. But it is only fact when MSNBC says it is
fact. Right?
Ms. Hardaway. No.
Ms. Richardson. According to the left.
Mr. Rothfus. Well, I want to thank all of you for your
indulgence for an extra 7 minutes, which is the benefit to
going last.
I do not think this is the last we are going to hear of it.
I will tell you, in closing, that I think that we are going to
have to--Congress and this committee are going to have to make
sure that the First Amendment rights of people who choose to
use large-scale, very powerful medium that is theoretically
open to everyone, that we have to ensure that it is. We do that
with broadcasts for elections. To be honest, I mentioned Teddy
Roosevelt.
You know, there was a time when Andrew Carnegie thought
that it was just fine to decide whose ore he wanted to make
sure could not be delivered on his railroad until they went
bankrupt and then sold to him.
Monopolies can gain a tremendous amount of power and
advantage if they are not stopped early. And a monopoly of
freedom of speech is, by definition, the most dangerous.
So, on behalf of the committee and our chairman, I would
say that this is not the last hearing we are going to have. And
I thank you all for your participation. We stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:02 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]