- TACKLING HUMAN TRAFFICKING: ASSESSING FEDERAL, STATE, AND LOCAL INFORMATION-SHARING EFFORTS
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
TACKLING HUMAN TRAFFICKING: ASSESSING
FEDERAL, STATE, AND LOCAL INFORMATION-SHARING EFFORTS
=======================================================================
FIELD HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INTELLIGENCE AND
COUNTERTERRORISM
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
OCTOBER 28, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-45
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
40-461 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Rogers, Alabama
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Peter T. King, New York
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
John Katko, New York
Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Mark Walker, North Carolina
J. Luis Correa, California
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Xochitl Torres Small, New Mexico
Debbie Lesko, Arizona
Max Rose, New York
Mark Green, Tennessee
Lauren Underwood, Illinois
Van Taylor, Texas
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan
John Joyce, Pennsylvania
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri
Dan Crenshaw, Texas
Al Green, Texas
Michael Guest, Mississippi
Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Dina Titus, Nevada
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California
Val Butler Demings, Florida
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Chris Vieson, Minority Staff Director
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND COUNTERTERRORISM
Max Rose, New York, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mark Walker, North Carolina,
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Ranking Member
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan
Peter T. King, New York
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex
Mark Green, Tennessee
officio)
Mike Rogers, Alabama (ex officio)
Vacancy, Subcommittee Staff Director
Mandy Bowers, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Statements
The Honorable Max Rose, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Intelligence
and Counterterrorism:
Oral Statement.................................................
1
Prepared Statement.............................................
1
The Honorable Mark Walker, a Representative in Congress From the
State of North Carolina, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Intelligence and Counterterrorism:
Oral Statement.................................................
2
Prepared Statement.............................................
4
Witnesses
Ms. Christine S. Long, Executive Director, North Carolina Human
Trafficking Commission, North Carolina Judicial Branch:
Oral Statement.................................................
6
Prepared Statement.............................................
8
Mr. Ronnie A. Martinez, Special Agent in Charge, Homeland
Security Investigations, Charlotte Field Office, U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Department of Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
10
Prepared Statement.............................................
12
Mr. Carl L. Wall, II, Special Agent in Charge, North Carolina
State Bureau of Investigation, Human Trafficking Unit:
Oral Statement.................................................
16
Prepared Statement.............................................
19
Ma. Aundrea Azelton, Chief Deputy, Randolph Country, North
Carolina Sheriff's Office:
Oral Statement.................................................
22
Prepared Statement.............................................
25
TACKLING HUMAN TRAFFICKING: ASSESSING FEDERAL, STATE, AND LOCAL
INFORMATION-SHARING EFFORTS
----------
Monday, October 28, 2019
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Intelligence
and Counterterrorism,
Greensboro, NC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:05 a.m., Old
County Courthouse, 301 West Market Street, Greensboro, North
Carolina, Hon. Max Rose (Chairman of the subcommittee)
presiding.
Present: Representatives Rose and Walker.
Mr. Rose. The Subcommittee on Intelligence and
Counterterrorism will come to order.
The subcommittee is meeting today to receive testimony on
tackling human trafficking, assessing Federal, State, and local
information-sharing efforts.
Before I pass this off to Ranking Member Walker, first of
all, thank you for being so hospitable to this New Yorker, and
if I may just take a point of privilege and say it has been an
incredible honor to serve with Ranking Member Walker.
You all have, I believe, one of if not the best Members of
Congress representing you, someone I learned from, someone it
is a great privilege and honor to work with, and I think we are
certainly making the country a better place.
So thank you for the great privilege of allowing him to
keep on coming back.
[The statement of Chairman Rose follows:]
Statement of Chairman Max Rose
October 28, 2019
I'm happy to be here in North Carolina--great to be here in your
beautiful State. You've treated this New Yorker well. And trust me,
it's always nice to leave the District of Columbia. It has been a
pleasure serving on the Intelligence and Counterterrorism Subcommittee
with my colleague and friend, Ranking Member Mark Walker.
It's so important to get out of the echo chamber of the District of
Columbia and hear from people across the country about the problems
they face. That's our duty as Members of Congress. Earlier this year,
in May, Ranking Member Walker joined me for a field hearing in my
district on Staten Island, where we heard from local officials about
the terrorism threats facing New York City. Today, we're coming to
Ranking Member Walker's neck of the woods to talk about the very
serious issue of human trafficking. Today's hearing is entitled
``Tackling Human Trafficking: Assessing Federal, State, and Local
Information Sharing Efforts.''
Today we will hear testimony from witnesses who are on the front
lines of the fight against human trafficking here in North Carolina. I
don't need to tell anyone that human trafficking is a huge problem.
There are an estimated 40.3 million victims of human trafficking world-
wide, of which more than 400,000 are believed to live in the United
States. That is a horrific statistic. We must do better. A study by
Polaris in 2018 showed that one of the biggest risk factors for being
trafficked is whether you've recently migrated or relocated. The second
biggest risk factor was substance abuse. The biggest takeaway, though,
is that there's no one profile that fits a victim of human trafficking,
although women and children have a higher risk of being trafficked.
There's no one profile for an individual who participates in
trafficking humans. And in the face of such a massive, diverse problem,
we really need a whole-of-society approach. From the Department of
Homeland Security all the way to local law enforcement, everyone has a
part to play. I understand that, in the last decade, the Department of
Homeland Security has unified its efforts to fight human trafficking
under the Blue Campaign. That includes the work being done by ICE
Homeland Security Investigations. I'd like to hear more about the Blue
Campaign today--about what's working, what challenges you face, and how
Congress might be able to help. I also believe that businesses must
play their part too. That's why I support legislation sponsored by my
fellow New Yorker, Representative Carolyn Maloney, the Business Supply
Chain Transparency on Trafficking and Slavery Act. It would force large
corporations--any company that makes more than $100 million a year--to
tell Americans, every year, what measures that company has taken to
identify and address conditions of forced labor, slavery, human
trafficking, and child labor within that company's supply chains.
Today, I want to hear from all of our witnesses about the quality
and frequency of information sharing between Federal, State, and local
officials. I also want to hear about how some of you may have worked
with businesses, here in North Carolina and across the country, to help
fight human trafficking from that end as well. Finally, I'd also like
to hear what recommendations you might have for Congress--or even for
other States, like my home State of New York--to strengthen the fight
against human trafficking.
Mr. Rose. With that, sir, I will recognize you for the
opening statement as this is your home territory.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Chairman Rose.
We may have to squeeze--get you a little barbecue today
before we get back to the District of Columbia. I don't know
how New Yorkers do barbecue but we have got a couple ways we do
it in North Carolina here.
But it is a privilege to work with you and getting to know
you the last couple of years, just your heart to get to,
really, the bottom line of these kinds of issues and a lot of
experience coming from New York specifically in this area, and
I appreciate the opportunity to work--appreciate the
opportunity to have you here in New York.
On behalf of my fellow North Carolinians, I would like to
welcome all of you today as well as the other Members of the
Subcommittee on Intelligence and Counterterrorism to my home
State.
I would also like to thank the Chairman for agreeing to
hold this important hearing on human trafficking. I believe
this is the first Federal hearing since 1921 here in central
North Carolina.
As you all know, human trafficking is a despicable crime
that continues to plague the Nation. Before I get into the
numbers, I also wanted to take just a moment and acknowledge
the incredible work of our armed services in taking out someone
who certainly was no stranger to human trafficking and that was
al-Baghdadi, the leader of ISIS.
I applaud, certainly, the administration and specifically
the great men and women in Special Forces and other--really,
other service men and women who support that to really make a
huge difference to eradicate such beings from the planet.
Human trafficking--let us look at a couple numbers here.
Since 2018 or in 2018, there were 10,949 human trafficking
cases that reported to the National Hotline.
Trafficking occurs in every State across the country. The
vast majority relate to sex trafficking and the victims in
women or girls.
Sadly, human trafficking is one of the fastest-growing
crimes in the United States. Our major highway system, our
agriculture economy, and a growing number of criminal gangs
have increased the prevalence of human trafficking within North
Carolina with some cases reported even in our district, and
there are some things that I am sure that Sheriff Sam Page from
Rockingham County here today with us can testify.
Last year, 287 cases of human trafficking were reported
through the hotline in North Carolina, ranking the State tenth
in the Nation.
This is a fraction of the cases reported in California,
Texas, Florida, and elsewhere, largely due to the efforts made
by stakeholders across the State to coordinate efforts, develop
training, and partner with victims services providers.
I will tell you there are some wonderful ladies on the
back--not the back row but sitting back there that we have
worked on several different State-wide occasions that are doing
incredible work not just on a State-sponsored thing but a lot
of the nonprofits that really make a difference in the lives.
Certainly, much more needs to be done to combat this
activity and I am proud that today's hearing can highlight the
important work that is going on across North Carolina.
Several State laws have been enacted, which is good,
including the permanent creation of the Human Trafficking
Commission, which is making annual recommendations to the State
legislature on additional authorities, and is working with the
State Bureau of Investigation to develop a State-wide training
program and best practices for law enforcement.
I have made combating human trafficking a priority in my
office from the very first day. I was proud to be the first
freshman of the 114th class to pass a bill through the House.
This bill, the Human Trafficking Detection Act of 2015,
works to train and inform DHS personnel to do better in
detecting and intersecting human traffickers as well as their
victims specific to their professional roles as well as the
making and the training curricula available to all State,
local, and private-sector partners.
I am interested in hearing from our witnesses today about
how the implementation of this law has assisted in the
cooperation with all levels of government in their efforts.
However, as legislators, we know there is much more that
needs to be done and must continue to work in a bipartisan
fashion to solve the complex problems related to human
trafficking and ensure those on the front lines have the
necessary tools that they need.
From talking with victims, advocacy groups, law
enforcement, and Government agencies across the State, there is
no doubt there is a need and a desire for more coordination,
training, public awareness, and victim services.
I look forward to hearing from our distinguished panel
today and learning about how Congress can even further assist
their on-going efforts to combat this international affliction.
This problem is bigger than any one jurisdiction's
resources.
Again, I want to thank Chairman Rose and Ms. Jackson Lee
for joining us today. I think Ms. Jackson Lee may not be here--
we are waiting on that--but for this important hearing.
I also want to express my sincere appreciation for the
witnesses both for appearing here today and for the work that
you do every day.
Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
[The statement of Ranking Member Walker follows:]
Statement of Honorable Mark Walker
October 28, 2019
On behalf of my fellow North Carolinians, I would like to welcome
Chairman Rose and the other Members of the Subcommittee on Intelligence
and Counterterrorism to my home State. I would also like to thank the
Chairman for agreeing to hold this important hearing on human
trafficking, a despicable crime that continues to plague the Nation.
In 2018, there were 10,949 human trafficking cases were reported
through the National hotline. Trafficking occurs in every State across
the country. The vast majority relate to sex trafficking and the
victims are women and girls.
Sadly, human trafficking is one of the fastest-growing crimes
within the United States. Our major highway system, our agricultural
economy, and a growing number of criminal gangs have increased the
prevalence of human trafficking within North Carolina, with some cases
reported in my district.
Last year, 287 cases of human trafficking were reported through the
hotline in North Carolina, ranking the State tenth in the Nation. This
is a fraction of the cases reported in California, Texas, Florida, and
elsewhere, largely due to the efforts made by stakeholders across the
State to coordinate efforts, develop training, and partner with victim
service providers.
While much more needs to be done to combat this activity, I am
proud that today's hearing can highlight the important work that is on-
going across North Carolina. Several State laws have been enacted,
including the permanent creation of the Human Trafficking Commission,
which is making annual recommendations to the State legislature on
additional authorities and is working with the State Bureau of
Investigation to develop State-wide training programs and best
practices for law enforcement.
I have made combatting human trafficking a priority in my time in
office. I was proud to be the first freshman of the 114th class to pass
a bill through the House. This bill, the Human Trafficking Detection
Act of 2015, works to train and inform DHS personnel to better detect
and intercept human traffickers and their victims, specific to their
professional roles, as well as making the training curricula available
to all State, local, and private-sector partners. I am interested in
hearing from our witnesses today about how the implementation of this
law has assisted in the cooperation with all levels of government in
their efforts.
However, as legislators, we know there is so much more that needs
to be done. We must continue to work in a bipartisan fashion to solve
the complex problems related to human trafficking and ensure those on
the front lines have the necessary tools they need. From talking with
victims, advocacy groups, law enforcement, and government agencies
across the State, there is no doubt that there is a need and desire for
more coordination, training, public awareness, and victim services.
I look forward to hearing from our distinguished panel and learning
about how Congress can assist their on-going efforts to combat this
international affliction. The problem is bigger than any one
jurisdiction's resources.
Again, I want to thank Chairman Rose and Ms. Jackson Lee for
joining me for this important hearing. I also want to express my
sincere appreciation for the witnesses, both for appearing here today
and for the work you do every day. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Ranking Member Walker.
Before I pass it back to you just to introduce the
witnesses, I would like to just certainly point to a few pieces
of legislation I think are of critical importance.
One is sponsored by my fellow New Yorker, Representative
Carolyn Maloney, the Business Supply Chain Transparency on
Trafficking and Slavery Act.
It would force large corporations--any company that makes
$100 million or more a year--to tell Americans every year what
measures the company has taken to identify and address
conditions of forced labor, slavery, human trafficking, and
child labor.
But beyond that, today I am eager to hear from the
witnesses as to how we can provide a whole-of-Government, a
whole-of-society approach to tackling this incredibly
difficult, incredibly complex problem that produces untold
levels of sorrow and misery, and I believe communities across
the country--I do not think that there is any community in the
United States of America that is not in some way, shape, or
form dealing with this problem.
Then, in addition, I am also interested to hear from our
witnesses today how we can use the tools of law enforcement
available to us but also how we can use the public health and
social service-based tools available to us as well to not only
address this problem and the consequences of it but to also
prevent it from arising in the first place.
So with that, Ranking Member, I will pass it back to you
again to introduce this exceptional panel of witnesses.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Chairman Rose. I appreciate the
courtesy of allowing me to introduce this impressive panel who,
collectively, I think, together--we added it up--has over a
hundred years of public service. We thank you for--each of you
for that.
First, we will hear from Ms. Christine Shaw Long. Ms. Long
serves as the executive director of the North Carolina Human
Trafficking Commission for the North Carolina Judicial Branch.
She previously worked and spent 15 years with the Salvation
Army of Wake County as the director of Social Ministries. She
also served 4 years on the North Carolina Human Trafficking
Commission and on the Salvation Army's North American Anti-
Human Trafficking Council.
In 2017, she was presented with the National Salvation Army
Excellence in Social Work award. Ms. Long, thank you for your
years of dedicated service to human trafficking victims.
Second, we will hear from Mr. Ronnie Martinez. Mr. Martinez
is the special agent in charge of the Charlotte field office
for Homeland Security Investigations within the Department of
Homeland Security.
Mr. Martinez spent over 27 years of law enforcement--has
over 27 years of law enforcement experience. Mr. Martinez has
also held several leadership positions within HSI, including
Missouri, Washington, and California.
Mr. Martinez began his law enforcement career in 1992 with
the U.S. Customs Service and served our country in the United
States Navy from 1985 to 1989. Thank you for your service, Mr.
Martinez, and being here today.
Our third witness is Mr. Carl Wall, the special agent in
charge of the Human Trafficking Unit for the North Carolina
State Bureau of Investigations.
Special Agent in Charge Wall has worked in numerous local
law enforcement positions during his 26-year career.
His prior positions include serving as a Wake County deputy
sheriff, North Carolina SBI drug agent, and a DEA task force
officer and special agent in charge for the SBI training
session. There is a lot of initials there but I think we have
got them covered there.
Since 2018, Special Agent Wall has been standing up for the
SBI's first Human Trafficking Unit. I appreciate your
participation today.
Our final witness today is Colonel Aundrea Azelton. Colonel
Azelton is the chief deputy at the Randolph County Sheriff's
Office. She is a 24-year law enforcement veteran including 10
years as a detective.
She has worked in both Randolph and Alamance County. I
think from what I heard last time that Randolph stole you back
from Alamance County. But that is--we may not get into that
today.
But Colonel Azelton served as a lead homicide investigator
in Randolph County and specialized as a human trafficking
investigator in Alamance County before returning to Randolph
County as the first female chief deputy.
Thank you all for appearing here today. I look forward to
your testimony and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Ranking Member.
I would also just like to point out how absolutely
beautiful this building is. They don't build stuff like this in
New York anymore.
So without objection, the witnesses' full statements will
be inserted in the record.
I now ask each witness to summarize his or her statement
for 5 minutes, beginning with Ms. Christine Shaw Long.
STATEMENT OF CHRISTINE S. LONG, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NORTH
CAROLINA HUMAN TRAFFICKING COMMISSION, NORTH CAROLINA JUDICIAL
BRANCH
Ms. Long. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairman Rose, Ranking Member Walker. Thank
you for the opportunity to testify before you today on this
critically important topic.
It is an honor to speak on behalf of the many dedicated
professionals appointed to the North Carolina Human Trafficking
Commission.
I currently serve as the executive director and only staff
for the commission. Our commission was created by the North
Carolina General Assembly in 2012 and was reconfigured in 2013
during the passage of our safe harbor law.
The commission consists of 12 appointed members and 3 ex-
officio judicial seats. Of the 12 voting members, 4 are
appointed by the Governor, 4 by the North Carolina speaker of
the House of Representatives, and 4 by the North Carolina
president pro tempore of the Senate.
The statutory charge of the commission is summarized as to
apply for and receive funding on behalf of the State to fund
and facilitate research, to assist in creating measurement,
assessment, and accountability mechanisms, to inform and
educate law enforcement personnel, social service providers,
and the general public, to suggest new policies, procedures,
legislation, and to assist in developing regional response
teams or coordinated efforts, and to identify gaps and
recommend solutions.
So since 2014, the commission has participated in several
State, regional, and National roundtables or compendiums. In
addition, we have also invited regional response programs and
providers from the mountains to the coast to share trends they
are seeing as well as their program strengths and needs.
These experts and many others have given us tremendous
insight into gaps across the State and ways to address those
gaps.
Additionally, State and National experts as well as
survivors have provided key information and advice for
potential changes.
Informed by these stakeholders, the Human Trafficking
Commission has launched efforts, partnerships, and projects to
make steps toward fulfilling our statutory charge.
Some of our successes have been conducting a State-wide
multidisciplinary symposium annually for the past 3 years,
distribution of $1.35 million in direct service grants through
a one-time State appropriation, mandatory posting of awareness
posters in 19,000 locations across the State, and multiple
legislative actions that strengthen our law or create remedies
for victims.
Although colleagues beside me today will add much more
detail regarding the trends being seen across North Carolina, I
can tell you that our State continues to see cases of both sex
and labor trafficking crossing all demographic lines.
Stories from steadfast providers in the field continue to
indicate numerous industries in which cases are being
identified and the opioid epidemic continues to further
complicate case management and outreach efforts.
While working in the field of human trafficking can be
exhausting, I can also speak to how inspirational it is to have
dedicated law enforcement, service providers, and community
members working alongside each other daily.
I would like to highlight two of the collaborations seen
within the State. These examples include Federal, State, and
local levels all working in tandem.
First, the process of drafting a State-wide human
trafficking resource directory has demonstrated to us that
there is, roughly, 24 multi-disciplinary regional response
programs, task forces on a local level, or local coalitions
working across the State.
These are groups of both government and non-government that
are either providing 24/7 response to the National Human
Trafficking Hotline, are coordinating providers in order to
ensure wraparound services, or are strategically planning
action in areas of their community.
A second partnership example is the North Carolina
Coalition Against Human Trafficking, or NCCAHT, as we call it.
In its original grassroots form, this organization consisted of
committed advocates, law enforcement, and service providers
meeting regularly as an informal membership.
These professionals initiated projects aimed at building
awareness and response across the State in the earlier days.
The collective impact model of NCCAHT was monumental in the
establishment of the Human Trafficking Commission and NCCAHT
holds a seat on the commission.
Other State-wide projects, research, and grants have also
included the commission and NCCAHT as part of their advisory
committees, which then continues to enhance the collective
impact at both a macro and a micro level in the State.
As you know all too well, large issues such as this one are
met with many obstacles. It seems prudent to share some of
those challenges facing North Carolina. One main challenge is
with State-wide mobilization and action is funding.
The commission is currently staffed with the State
appropriation that ends before the fiscal year closes. Not only
does the commission need reoccurring funding to continue
progress toward its statutory charge, but our State desperately
needs a State-funded task force to ensure cases are taken from
initial identification to proper and full victim service
provision and, finally, to prosecution of the trafficker.
Furthermore, we also believe that it is critical to address
prevention efforts and prioritize those in funding as well.
Although many States--although as with many States, another
issue facing us is lack of comprehensive services throughout
the State.
While we have a few NGO's operating with Federal or State
funding, there are still many, many gaps in service provision
such as emergency and transitional housing.
In addition, expansion of some services and development of
additional specialties such as alternative therapies is a
critical piece in the puzzle.
So, in summation, human trafficking is sometimes referred
to as a public health, a social justice, human rights, and a
public safety issue.
North Carolina recognizes that it will take everyone
working together to end this horrific crime. It is vital that
we continue these partnerships and collaborations. Thank you
for the opportunity to testify today.
We appreciate your interest and look forward to your
questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Long follows:]
Prepared Statement of Christine S. Long
October 28, 2019
Good morning, Chairman Rose, Ranking Member Walker, and Members of
the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you
today on this critically important topic. It is an honor to speak on
behalf of the many dedicated professionals appointed to the North
Carolina Human Trafficking Commission. I currently serve as the
executive director, and only staff, for the commission. Our commission
was created by the North Carolina General Assembly in 2012 and was
reconfigured in 2013 during the passage of our Safe Harbor Law. Regular
meetings, as a permanent commission, began in March 2014.
The commission consists of 12 appointed members and 3 ex-officio
judicial seats. Of the 12 voting members, 4 are appointed by the
Governor, 4 by the NC Speaker of the House of Representatives, and 4 by
the NC President Pro Tempore of the Senate. The statutory charge of the
commission is as follows:
1. To apply for and receive funding, on behalf of the State, that
will assist in examining and countering the problem of human
trafficking in North Carolina;
2. To commission, fund, and facilitate quantitative and qualitative
research to explore the specific ways human trafficking is
occurring in North Carolina and to assist in creating
measurement, assessment, and accountability mechanisms;
3. To contribute to efforts to inform and educate law enforcement
personnel, social services providers, and the general public
about human trafficking so that traffickers can be prosecuted
and victim-survivors can receive appropriate services;
4. To suggest new policies, procedures, or legislation to further
the work of eradicating human trafficking and to provide
assistance and review with new policies, procedures, and
legislation;
5. To assist in developing regional response teams or other
coordinated efforts to counter human trafficking at the level
of law enforcement, legal services, social services, and
nonprofits; and
6. To identify gaps in law enforcement or service provision and
recommend solutions.
Since 2014, the commission has participated in several State,
regional, and National roundtables, advisory committees, studies,
collaboratives, and compendiums.
Throughout the past 4 years, the commission has invited regional
response programs and other providers from the mountains to the coast
to share trends they are seeing, as well as their program strengths and
needs. These experts, and many others, have given us tremendous insight
into gaps across the State and ways to address the gaps. Additionally,
State and National experts, as well as survivors, have provided key
information regarding advice for potential policy changes or emerging
practices in the field.
Informed by these stakeholders, the Human Trafficking Commission
has launched efforts, partnerships, and projects to make steps toward
fulfilling our statutory charge.
Some examples of Commission successes are listed below:
Establishment of mandatory law enforcement training.
Conducting State-wide multidisciplinary symposiums annually
the past 3 years. The conferences have featured different
tracks for professionals across the State using both National
speakers and State content experts.
Distribution of $1.35 million in direct service grants
through a State appropriation. These grants are helping launch
and expand the provision of services and response across the
State.
Issuing Standards for Direct Service Providers to use when
working with survivors.
Mandatory posting of an awareness poster in over 19,000
locations across the State.
Multiple legislative actions to strengthen child sexual
exploitation laws, create a civil remedy for victims, create a
sex tourism law, and expand post-conviction relief for victims
charged with a crime while being trafficked.
Although colleagues beside me today will add much more detail
regarding the trends being seen across North Carolina, I can tell you
that our State continues to see cases of both sex and labor trafficking
crossing all demographic lines. According to reports from the National
Human Trafficking Hotline, our State has consistently ranked within the
top 10 States for human trafficking. Stories from steadfast providers
in the field continue to indicate numerous industries in which cases
are being identified and the opioid epidemic continues to further
complicate case management and outreach efforts.
While working in the field of anti-human trafficking can be
exhausting, I can also speak to how inspirational it is to have
dedicated law enforcement, service providers, and community members
working alongside each other daily. I would like to highlight 2 of the
collaborations seen within the State. These examples include
participants from Federal, State, and local levels working in tandem.
First, the process of drafting a State-wide human trafficking
resource directory has demonstrated there are roughly 24
multidisciplinary regional response programs, local task forces, or
local coalitions working across the State. These are groups of both
Government and non-profits that are either providing 24/7 response to
the National Human Trafficking Hotline, are coordinating providers in
order to ensure wrap-around services for victims, or are strategically
planning for action in specific areas of the movement in their
communities. While the initial resource directory draft indicates
roughly 60 non-governmental organizations (NGO's) involved in the
movement, one-third are agencies offering to help victims as part of
another program that is not specific to human trafficking and therefore
is tailored to another population, such as homelessness, domestic
violence, etc.
A second partnership example is the North Carolina Coalition
Against Human Trafficking (NCCAHT). In its original grassroots form,
this organization consisted of committed advocates, law enforcement,
and service providers meeting regularly as an informal membership.
These professionals initiated projects aimed at building awareness and
response across the State. The collective impact model of NCCAHT was
monumental in advocating for the establishment of the Human Trafficking
Commission, and NCCAHT holds a seat on the Commission. Other State-wide
projects, research, and grants have also included the commission and
NCCAHT as part of their advisory committees, which then continues to
enhance collective impact at both macro and micro levels.
As you each know all too well, large issues such as this one are
met with many obstacles. It seems prudent to share some of the
challenges facing North Carolina.
One main challenge for State-wide mobilization and action is
funding. The commission is currently staffed with a State appropriation
that ends before the fiscal year closes. Not only does the commission
need recurring funding to continue progress toward its statutory
charge, but our State desperately needs a funded task force to ensure
cases are taken from initial identification, to proper and full victim
service provision, and finally to prosecution of the trafficker.
Furthermore, we believe it is critical that prevention efforts be
prioritized for funding.
As with many States, another issue facing us is lack of
appropriate, comprehensive services throughout the entire State. While
we have a few NGO's operating with Federal funding such as the Office
of Victim's Crime grants or with State funding through Governor's Crime
Commission grants, there are still gaps in service provision such as
emergency and transitional housing. Expansion of such services and
development of additional specialties, e.g., alternative therapies, is
a critical piece in this puzzle.
Last, data collection is a discussion often brought up as a barrier
to preparing adequately for future needs in capacity building, or as a
barrier to obtaining funding. Since this is a hidden and complex crime,
collecting reliable and unduplicated data from multiple sectors that
are each coming into contact with victims is a difficult challenge.
In summation, human trafficking is sometimes referred to as a
public health, social justice, human rights, and public safety issue.
North Carolina recognizes that it will take everyone working together
to end this horrific crime. It is vital that we continue these
partnerships and collaborations.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. We appreciate your
interest and I look forward to answering your questions and to future
collaborations with Members of the subcommittee to address this urgent
problem.
Mr. Rose. Thank you for your testimony.
I now recognize Mr. Ronnie Martinez to summarize his
statement for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF RONNIE A. MARTINEZ, SPECIAL AGENT IN CHARGE,
HOMELAND SECURITY INVESTIGATIONS, CHARLOTTE FIELD OFFICE, U.S.
IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY
Mr. Martinez. Thank you, Chairman Rose.
Good morning, Chairman Rose, Ranking Member Walker. It is
an honor to be here to represent Homeland Security
Investigations--HSI.
I can attest to HSI's continued commitment to identifying
and assisting human trafficking victims and bringing
traffickers to justice.
I am particularly pleased to be here as a special agent in
charge of the new HSI Charlotte office. On average, HSI
conducts 1,000 human trafficking investigations annually.
HSI identifies and assists hundreds of victims and conducts
extensive local outreach and training to generate leads.
However, we do not and cannot do this important work alone.
HSI participates in more than 120 human trafficking task forces
consisting of Federal, State, and local law enforcement as well
as non-Governmental victim service providers.
In North Carolina specifically, HSI participates in 3 task
forces in Charlotte, Winston-Salem, and Raleigh, these covering
the State's 3 Federal judicial districts.
These task forces have been extremely successful in
identifying and dismantling human trafficking networks.
Together, with our law enforcement partners we have increased
arrests, indictments, prosecutions of traffickers in North
Carolina and abroad.
Together with our NGO partners, human trafficking victims
have received critical and comprehensive social services.
HSI's human trafficking mission is two-fold: No. 1, to
proactively identify cross-border trafficking organizations and
minimize the risk they pose to National security and public
safety, and No. 2, to employ a victim-centered approach whereby
equal value is placed on the identification and stabilization
of victims as well as the investigation and prosecution of
traffickers.
Law enforcement as a whole is much better at identifying
and tackling sex trafficking. However, labor trafficking is
just as insidious as sex trafficking but much harder for us to
find.
For decades now HSI has been seeing the same types of cases
involving agriculture, construction, domestic work, restaurants
and massage parlors--essentially, jobs with low pay and fewer
legal protections in the underground economy and in the service
industry.
When I recently assumed the duty of special agent in charge
for North and South Carolina, I learned about a particularly
horrendous HSI investigation in North Carolina from 2012.
In 2012, a sex trafficker named Shahid Hassan Muslim forced
a 16-year-old to have sex with as many as 12 men per day. After
almost a year, she escaped. But in revenge, Muslim tracked her
down and held her captive for days while physically assaulting
her.
This was also a threat to 5 other young women Muslim was
trafficking that same--that the same would happen to them if
they had tried to leave him.
A total of 18 minors and young women, both United States
citizens and foreign nationals, were identified as victims in
this joint investigation by HSI, FBI, and the Charlotte-
Mecklenburg Police Department.
I chose to illustrate this case today for a few reasons.
First, there are trafficking cases that involve the recruiting
and smuggling of victims into the United States for the
purposes of their exploitation.
However, Muslim's case is one of many where his victims
were both United States citizens and were long-time lawfully
present immigrants in our communities.
Traffickers will exploit anyone out of greed. Second,
criminals, including sex traffickers, are becoming increasingly
savvy to use technology to conduct and conceal their insidious
activities.
Muslim was prolific in his use in on-line advertising,
social media for recruitment, and on-line companies to conceal
his movements. HSI is committed to staying on pace with cyber
crime investigative strategies. Third, HSI provides victims
with an array of referrals for comprehensive services.
As a result, one of the victims now is on a pathway to
United States citizenship. Another victim recently graduated
from college and her graduation was attended by the case agent
and a social worker.
We have seen time and time again that law enforcement
officers who work with victim assistance personnel are more
stable victim witnesses and stronger investigations.
More importantly, the victims of these nefarious crimes
have statistically better chances to rebuild their lives.
I want to thank you for highlighting human trafficking and
law enforcement efforts and I thank you for this opportunity to
appear before you today and I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Martinez follows:]
Statement of Ronnie A. Martinez
October 28, 2019
introduction
Chairman Rose, Ranking Member Walker, and distinguished Members of
the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today to discuss the role of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE) in investigating human traffickers and protecting victims.
Fighting all forms of modern-day slavery is one of ICE's top
operational goals, specifically to disrupt and dismantle organized
human trafficking. As one of 30 special agents in charge, I can attest
to the pervasiveness of the crime, as well as the vital role ICE's
Homeland Security Investigations (HSI) plays in investigating human
trafficking crimes, assisting victims, and bringing perpetrators to
justice. I am also honored to have our partners in the fight against
human trafficking on the panel with me today.
ICE HSI is the leader in combatting transnational criminal
organizations engaged in human trafficking. ICE HSI conducts more than
1,000 human trafficking investigations annually, identifies and assists
hundreds of victims, conducts extensive local outreach and training to
generate leads, and trains foreign law enforcement partners on human
trafficking through International Law Enforcement Academies (ILEA). As
a lead Federal law enforcement agency responsible for investigating
human trafficking, we leverage our global operational apparatus of more
than 200 domestic offices and 78 international offices in 52 countries.
This global footprint allows HSI to be strategically situated to work
with law enforcement partners, as well as non-governmental
organizations, which bring human trafficking tips and leads to HSI
special agents world-wide.
The mission of our human trafficking investigations is two-fold:
(1) To proactively identify cross-border criminal trafficking
organizations and prioritize investigations according to the degree of
risk posed by each to National security and public safety--HSI targets
human trafficking organizations with the goal of disrupting and
dismantling the organization and seizing their illegally obtained
assets to remove the profit incentive; and (2) to employ a victim-
centered approach, where equal value is placed on victim identification
and stabilization, as on the investigation and prosecution of
traffickers. ICE HSI as an agency is first and foremost concerned with
protecting the victim and, therefore, identifying and assisting them is
paramount.
To accomplish its anti-trafficking mission, ICE HSI works in close
coordination with other components of DHS, law enforcement agencies at
the local, Tribal, State, and Federal levels, as well as foreign law
enforcement, non-governmental organizations (NGO's), victim service
providers, and private industry to protect victims, investigate and
prosecute offenders, and prevent trafficking from occurring. ICE HSI
Special Agents and Victim Assistance personnel are directly supported
by key ICE headquarters programs, including the Human Trafficking Unit
(HTU), the Victim Assistance Program (VAP), the Parole and Law
Enforcement Programs Unit (PLEPU), the Forced Labor Program, and the
Child Exploitation Investigations Unit.
strategic approach to combating human trafficking
The counter-trafficking strategy ICE HSI employs is rooted in
prevention, protection, prosecution, and partnership. Our victim-
centered approach relies on close coordination with the Victim
Assistance Program to connect survivors with service providers. We seek
to aggressively target human traffickers using a comprehensive
approach. Our emphasis on partnerships involves significant
coordination, outreach, and coalition-building efforts. This strategy
is a force multiplier and has paid dividends in successful
prosecutions, as well as in identifying and assisting victims.
ICE HSI has dedicated human trafficking investigative groups in
each of the special agent in charge field offices with subject-matter
experts in outlying offices as well. These specialized agents
participate in more than 120 human trafficking task forces Nation-wide
consisting of Federal, State, and local law enforcement, as well as
victim service providers. Moreover, ICE HSI has participated
extensively in the interagency Anti-Trafficking Coordination Team
(ACTeam) Initiative, along with the DOJ's Human Trafficking Prosecution
Unit, the U.S. Department of Labor, the U.S. Department of State (DOS),
and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, convening Anti-Trafficking
Coordination Teams in 12 competitively-selected cities to proactively
develop and advance significant, high-impact Federal human trafficking
investigations and prosecutions. In addition, local law enforcement
agencies detail officers to ICE HSI human trafficking groups to work
full-time with ICE HSI Special Agents on trafficking investigations.
As part of ICE HSI's Trafficking in Persons Strategy, we also
conduct a significant amount of outreach in order to generate leads
from the organizations to which victims are likely to trust, confide,
and report the crime. Annually, this strategy results in several
thousand contacts with other law enforcement, NGO's, and community
organizations concerning human trafficking within the United States.
This routinely involves hundreds of training/engagement events with
NGO's and law enforcement.
ICE HSI has created a new outreach initiative called STOP
(Strategic Trafficking Outreach Program) to strategically target
industries that have been found to be associated with human
trafficking. This new initiative will raise awareness within these
industries, identify additional victims that have previously gone
unreported, and increase prosecution of traffickers.
ICE HSI is a key partner of the Blue Campaign along with other
components, such as U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS),
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), the Federal Law Enforcement
Training Centers (FLETC), Transportation Security Administration (TSA),
Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties (CRCL) and the United
States Coast Guard (USCG). The Blue Campaign is a National awareness
campaign to: (1) Educate the public, law enforcement, and other
institutions on human trafficking in the United States; and (2) to
increase understanding of the indicators of human trafficking, and to
appropriately recognize and respond to possible cases of human
trafficking. Working in collaboration with first responders,
governmental, non-governmental, and private-sector organizations, the
Blue Campaign magnifies this important, National public outreach.
Additionally, FLETC has developed a new Human Trafficking Awareness
Training course, which will be made available to Federal, State, local,
Tribal and campus law enforcement Nation-wide to assist ICE HSI in
raising much-needed basic awareness of this crime.
In addition to providing basic and advanced training to
investigators in the United States, we also provide a substantial
amount of international human trafficking training, which is delivered
to foreign law enforcement, prosecutors, and victim service providers
in collaboration with ICE Attache offices typically from more than 70
countries annually. Working with DOS, we also coordinate and train at
numerous events at ILEAs and U.S. embassies world-wide. The training
includes our efforts to combat human trafficking, investigative
techniques, bilateral investigations, indicators of human trafficking,
victim identification, and victim assistance with a focus on building
the capacity to conduct human trafficking investigations with host
country authorities.
the global scope of human trafficking
Human traffickers exploit domestic and foreign National victims in
the United States, and traffickers exploit victims from the United
States abroad. Human traffickers and victims can be of any age, race/
ethnicity, sex, gender identity, nationality, immigration status,
cultural background, socio-economic class, and education attainment
level. Traffickers can be relatives, family friends, gang members or
associated with transnational criminal organizations, and they can
operate alone or in groups. Traffickers use various forms of force,
fraud, and coercion to control and exploit victims, including debt
bondage, fraudulent employment opportunities, false promises, violence,
and threats of violence. Human trafficking occurs in both legal and
illegal industries, and may intersect with other criminal activity,
such as drug trafficking, migrant smuggling, or money laundering.
Though clandestine by nature, it is an extremely lucrative illicit
activity with estimated annual global profits of $150 billion,
according to the International Labour Organization.
challenges to combatting human trafficking
To minimize risk and maximize profitability, traffickers work to
preserve the clandestine nature of the crime by creating agile
networks, adapting to profit and risk environments, and adopting
advanced technologies. These characteristics make it difficult to
detect and, as a result, difficult to gather quality information. We
are constantly working to improve detection of human trafficking cases
to make the crime less clandestine and to ensure we are equipped to
identify potential victims, traffickers, hot spots, and transportation
routes. For example, we've enhanced our training at the Federal Law
Enforcement Training Centers (FLETC) to include mandated human
trafficking training for new agents.
Immigration status is often perceived to be a barrier to reporting
suspected human trafficking. Some victims and/or their service
provider/attorney do not call police, file a case, etc., because of
fear of deportation/immigration enforcement. A wide range of crimes are
unreported or underreported and have become harder to investigate when
the victims are immigrants or have limited English proficiency. Foreign
national victims are not always aware of their eligibility for certain
legal benefits and services. A victim-centered approach requires we
have policies and practices in place to protect trafficking victims
from being susceptible to removal.
Statistically, there are fewer labor trafficking investigations
because of the difficulty in detecting labor trafficking and separating
it from other forms of labor exploitation and workplace violations. It
can be especially difficult to detect, investigate, and prosecute for a
number of reasons, including isolation of the victims, limited sources
of corroborating evidence, and challenges in earning the trust of
victims in order to elicit their statements. Not all law enforcement is
sensitive to a trauma-informed, victim-centered approach, or
appreciative of the full spectrum of human trafficking (not just sex
trafficking, but labor trafficking as well). Also, many victims do not
see themselves as victims. Consistent, survivor-informed training
across law enforcement should be standardized (including terminology,
typology, etc.) and continually updated, drawing on the expertise
offered by survivors themselves.
Law enforcement should also be cognizant that the justice law
enforcement seeks for a victim is not always the justice a victim seeks
for themselves. It is not just about prosecuting the traffickers.
Sometimes victims want to be removed from the situation and stabilized
and move on with their life. Not every trafficking victim wants to play
a role in holding the trafficker accountable.
We continue to engage with foreign counterparts to develop anti-
trafficking strategies in their respective regions.
the victim assistance program
Our Victim Assistance Program (VAP) provides overall guidance on
victim assistance and is a resource to all ICE programs for training,
technical assistance, and monitoring compliance with Federal crime
victim assistance statutes and the Attorney General Guidelines for
Victims and Witness Assistance. VAP is also a critical resource to ICE
HSI investigations and the ensuing criminal prosecutions by
safeguarding victims' rights and ensuring access to the services to
which they are entitled by law, as well as providing the assistance
they need so that they can participate actively and fully in the
criminal justice system process. VAP personnel respond to victims'
issues in a wide range of Federal crimes, including human trafficking,
child pornography, child sex tourism, child sex trafficking, white
collar crime, and human rights abuses.
HSI Victim Assistance Specialists support our approximately 6,100
Special Agents and train them on victims' rights, immigration relief
for foreign national victims, human trafficking, child exploitation,
forensic interviewing, and other victim issues. Victim Assistance
Specialists also assist victims with resources and service referrals
for Federal, State, and local crime victim services, as well as
referrals to non-governmental and community-based victim service
providers. In addition to assistance for victims, another service
provided by the VAP is the Victim Notification Program and hotline,
which provides, for those prior victims who register, notifications of
the release from incarceration or removal of criminal alien offenders.
Along with the Victim Assistance Specialists, VAP includes Forensic
Interview Specialists to conduct legally-defensible, victim-sensitive,
fact-finding, forensic interviews, which are developmentally
appropriate and take into account the victim's age, language skills,
mental health, and learning capacity.
We would like to thank Congress for appropriating $7.5 million for
the expansion of HSI Victim Assistance Program in 2019, which assisted
HSI in creating new Victim Assistance-related positions. The overall
expansion resulted in a 400 percent increase of our Forensic Interview
program going from 6 to 30 Forensic Interview Specialists, as well as
an increase of our Victim Assistance Specialists from 26 to 34
positions Nation-wide.
making an impact
Working closely with its partners, to include prosecutors at the
local, State, and Federal levels, ICE HSI has been able to make a
significant difference and move forward U.S. counter-trafficking
efforts. In the last 2 years, we have initiated nearly 2,000 human
trafficking cases, resulting in the identification and assistance of
almost 1,000 human trafficking victims and over 3,000 criminal arrests,
and 1,200 convictions. In fiscal year 2018, 849 human trafficking cases
were initiated, resulting in 1,588 criminal arrests, 833 indictments
and 538 convictions. Fiscal year 2019 statistics are still being
consolidated and finalized, but preliminary reporting indicates
increases from fiscal year 2018 across all 4 of these metrics.
One example of our efforts with Mexico is the cross-border
initiatives to target transnational criminal organizations (TCOs)
responsible for sex trafficking of Mexican women in the United States.
Mexico is the country of origin of the largest number of foreign-born
human trafficking victims identified in the United States. In response
to numerous Federal investigations and prosecutions of trafficking
networks operating across the U.S.-Mexico border, DOJ and DHS launched
the U.S.-Mexico Bilateral Human Trafficking Enforcement Initiative to
enhance collaboration with Mexican law enforcement counterparts in
order to more effectively combat trans-border trafficking threats.
Through this initiative, U.S. and Mexican authorities exchange leads
and intelligence to dismantle transnational trafficking networks
through high-impact prosecutions in both the United States and Mexico.
In addition to coordinating the development of bilateral
investigations and prosecutions, DOJ, DHS, and their Mexican law
enforcement counterparts engage in extensive exchanges of expertise and
case-based mentoring to advance best practices in victim-centered
enforcement strategies. The initiative has achieved significant
results: U.S. Federal prosecutions of over 170 defendants; Mexican
State and Federal prosecution of over 30 associated defendants;
extradition of 8 defendants from Mexico to the United States to face
charges; identification of and assistance to more than 200 victims; and
recovery of over 20 victims' children from the trafficking networks'
control. We have coordinated bilateral enforcement actions to apprehend
co-conspirators on both sides of the border.
immigration options for foreign victims of human trafficking
Short- and long-term immigration options assist law enforcement in
stabilizing victims, which can lead to improved cooperation with law
enforcement and humanitarian relief to victims. ICE HSI can provide
Continued Presence (CP) to victims, an important law enforcement tool
that allows a ``victim of a severe form of trafficking,'' who may be a
potential witness to such trafficking, to remain in the United States
to facilitate an investigation or prosecution of human trafficking-
related crimes. CP provides for the temporary deferral of removal
actions, along with temporary work authorization and potential access
to public benefits and services through the Department of Health and
Human Services certification process. It also allows victims to remain
in the United States while pursuing a civil action against their
traffickers.
CP is vital to law enforcement efforts to combat human trafficking.
It is a necessary means of stabilizing victims so they can cooperate as
witnesses in bringing traffickers to justice. CP may be granted for an
initial period of 2 years and may be renewed multiple times for up to 2
years per renewal to facilitate an investigation or prosecution against
traffickers. The appropriate application of CP can lead to more
successful prosecutions of traffickers and can increase the odds of
identifying and rescuing more victims. USCIS can also provide longer-
term immigration relief and employment authorization to certain
qualifying victims of severe forms of trafficking through T
nonimmigrant status, also known as the T visa, and victims of certain
qualifying crimes (including human trafficking) through U nonimmigrant
status, also known as the U visa. T and U nonimmigrant status are
generally granted for 4 years and may be extended in certain
circumstances.
conclusion
ICE HSI remains committed to utilizing its authorities and
resources to arrest human traffickers and identify and assist the
victims of this horrific crime. We will build upon the successes of our
outreach and victim-centered approach, and share our lessons learned
and expertise to expand the global fight against this horrific crime.
We will continue to disrupt and dismantle the criminal organizations
engaged in human trafficking until we end the threat that human
trafficking poses.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you today and
for your continued support of ICE HSI and its law enforcement mission.
I would be pleased to answer any questions.
Mr. Rose. Thank you for your testimony.
I now recognize Mr. Carl Wall to summarize his statement
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walker. Mr. Wall, I hate to interrupt you there but I
want to make sure that your mic is working. Is that something
that we can check to make sure that doesn't--I know many that
is not----
OK. I think we are on. Just speak as much as you can to the
mic.
Thank you.
STATEMENT OF CARL L. WALL, II, SPECIAL AGENT IN CHARGE, NORTH
CAROLINA STATE BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, HUMAN TRAFFICKING UNIT
Mr. Wall. OK. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Walker. Thank you.
Mr. Wall. My name is Carl Wall and I am the special agent
in charge of North Carolina State Bureau of Investigation Human
Trafficking Unit.
For more than 26 years, I have had the honor of serving
North Carolina as a law enforcement officer and the last 21 as
a special agent with the SBI.
In 2017, the North Carolina General Assembly gave the SBI
original jurisdiction in human trafficking. In 2018, the SBI
began efforts to establish a unit to combat human trafficking
in North Carolina.
In July of that year, I was assigned as the SAC of the
Human Trafficking Unit. My goals were to provide training, both
basic and advanced, to identify and support and rescue victims,
and identify and bring to justice traffickers, and also to
coordinate with local and Federal law enforcement.
Currently, I am the only full-time human investigation or
human trafficking agent within our agency. The SBI has lobbied
for more agents with the General Assembly.
In our pending State budget, the General Assembly has
designated funds for 8 full-time human trafficking agents. If
our Governor signs the budget, we will have a full-time unit to
serve the citizens of North Carolina.
When I began this position, I had no experience or prior
knowledge of human trafficking. I attended every training and
conference I could find to learn what human trafficking looks
like, especially in our State of North Carolina.
I have also learned from others--other agencies, including
the Florida Department of Law Enforcement, Tennessee Bureau of
Investigation, the South Carolina Law Enforcement Division, and
the Georgia Bureau of Investigation--as to what their States do
to combat human trafficking.
Many of these agencies exceed North Carolina in resources
allocated to combat human trafficking, the understanding of the
crime, and the structure of the response.
Many have protocols and excellent working relationships
between Federal and State and local agencies to include
nongovernmental organizations to make human trafficking cases
seamless in their investigations and response to victims.
In 2017, as you have pointed out, Ranking Member, North
Carolina was ranked from the Polaris Project as being eighth in
the Nation with human trafficking tips reported.
That year in 2017, we had 221 cases reported, 149 of them
sex-related, 51 of them labor-related. In 2018, there were 287
tips reported. A hundred and ninety-two of them related to sex,
54 related to labor, which ranked us tenth in the Nation.
Although these reports appear to be low, these are just
tips reported to Polaris, which were agreed to be shared with
law enforcement.
I have learned through active communication with local
service providers, A Safe Place in Wilmington, North Carolina,
that they alone had serviced over 190 victims in 2018.
So what is the accurate data? It is my belief that the
actual numbers are much higher than Polaris reports and as we,
as a State, simply don't know the real number of victims in
North Carolina; we need to find out.
The SBI's intelligence analyst Ashley Burke was asked to
evaluate the number of sex-related advertisements on the
internet specific to North Carolina. On just one website--Skip
the Games--we discovered that in 2018 there were over 400,000
ads specific to North Carolina.
It is evident that North Carolina, like other States, has a
human trafficking issue that law enforcement is behind in
effectively combating it.
To date, the Fayetteville Police Department is the only one
agency that has a full-time human trafficking unit in the
State. They have 4 full-time officers working human trafficking
cases and have been extremely successful.
North Carolina is unique as we are still educating
officers, chiefs, and sheriffs that human trafficking exists
and it is our mission at the SBI to educate and assist them in
coordinating investigations and rescuing victims.
At a recent Police Executive Research Forum--the PERF round
table--I explained that not everyone in North Carolina
recognizes human trafficking and that the victims are truly
victims and not suspects in a prostitution case.
I have found that the best way to relate to local law
enforcement's misunderstanding of human trafficking is to
explain to them from my point of view as a previous drug
investigator.
Traffickers are like drug dealers. They are business
people. Rather than selling narcotics, their commodity is
another human being.
Sadly, people are a commodity that do not have--that they
do not have to replenish. Their product doesn't go away when
they sell it. They can profit over and over.
During classes that we teach all over the State we make
sure to show human trafficking is not just in our most
populated areas as some assume, but it is everywhere.
Attached is attachment number 2. It is a map of the State
of North Carolina that shows how many ads are specific to each
selected city. Even rural communities in North Carolina are not
immune from this heinous crime.
When I hear someone say the victim could leave or run at
any time they wanted, they are not a victim, I explain to them
I have yet to have a victim tell me that they chose to be a
prostitute when they grew up. It doesn't happen. These are
victims controlled by force, fraud, coercion from the
traffickers.
Over the past 15 months, the SBI has conducted over 20
trainings covering 15 counties with more scheduled. In the 15
months, the SBI has gone from conducting approximately 18 human
trafficking investigations to having opened 61 cases to date.
We have 14 SBI agents who have volunteered to have a
collateral duty in addition to their regular duty to
investigate human trafficking, and, of course, this comes as a
secondary duty only to their original assignments.
As the SBI moves forward in establishing a full-time human
trafficking unit, we continue to train, educate, and conduct
proactive investigations. We do this in collaboration and
partnerships with local and Federal agencies.
In the past 15 months the SBI has conducted 10 proactive
operations in which we have encountered over 45 victims of
human trafficking.
With our partnerships and collaborations, we have been able
to offer these victims services to get them out of their
current situation and we have identified and began to identify
and investigate the traffickers and bring them to justice.
Partnerships and collaboration is the only way you can
investigate this crime. It is like no other. With law
enforcement we must work together with our NGO's to conduct a
successful investigation.
It is the only crime that law enforcement needs and relies
on others for a successful case. When the SBI began this unit
in 2018, the first thing I did was personally go and visit our
Federal partners in each area of responsibility.
I met with the RAC of each Homeland Security Investigations
Office and explained the SBI's mission and what our goals are.
Each office has been more than helpful in assisting the SBI's
mission.
I have also met and described our mission to each of the
RAC offices with the FBI within North Carolina. They, too, have
been very supportive and inclusive.
The Federal agencies have been imperative in the creation
and the success of the SBI's current mission.
In each of our human trafficking outreach operations and in
most of our investigations there has been a positive
interaction with Federal and local law enforcement.
We are here to support each other with the same goals of
supporting victims and helping them get out of the life and
bring to justice the traffickers.
This partnership is key. We must all share our data and our
information because the traffickers know no boundaries. We must
work hand-in-hand with our NGO partners and make sure to
include them as we move forward in this effort to end human
trafficking.
On average, it takes 6 encounters with law enforcement and
NGO's to get a victim to understand that their normal is not
normal and to show them a better way without a trafficker.
So we all must work diligently and continuously together to
make a difference in North Carolina. As we move forward with a
full-time human trafficking unit for the SBI, I am proud to
lead the charge for our agency.
I am proud to have partners such as HSI and FBI and our
local law enforcement as we tackle this hideous crime. In my
26-plus years in law enforcement, I have seen many gruesome
crimes.
I have dealt with murderers, rapists, ruthless narcotic
organizations. But until this assignment, I had never seen the
violence, both physical and mental, the sickness, and the
controlling that a trafficker has over a victim.
A victim is another human being. A victim has the potential
to be successful, a proactive person to society, and humanity
has been taken away by someone else.
The crime of human trafficking has always existed in some
form. We must turn our lens of our views as to what it is,
where it is, and how we go about changing it.
No longer should we look at these individuals as choosing
to sell themselves for sex. They are victims of human
trafficking.
In closing, I am proud to be the one to hopefully make a
change in human trafficking in North Carolina. I hope in my
final years of law enforcement we can see the success that the
SBI and all the partners hoped for.
I hope to have a full-time unit that makes a huge impact on
this crime. Our number of reported victims will rise and we
want those numbers to rise that will show how serious the issue
we have.
If the numbers rise, then we know the public, law
enforcement, and everyone is seeing the crime for what it
really is and not being ignored or misidentified.
Thank you to the Members of the committee for allowing me
to testify today and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wall follows:]
Prepared Statement of Carl L. Wall, II
October 28, 2019
Good morning, Chairman Bennie Thompson, Ranking Member Mike Rogers,
and Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify before you today on the issues of human trafficking in North
Carolina. It is an honor to speak on behalf of the dedicated
professionals of the North Carolina State Bureau of Investigation
(NCSBI). My name is Carl Wall; I am the special agent in charge (SAC)
of the NCSBI's Human Trafficking Unit. For more than 26 years I have
had the honor of serving North Carolina as a law enforcement officer,
the last 21 years as a special agent with the NCSBI. I have held many
roles over my career as drug agent, Drug Enforcement Administration
(DEA) task force officer, assistant special agent in charge, and
special agent in charge. I was previously the SAC of the SBI's Training
Section before this assignment as the SAC of the Human Trafficking
Unit.
In 2017, the North Carolina General Assembly gave the NCSBI
original jurisdiction of human trafficking investigations. In 2018, the
NCSBI began efforts to establish a unit to combat human trafficking in
North Carolina. In July of that year I was assigned as the SAC of the
Human Trafficking Unit. My goals were to provide training, both basic
and advanced to identify, support, and rescue victims, and identify and
bring to justice traffickers, and to coordinate with local and Federal
law enforcement. Currently, I am the NCSBI's only full-time human
trafficking agent. The SBI has lobbied for more agents to the NC
General Assembly. In our pending State budget, the General Assembly has
designated funds for 8 full-time human trafficking agents. If our
Governor signs the budget, we will have a full-time unit to serve the
citizens of North Carolina.
When I began this position, I had no experience with or prior
knowledge of human trafficking. I attended every training and
conference I could find to learn what human trafficking looks like. I
also learned from other agencies including the Florida Department of
Law Enforcement, the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation, the South
Carolina Law Enforcement Division, and the Georgia Bureau of
Investigation as to what their States do to combat human trafficking.
Many of these agencies exceed North Carolina in resources allocated to
combat trafficking, understanding of the crime, and structure of
response. Many have protocols and excellent working relationships
between Federal, State, and local agencies to include Non-Governmental
Organizations (NGO) to make human trafficking cases seamless in their
investigation and response to victims.
In 2017, North Carolina was ranked by the National Human
Trafficking hotline (Polaris Project) as being eighth in the Nation for
number of human trafficking tips reported. Polaris reported that NC had
221 reported tips, 149 of them sex-related, and 51 labor-related. In
2018 Polaris reported we had 287 tips, 192 of them related to sex
trafficking and 54 related to labor trafficking, which ranked us tenth
in the Nation for reported tips. Although these reports may appear to
be low, these are just the tips reported to Polaris, which were agreed
upon to share with law enforcement. I have learned through active
communication with a local service provider, A Safe Place in
Wilmington, NC that they had reported serving over 190 victims in 2018.
So, what is the accurate data? It is my belief that actual numbers are
much higher than Polaris reports, and as a State we simply don't know
the real number of victims in North Carolina. Our intelligence analyst,
Ashley Burke, evaluated the number sex-related advertisements on the
internet specific to North Carolina. On just one website (Skip the
Games) we discovered that in 2018 there were over 400,000 ads specific
to North Carolina. (See Attachment No. 1)
It is evident that North Carolina, like other States, has a human
trafficking issue and law enforcement is behind in effectively
combatting it. To date, the Fayetteville Police Department is the only
agency that has a full-time Human Trafficking Unit. They have 4 full-
time officers working human trafficking cases and have been extremely
successful. North Carolina is unique, as we are still educating
officers, chiefs, and sheriffs that human trafficking exists and it's
our mission at the NCSBI to educate and assist them with conducting
investigations and rescuing victims. At a recent Police Executive
Research Forum (PERF) roundtable, I explained that not everyone in
North Carolina recognizes human trafficking and that the victims are
truly victims and not suspects in a prostitution case. I have found the
best way to relate to the local law enforcement's misunderstanding of
human trafficking is to explain to them from my point of view as a
previous drug investigator. Traffickers are like drug dealers, they are
business people. Rather than selling narcotics, their commodity is
another human being. Sadly, people are a commodity that they don't have
to replenish; their ``product'' doesn't go away when they sell it. They
can profit over and over.
During classes that we teach all over the State we make sure to
show that human trafficking is not just in the most populated areas, as
some assume, but everywhere. Attached as Attachment No. 2 (See
Attachment No. 2) is a map of the State of North Carolina and how many
ads are specific to each selected city. Even the rural communities in
North Carolina are not immune from these heinous crimes. When I hear
someone say, ``the victim could leave or run anytime they want. They're
not a victim,'' I explain, I have never heard a victim say, ``I chose
to be a prostitute when I grow up.'' It doesn't happen. They are
victims, controlled by force, fraud, or coercion from the traffickers.
Over the past 15 months the NCSBI has conducted over 20 trainings
covering 15 counties, with more scheduled. In the 15 months the NCSBI
has gone from conducting approximately 18 human trafficking
investigations to having opened 61 cases to date. We have over 14 NCSBI
Agents who volunteer to have a collateral duty of investigating human
trafficking investigations. This comes a secondary duty, only after
their original assignment is complete, which comes first.
As the NCSBI moves forward in establishing a full-time Human
Trafficking Unit we continue to train, educate, and conduct proactive
investigations. We do this with collaboration and partnerships with
local and Federal agencies. In the past 15 months the NCSBI has
conducted 10 proactive operations in which we have encountered 45
victims of human trafficking. With our partnerships and collaboration,
we have been able to offer these victims services to get them out of
their current situation, and we have identified and began to
investigate traffickers to bring them to justice. Partnership and
collaboration is the only way you can investigate this crime. It is
like no other; we in law enforcement must work together and with the
NGO's to conduct a successful investigation. It is one of the only
crimes that law enforcement needs and relies on others for a successful
case. When the NCSBI began this unit in 2018 the first thing I did was
personally go and visit Federal agency leaders in each Area of
Responsibility (AOR). I met with each RAC of Homeland Security
Investigations office and explained what the NCSBI's mission was and
what our goals are. Each office has been more than helpful in assisting
the NCSBI's mission. I also met with and described our mission to each
RAC of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) offices in North
Carolina. They too have been very supportive and inclusive. Both
Federal agencies have been imperative in the creation and success of
the NCSBI's mission.
In each of our Human Trafficking outreach operations and in most of
our investigations there has been a positive interaction with Federal
and local law enforcement. We are here to support each other, with the
same goal of supporting victims and helping them get out of ``the
life'' and bring justice to the traffickers. This partnership is key,
we must all share our data and information because the traffickers know
no boundaries. We must work hand-in-hand with our NGO partners and make
sure to include them as we move forward in this effort to end Human
Trafficking. On average, it takes 6 encounters with law enforcement and
NGO's to get a victim to understand that their normal is not normal and
show them a better way of life without a trafficker. So, we all must
work vigilantly and continuously together to make a difference in North
Carolina.
As we move forward with a full-time Human Trafficking unit for the
NCSBI, I am proud to lead the charge from our agency. I am proud to
have partners such as HSI and FBI and our local law enforcement as we
tackle this hideous crime. In my 26+ years in law enforcement I have
seen many gruesome crimes. I have dealt with murderers, rapists, and
ruthless narcotic organizations. Until this assignment, I had never
seen the violence, both physical and mental, the sickness and the
controlling that a trafficker has over a victim. A victim that is
another human being, a victim that has the potential to be successful,
proactive person to society and their humanity taken away by someone
else. The crime of human trafficking has always existed in some form.
We must turn the lens of our views as to what it is, where it is, and
how we go about changing it. No longer should we look at these
individuals as ``choosing'' to sell themselves for sex, they are
victims of human trafficking.
In closing, I am proud to be the one who hopefully can make a
change in Human Trafficking in North Carolina. I hope in my final years
as a law enforcement officer we can see the success that the NCSBI and
all partners hope for. I hope to have a full-time unit that makes a
huge impact on this crime. Our number of reported victims will rise, we
want them to rise to show the serious issue we have. If the numbers
rise, then we know the public, law enforcement, and everyone is seeing
this crime for what it really is and not ignoring or misidentifying it.
Thank you to the Members of this committee for allowing me to
testify here today.
Mr. Rose. Thank you for your testimony.
I now recognize Colonel, is it? Colonel Aundrea Azelton to
summarize her statement for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF AUNDREA AZELTON, CHIEF DEPUTY, RANDOLPH COUNTRY,
NORTH CAROLINA SHERIFF'S OFFICE
Ms. Azelton. Good morning, Chairman Max Rose and Ranking
Member Walker. It is both an honor and a privilege to testify
before you today on this incredibly important issue on behalf
of Sheriff Greg Seabolt and the many dedicated professionals at
the Randolph County Sheriff's Office.
I am Colonel Aundrea Azelton, chief deputy at the Randolph
County Sheriff's Office. I am a 24-year law enforcement veteran
with 10 years of investigative experience. I wish I were still
24.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Azelton. In 2016, I left Randolph County Sherriff's
Office and went to work as a Special Victims Unit detective in
Alamance County.
I was assigned to Sheriff Terry Johnson to work human
trafficking cases there. At that time, I had absolutely no
experience or training and very little knowledge about human
trafficking.
However, I was quickly connected to the Alamance Anti-Human
Trafficking Advocacy Council comprised of detectives from local
municipalities, assistant district attorneys, an SBI agent, and
a representative from the Alamance For Freedom, an NGO focused
on the advocacy for human trafficking victims.
Through that council I received knowledge and training that
helped me recognize and understand my role and the process
necessary to investigate human trafficking and the resources
available to trafficking victims. I am by no means an expert in
human trafficking investigations.
However, I can testify to the fact that these
investigations are complex and, therefore--and there are many
forms of human trafficking that I had never before realized
were in our communities.
I can also testify that these investigations are beyond the
existing expertise or experience of most local agencies in
North Carolina without the assistance of the State Bureau of
Investigations and/or Homeland Security Investigations and
impossible without the collaboration from the district
attorney's office and a local NGO.
I left Alamance County and returned to the Randolph County
Sheriff's office as the chief deputy in 2018. I will testify
that our agency currently lacks the manpower, training, and
resources necessary to investigate human trafficking.
We do recognize that while human trafficking may not be
widespread in Randolph County, the potential is there and even
one trafficking victim in our community is worth the effort to
prepare our agency for these investigations.
Human trafficking takes many forms and does not
discriminate. Every case is different from the next. Our most
vulnerable citizens are being victimized in our communities in
plain sight.
These victims commonly come from backgrounds of poverty,
domestic abuse, substance abuse, family dysfunction, or simple
misfortune that have placed them in a position of
vulnerability.
They are targeted by predators that promise something
better, often basic needs simply like a place to live.
Traffickers use many different techniques to lure, coerce, or
force their victims into sexual servitude, the sex trade, or
labor. They are very adept at convincing victims to perform
whatever acts they have chosen as long as it benefits them.
Traffickers are even more skilled at holding these victims
mentally hostage through emotional manipulation. Those powerful
manipulations require even more powerful resources to help
victims overcome their fears and/or attachments to their
traffickers.
NGO's are, therefore, a key to fighting human trafficking.
These organizations must have resources and law enforcement
must partner with these organizations in order to be able to
offer human trafficking victims something better than the life
they are living.
These organizations must be on the front end of
investigations. Law enforcement cannot wait until they have a
human trafficking investigation under way.
It is imperative that they already have a partnership with
these organizations and understand the services and resources
available to victims if they hope to convince victims to come
forward, cooperate with investigations, and testify against
their handlers.
Community awareness is equally important. These victims are
often living in plain sight among us, not just handcuffed in
the basement and, unfortunately, for our community it is
necessary that everyone understand that human trafficking is
not simply physical captivity but can be and is more likely to
be more subtle mental captivity of power, control, and
dependence.
Our schools, businesses, churches, and other governmental
offices must become partners with law enforcement so they can
recognize the indicators of human trafficking and know how to
report the suspicion and to whom it should be reported.
It is equally important that we change the mindset of law
enforcement to--in regards to trafficking victims. When the
term ``human trafficking'' is mentioned, most people will
picture a child or a young woman chained or physically
restrained and locked away in a basement.
In actuality, many cases are much more complex and not
nearly as clear cut. Many times victims appear to be complicit
in crimes that officers or detectives are investigating.
Victims of human trafficking are many times participating
in crimes of drug trafficking, prostitution, and frauds. Those
victims who are being coerced or deceived into participating
are usually unlikely to cooperate with detectives and even less
likely to identify as a victim.
They either fear their trafficker, trust their trafficker,
or rely on them for their most basic needs or to provide for
their addiction.
In some cases, the trafficker is a romantic partner and
even a parent. These cases often end with the victim being
charged for the crime and never even recognized as a victim.
In cases where victims are identified, the likelihood of
the victim being cooperative and testifying against their
trafficker is slim.
Human trafficking cases are complex. These cases involve
what we classify in law enforcement as a special victim
investigation.
However, they also require the resources and longevity of a
vice narcotics-style investigation involving tremendous amounts
of manpower and sometimes months of investigation.
These cases generally involve technology that requires yet
another skill set to properly investigate. In addition, human
trafficking does not operate solely within jurisdiction.
Victims are moved or operated from county to county, across
State lines, and into other countries.
Most counties and municipalities in North Carolina simply
do not have the manpower and resources to properly and
completely investigate these cases.
Agencies are often overwhelmed with obvious crimes and
focused on the current opioid epidemic. It is therefore
imperative that human trafficking be investigated from a task
force perspective and include partners from local, State, and
Federal agencies but also include prosecutors, NGO's, and other
service agencies like the Department of Social Services.
Local agencies cannot investigate these cases alone. The
first step an agency must take in recognizing--is recognizing
that although human trafficking may not be a wide-spread
problem in their jurisdiction, even one trafficking victim is
too many.
We must make training and education a priority and initiate
those necessary partnerships so we know and understand the
complexities of investigations, can recognize the indicators of
human trafficking, and can be prepared to properly, skillfully,
and effectively interact with victims and have services and
resources in place to offer them.
It takes a team to bring these cases to fruition. If
agencies hope to combat human trafficking in their
jurisdictions they must have the support of lawmakers and
resources of our State and Federal Government.
The Randolph County Sheriff's Office is, therefore, seeking
a task force position with the Department of Homeland Security
in an effort to initiate a partnership to combat human
trafficking in our community.
On behalf of my agency and potential victims in our county,
I thank you all for your willingness to listen, to develop laws
to protect victims, and allocate funding to assist agencies
like ours in this important crime-fighting endeavor.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Azelton follows:]
Prepared Statement of Aundrea Azelton
October 25, 2019
Good morning Chairman Max Rose and distinguished committee Members.
It is both an honor and a privilege to testify before you today on this
incredibly important issue on behalf of Sheriff Greg Seabolt and the
many dedicated professionals at the Randolph County Sheriff's Office. I
am Colonel Aundrea Azelton, chief deputy at the Randolph County
Sheriff's Office. I am a 24-year law enforcement veteran with 10 years
of investigative experience. In 2016, I left Randolph County Sheriff's
Office and went to work as a special victims unit detective in Alamance
County. I was assigned by Sheriff Terry Johnson to work human
trafficking cases there. At that time, I had absolutely no experience
or training and very little knowledge about human trafficking. However,
I was quickly connected to the Alamance Anti-Human Trafficking Advocacy
Council comprised of detectives from local municipalities, assistant
district attorneys, an SBI agent, and a representative from Alamance
for Freedom, a NGO focused on advocacy for human trafficking victims.
Through that council, I received knowledge and training that helped me
recognize and understand my role in the process necessary to
investigate human trafficking and the resources available to
trafficking victims. I am, by no means, an expert in human trafficking
investigations, however I can testify to the fact that these
investigations are complex and there are many forms of human
trafficking that I had never before realized were in our communities. I
can also testify that these investigations are beyond the existing
expertise or experience of most local agencies in North Carolina
without the assistance of the State Bureau of Investigations and/or
Homeland Security Investigations and impossible without collaboration
from the District Attorney's Office and a local NGO. I left Alamance
County and returned to the Randolph County Sheriff's Office as the
chief deputy in 2018. I will testify that our agency currently lacks
the manpower, training, and resources necessary to investigate human
trafficking. We do recognize that while human trafficking may not be
wide-spread in Randolph County, the potential is there and even 1
trafficking victim in our community is worth the effort to prepare our
agency for these investigations.
Human trafficking takes many forms and does not discriminate; every
case is different from the next. Our most vulnerable citizens are being
victimized in our communities in plain sight. These victims commonly
come from backgrounds of poverty, domestic abuse, substance abuse,
family dysfunction, or simple misfortune that have placed them in a
position of vulnerability. They are targeted by predators that promise
something better, often basic needs like simply a place to live.
Traffickers use many different techniques to lure, coerce, or force
their victims into sexual servitude, the sex trade, or labor. They are
very adept at convincing victims to perform whatever act they have
chosen as long as it benefits them. Traffickers are even more skilled
at holding these victims mentally hostage through emotional
manipulation. Those powerful manipulations require even more powerful
resources to help victims overcome their fears and/or attachments to
their traffickers.
NGOs are therefore a key to fighting human trafficking. These
organizations must have resources and law enforcement must partner with
these organizations in order to be able to offer human trafficking
victims something better than the life they are living. These
organizations must be on the front end of investigations. Law
enforcement cannot wait until they have a human trafficking
investigation under way; it is imperative that they already have a
partnership with these organizations and understand the services and
resources available to victims if they hope to convince victims to come
forward, cooperate with investigations, and testify against their
handlers.
Community awareness is equally important. These victims are often
living in plain sight among us, not just handcuffed in the basement.
Unfortunately for our community, it is necessary that everyone
understand that human trafficking is not simply physical captivity but
can be, and is more likely to be, a more subtle mental captivity of
power, control, and dependence. Our schools, businesses, churches, and
other governmental offices must become partners with law enforcement so
they can recognize the indicators of human trafficking and know how to
report the suspicion and to whom should it be reported.
It is equally important that we change the mindset of law
enforcement in regards to trafficking victims. When the term human
trafficking is mentioned, most people will picture a child or young
woman, chained or physically restrained and locked away in a basement.
In actuality, many cases are much more complex and not nearly as clear
cut. Many times victims appear to be complicit in the crimes that
officers or detectives are investigating. Victims of human trafficking
are many times participating in crimes of drug trafficking,
prostitution, and frauds. Those victims, who are being coerced or
deceived into participating, are usually unlikely to cooperate with
detectives and are even less likely to self-identify as a victim. They
either fear their trafficker, trust their trafficker, or rely on them
for their most basic needs or to provide for their addiction. In some
cases the trafficker is a romantic partner or even a parent. These
cases often end with the victim being charged for the crime and never
even recognized as a victim. In cases where victims are identified, the
likelihood of the victim being cooperative in testifying against their
trafficker is slim.
Human trafficking cases are complex. These cases involve what we
classify in law enforcement as special victim investigations, however
they require the resources and longevity of a Vice Narcotics-style
investigation involving a tremendous amount of manpower and sometimes
months of investigation. These cases generally involve technology that
requires yet another skill set to properly investigate. In addition,
human trafficking does not operate solely within a jurisdiction;
victims are moved or operated from county to county, across State lines
and into other countries. Most counties and municipalities in North
Carolina simply do not have the manpower and resources to properly and
completely investigate these cases. Agencies are often overwhelmed with
obvious crimes and focused on the current opioid epidemic. It is
therefore imperative that human trafficking be investigated from a task
force perspective and include partners from local, State, and Federal
agencies; but also include prosecutors, NGO's, and other service
agencies like the Department of Social Services. Local agencies cannot
investigate these cases alone. The first step an agency must take is
recognizing that although human trafficking may not be a wide-spread
problem in their jurisdiction, even one trafficking victim is too many.
We must make training and education a priority and initiate those
necessary partnerships so we know and understand the complexities of
investigations, can recognize the indicators of human trafficking, and
can be prepared to properly, skillfully, and effectively interact with
victims and have services and resources in place to offer them.
It takes a team to bring these cases to fruition. If agencies hope
to combat human trafficking in their jurisdictions they must have the
support of law makers and the resources of our State and Federal
Government. The Randolph County Sheriff's Office is therefore seeking a
task force position with the Department of Homeland Security in an
effort to initiate a partnership to combat human trafficking in our
community. On behalf of my agency and potential victims in our county,
I thank you all for your willingness to listen, to develop laws that
protect victims, and allocate funding to assist agencies like ours in
this important crime-fighting endeavor.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Colonel.
I thank all the witnesses for their testimony. I will
remind the subcommittee that we each have 5 minutes to question
the panel but I am sure we can go beyond that.
I now recognize the Ranking Member of the subcommittee, the
gentleman from North Carolina, hometown hero, Mr. Walker, for
questions.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Chairman Rose.
I think I will start my line of questioning this way. Of
all the human trafficking training you have taken--and this is
for all of you and let us keep our--if we can keep our answers
brief we will get a few more of the questions in--all the
training you have taken, whether that it is Government-
sponsored or otherwise, including NGO's, and just for people's
listening perspective, NGO is basically a non-Governmental
organization--what have you found to be the most valuable?
Ms. Long, let me start with you. Of all the training that
you have taken, is there something that stands out so this is
something that is really working?
Ms. Long. Thank you, Congressman Walker.
When I think back to the--probably a little over 10 years
in working in this area there are so many trainings that I can
think of.
You know, initially, I received a lot of trainings
internally at the Salvation Army and with some of the different
materials they had developed early on to address human
trafficking throughout the Nation and then, you know, I think--
I think even--I just went last week to the Shared Hope
International training in Cincinnati and even I learned so much
there even all these years later.
Mr. Walker. So is it fair to say that some of the--some of
the great training is coming from the nonprofits, from the
NGO's that are partnering with this? Is that fair to say?
Ms. Long. Definitely.
Mr. Walker. All right. Mr. Martinez, would you--same
question to you. What is something out there--I guess my
question is, as I want people to know, what are some of the
things that are being--that are productive when it comes to the
training side?
Mr. Martinez. Well, training with HSI, you know, we
participate on 120 task forces, and within those task forces we
provide training to State and Federal and local agencies.
Participating agencies also have access to our advanced
human trafficking training that we conduct at our Federal Law
Enforcement Training Center in Glynco, Georgia.
But this is always changing. It is an evolving--it is an
evolving crime. So we are always--HSI is always trying to
modify and change our training to fit how we do today.
Mr. Walker. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Wall.
Mr. Wall. Identify just one single training but any
training opportunity in which there is a survivor.
I have found in traveling across the East Coast and doing
these training events for law enforcement to understand exactly
what we are dealing with would be to have a survivor, a former
victim, in front of them explaining their situation and how it
was that they got into it, how they got out of it, and what
their mindset was while in it.
Mr. Walker. OK.
Ms. Azelton. Colonel.
Ms. Azelton. I cannot think of one particular training, but
there are two components to the training that I have been to
that were most impactful.
The first type of training is one that is a
multidisciplinary team training, which involves the NGO, the
prosecutor, the other members of the task force that you are on
or the people that you are working with.
It gets everybody on the same page with these
investigations. The second component is training that is
victim-centered, that talks about victims and how to help us
understand, change our mindset about victims and learn the
techniques that we need to build the rapport with them.
Mr. Walker. OK. Thank you.
Given the--Mr. Wall, direct this one to you--given the
intrastate, interstate, and international nature of human
trafficking, in many cases across multiple jurisdictions, how
does law enforcement across the State deconflict and coordinate
cases?
Mr. Wall. Well, right now----
Mr. Walker. Maybe Mr. Wall, Mr. Martinez, for you guys.
Mr. Wall. Yes. Right now, with our partnership with HSI and
with the FBI, anytime we have got a human trafficking case in
the State of North Carolina that could cross boundaries for us
in a county situation we make sure we coordinate with our
Federal partners.
We immediately call our local partners, and right now it is
just deconfliction by person and by constant communication.
Mr. Walker. Mr. Martinez, anything to add to that?
Mr. Martinez. Same thing, and we have a headquarters
component that does it on a National basis where we contact our
offices.
Mr. Walker. Do you feel like those communications are
getting better as far as----
Mr. Martinez. Yes.
Mr. Walker [continuing]. Back and forth and not the silo
operation where we had years ago, back and forth? You feel like
there are improvements?
Mr. Martinez. Yes, sir. There is.
Mr. Wall. Yes, sir. I think in this type of crime element,
unlike in a narcotics division where you would have silos, I
think the understanding is and everybody is sharing the
information very well.
Mr. Walker. As a former pastor and seeing some of this
stuff from a distance, there is a psychological component to
this as well--an emotional component.
My wife has launched the Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner
Program at Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center and has testified
on behalf of the FBI in some of these cases here.
My question is, is law enforcement or the State agencies--
is there an equipping going on to handle the sensitivity of
these issues?
Colonel Azelton just talked about some of the--not even
knowing you are a victim in some of this. So, certainly, there
is a criminal aspect to it, and we can talk about raising the
penalty levels for the johns and things.
But my part of it, is there someone to bridge the gap, to
hold the hand of these victims to be able to walk them through
to be able to get the information in a sensitive way that does
not create more pressure or more hardships for them?
Ms. Long, would you mind addressing that and maybe Colonel
Azelton as well?
Ms. Long. Sure. I think we are making progress in that area
as well. A lot of the training that is conducted across the
State and the symposiums we have conducted have included a lot
of detail on trauma-informed services, trauma-informed
investigations, and victim-centered services.
So I do think we are making progress. We still have--we
still have much to do.
Mr. Walker. Ms. Azelton, did you have anything to add to
that?
Ms. Azelton. In smaller or more rural communities like
Randolph County we are still emerging on our victim services
and that is for our child advocacy centers, our sexual assault
centers.
We do not have those resources. I think that we are on the
brink of developing those resources through our family crisis
center. But we are not fully developed.
The NGO's, such as Alamance For Freedom like Alamance
County has, those are imperative to these investigations
because those agencies provide that service to the victims.
Mr. Walker. I just don't know that people fully understand
the complexity of this crime where you can have somebody that
is part of the crime but still a victim of the crime, and I am
hoping that we can dial this down, too.
I appreciate the Chairman's yielding. I want one more
question.
I would like to acknowledge--I believe Sheriff Rogers is
here as well today of Guilford County. Thank you for your
interest today. As well, we have got some commissioners--Kay
Cashion, Commissioner Jeff Phillips, Commissioner Alan Branson.
Thank you for being here today.
Panel, what are the most common ways your agencies become
aware of a human trafficking case? Let us bring it all the way
back down to their--does the majority of cases develop through
tips from the National hotline that we talked about or is there
some other way that you are getting information on this?
Just, quickly, for the 4 of you and then I am going to
yield back to the Chairman.
Ms. Long.
Ms. Long. Thank you.
You know, I do think we talk often about the National Human
Trafficking Hotline and how wonderful it is and their stats
are.
But when you talk with the providers on the ground, they
are receiving the majority of their referrals from others in
their community that they have trained.
So law enforcement, working with them, local coalitions,
task forces, homeless shelters they may have trained. So it
does seem that that piece of raising awareness is a bigger
piece than the hotline.
Mr. Walker. Mr. Martinez.
Mr. Martinez. Certainly, the hotline does provide a lot of
tips. But also working with our partners, working other
investigations like gang investigations, narcotics, certainly
comes from that. So we do see it through that.
Mr. Walker. Mr. Wall.
Mr. Wall. Yes, sir. We would see it from proactive
investigations in which we would conduct an operation--an
outreach operation.
We develop a lot of cases from that as well as our
partners, the NGO's, who are already servicing the victim and
they come forward and are ready to move forward with a
prosecutorial case.
Mr. Walker. Colonel.
Ms. Azelton. During my time in Alamance County, we did get
tips from the community and I attribute that to Alamance For
Freedom and Sheriff Johnson and some of our partners there did
a really good job of awareness in our community.
So we did have tips coming in from the community. In
Randolph, where it is not so much a hot topic item, detectives
are recognizing the elements of those crimes in crimes that
they are currently investigating.
Mr. Walker. You mentioned an Alamance For Freedom. Is that
a group that you worked with directly when you were in Alamance
County?
Ms. Azelton. It was the NGO in Alamance that provided
victim advocacy and services--emergency services--to the
victims that we encountered.
Mr. Walker. You had a close relationship in working with
them?
Ms. Azelton. Yes. They were with us at almost every
training that we went to--provided training. It was--they were
always there for a victim in emergency situations, which was
incredible.
They would actually be there when we first encountered
them, provide emergency services at the time, placement, and
would carry them through with finding a place to go and learn
those life skills and we actually have a very inspiring case
that I hope to share soon when that case is finished in court.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Colonel.
Chairman.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Ranking Member Walker.
So I want to just, first off, touch on the piece of the
internet.
I believe, Mr. Wall, you had mentioned the statistic of
400,000 advertisements, which I find to be an incredibly
striking number.
So could each of you walk me through what you are seeing
happening on the internet right now in regards to this issue?
Then, just as importantly, what have your interactions been
with these tech companies, social media companies, and
otherwise to work with them to both investigate these cases
using these advertisements as leads, and to get these
advertisements off of their platforms?
So we will start from reverse order. Colonel.
I understand that there has not been any direct
communication with them as well--that we find to be more often
the case than otherwise.
Ms. Azelton. During the time I was focusing on human
trafficking investigations in Alamance County a lot of the--I
didn't have a lot of interaction with the actual companies in
submitting search warrants to certain companies. Sometimes they
didn't even respond.
Mr. Rose. Could you just go with that? Which companies
would----
Ms. Azelton. So there was a particular case where I sent in
a subpoena to Google for a Google account and they never
responded.
That case I ended up turning over to the task force with
HSI and I think they ended up following up on that. But I
waited months and months and months with no response to that
particular----
Mr. Rose. Wow. So you sent the subpoena to Google regarding
a human trafficking case that was actively occurring and Google
didn't even take the time to respond to you?
Ms. Azelton. That is how it appeared.
Mr. Rose. That is astounding.
Mr. Wall. Oh. Yes, sir. In dealing with some of these
companies it just depends on who they are. Most of these
websites are now housed outside the U.S. jurisdiction. They are
in foreign countries.
So that is where their servers sit, which is why there is
not a lot that we can do as far as law enforcement.
But as far as our interaction with them when depending on
who they are, some of them have been very cooperative. They
will send us everything because they don't want the heat of law
enforcement on them in not responding.
So they will give us anything we need as far as the
subpoenas. But what we are seeing on-line that is basically how
these operations are working.
Mr. Rose. So you are telling me that there are on-line
marketplaces, for all intents and purposes that----
Mr. Wall. Absolutely.
Mr. Rose [continuing]. That are operated with servers off-
line. But name some of these companies.
Mr. Wall. Skip the Games, Adult Search, City X Guide, One
Back Page, Mega Personals. There are over 40 that you could go
to right now and we can pull up and you could find anything you
wanted.
Mr. Rose. OK. We would appreciate it if you could just
provide us with a list of any of these that you are aware of.
Mr. Wall. Sure.
Mr. Rose. Mr. Martinez.
Mr. Martinez. The same. As you heard in my opening
testimony, the Muslim case utilized the internet to get his
victims and people to--that they serviced.
So the internet provides anonymity. I mean, they are always
using that platform to get their victims and sell their
product.
So that is one thing that--and with my colleagues with
issues with getting this information from the tech companies,
that is something that whenever we have issues we--our cyber
crimes center and headquarters is always providing assistance
and getting that type of support.
Mr. Rose. Well, undoubtedly, we have seen the cases of
human trafficking dramatically increase over the last 5 to 10
years. Do we think in part that is due to these companies that
are established in these on-line marketplaces?
Mr. Martinez. I would say it could be part of it. I mean,
human trafficking is such a clandestine crime where everyday
everything is evolving and we are developing new techniques to
uncover it.
So that could be part of it, yes.
Mr. Rose. Ms. Long.
Ms. Long. I mean, the only thing that I would add to that
is that we do know also that apps are used as recruitment and
we have seen cases that used Facebook to recruit and help groom
victims and, of course, now it is moving away from Facebook so
we--but we do hear of cases with Instagram and others.
The commission hasn't had any, you know, direct contact
with companies.
Mr. Rose. So when you talk about apps what you are
specifically referring to is social media platforms or are
there apps that are dedicated to this type of heinous activity?
Ms. Long. I would have to defer.
I know the social media platform for sure for recruiting
and coercing victims. But do you know of any specific apps that
are--yes, I don't either.
Mr. Rose. OK. All right. Thank you, ma'am.
We can continue with your--all right. Great.
I defer to you again, sir.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Chairman.
My condolences go out to the families and friends of the 39
victims found dead last week--some of you may have seen it--in
the trailer of a truck in Essex, over in the United Kingdom.
While this is, obviously, out of our jurisdiction, this is,
unfortunately, an all-too-familiar situation as there are
countless stories of victims, sometimes in the hundreds, being
discovered in the back of a trailer in terrible conditions in
the United States.
What would be beneficial to law enforcement officers and
agencies to be able to better identify and save these victims
trafficked in these trailers before it comes to the tragic
situation that we experienced in England?
We have seen some of that here in the country and, Mr.
Wall, let me start with you. Is there some things there that
would be beneficial to law enforcement identified before it
gets to that place?
Mr. Wall. Well, of course, and we are working in
conjunction with Texas DPS to train our North Carolina State
Highway Patrol to identify any vehicles that may be driving up
and down the highways such as that.
But it is just getting the word out to the communities, to
the law enforcement community and to the public, as to what
human trafficking may look like.
I feel like once they see something they will say
something, and then we can move forward with it.
Mr. Walker. Mr. Martinez, do you believe that some of our
immigrant communities are targeted based on the fear of--
sometimes you hear this about deportation--that makes them even
less willing to come clear on this? Is this something that you
have seen or experienced? Somebody want to address that?
I will start with you, Mr. Martinez.
Mr. Martinez. That is absolutely a problem. Illegal
immigrants that are here in the United States are vulnerable
and they are being used in trafficking cases because
traffickers take advantage of that.
They know that they are being reported to ICE or to
officials that they are going to be deported. So that is
definitely----
Mr. Walker. I believe last year you guys made close to
1,600 arrests, I believe, if my numbers are correct on ICE--
including ICE and HSI specifically, this human trafficking.
Are those numbers correct as far as you----
Mr. Martinez. The specific numbers--criminal arrests for
fiscal year 2018 was close to 16,588 and----
Mr. Walker. Mm-hmm. We know that the human smuggling and
the human trafficking, specifically at our Southern Border, is
a continued growing issue.
Immigrants have been tracked from over 60 countries there,
and for many of those victims that are paying these coyotes,
that payment does not end once they smuggle them inside the
border.
Have you guys seen this continued abuse once they cross
over into this country where these gang-related are continuing
to reap payment, as horrible as that sounds? Is that something
that you see and it is continued once they arrive here?
Mr. Martinez. That is correct, sir, and the payments never
end and that is the problem they hold over now. They never end.
They are always having to pay that payment and that is the
abuse.
Mr. Walker. Let me stay with you, Mr. Martinez. I want to
focus a little bit more on how each of your agencies and
organizations specifically work just to combat this entire
problem.
Does HSI have any human trafficking task forces in North
Carolina?
Mr. Martinez. Correct. We have one in Charlotte, one in
Winston-Salem, and one in Raleigh.
Mr. Walker. All right. So if that is the case, how do you
determine which local law enforcement partners are selected as
task force officers and how does the TFO relationship work to
target specifically human trafficking?
Mr. Martinez. Those relationships or those task force
officers that come into--to work with us are through dialog and
that is through day-to-day interactions with either drug
smuggling, crimes, gangs, anything--human trafficking.
So it is dialog with myself as an executive going to the
different departments and having dialog with executives and
building coalitions so we can have those exchange of resources
to better combat human trafficking.
Mr. Walker. OK.
Mr. Wall, how many rapid response teams currently exist
across the State of North Carolina and how many do you think
are needed?
Mr. Wall. Currently, I think there are--Christine, help me
out--24 or 44. They are in different pockets--the rapid
response teams, which are mostly comprised----
Mr. Walker. Can you unpack that rapid response for the
listener today? Please----
Mr. Wall. A rapid response team or multi-discipline team is
usually made up of NGO's--nongovernmental organizations--that
are there as service providers when law enforcement encounters
a human trafficking victim.
It is someone that we rely on to call upon to come to the
scene to help rescue that victim, to get them into--whether it
is get them to some food, to housing, to get them out of that
situation.
North Carolina is not completely covered. I don't know if
that number is correct as far as 24 but they are across the
State. But we have a lot of counties that are still uncovered
with the rapid response team.
Mr. Walker. So you believe these NGO's are valuable
providers or partners with you. Could you do your job without
them? Let me just be that point-blank.
Mr. Wall. No. No. Could not do--this crime of human
trafficking could not be investigated by law enforcement alone.
We must have the partners of the NGO's to do this job.
Mr. Walker. On the rapid response teams, what is the
biggest hurdle to establishing these teams?
Mr. Wall. I think it is----
Mr. Walker. Ms. Long, I want you----
Mr. Wall. Yes.
Mr. Walker. I mean Mr. Wall. Then we will come back to Ms.
Long.
Mr. Wall. I think it is education. I think it is getting
the community to understand what human trafficking is and then
finding that passionate person or people within that community
that want to stand up a rapid response team and make a
difference in their community.
Mr. Walker. Ms. Long, do you want to add anything to that?
Ms. Long. Sure, I would, actually.
So we have counted about 24 that are either rapid response
teams or maybe they are a task force or a coalition that some
of them are not always focused on 24/7 response with the
National hotline.
So as far as rapid response teams, there is probably around
11 or 12 of those, and I think part of the most difficult
challenge that they face is that these are groups coming
together on their time to try to pull together different
efforts and organizations.
So I still think to some extent having that State-wide task
force or the unit that Special Agent Wall is talking about is
needed to help just organize and add that extra additional
support into them because they are doing it as collateral
support.
Mr. Walker. A couple more questions, then I will yield
back.
Ms. Long, I want to stay with you here. How does the Human
Trafficking Commission partner with the DHS Blue Campaign?
Ms. Long. Yes. You know, we were looking at having the Blue
Campaign come about a year ago. We were planning an event to
have them come and do a round table, and then due to various
budget-related items we had to postpone that.
Then we do have material from the Blue Campaign that we use
and take with us different places--tip cards, that sort of
thing.
Mr. Walker. Mr. Martinez, my final question is do you know
if there is a Homeland Security Information Network Portal for
human trafficking, and if there is do you think such a portal
code could be helpful in sharing information on human
trafficking?
Or is there a different system that you would recommend to
use to reach other law enforcement entities about human
trafficking trends, best practices and cases?
Mr. Martinez. Yes. Yes. Thank you for your question.
We do. We call it the HSIN, Homeland Security----
Mr. Walker. Can you repeat that? Called the----
Mr. Martinez. HSIN.
Mr. Walker. OK.
Mr. Martinez. It is through fusion centers that have
communication across the country and able to share strategies
and information through that system.
Headquarters also has--our headquarters human trafficking
unit has a way to get information out to any of the different
offices that we have across the country and share that
information that way through our State and local partners,
through all across the country.
Mr. Walker. Thank you.
Chairman.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, sir.
I want to touch on big business for a moment here. We will
start with Ms. Long. We will just go on down.
Do we have a sense that big business is complicit in this--
that they are aware that, potentially, some of their labor is
coming from this?
If not, then what actors in the private sector--what can we
be looking to the private sector for here as a partner?
Because, certainly, there is some demand here that is being
met.
So we have to look at supply. But how can we look at
demand?
Ms. Long.
Ms. Long. I do think to some extent, you know, some big
business is aware. Some of the efforts that we have taken to
try to help educate and bring awareness is--at our last
symposium in 2019 we had a couple of specific workshops on
financial crimes investigations related to human trafficking
and we had several banks come.
A bank helped sponsor some of that to help kind-of--yes,
just further that knowledge and how they can help with
investigations.
Then on even a State-wide--a State government platform, I
guess, with our Department of Labor, you know, with their
housing inspectors that go out and different initiatives that
go out they definitely speak as well.
They are looking for things and talk with growers and
others in the community about human trafficking as well.
Mr. Martinez. Yes. For Homeland Security Investigations we
are starting a new initiative. It is called the STOP
Initiative, and that is the Strategic Trafficking Outreach
Program, where we are focusing on industries to inform them,
like, an example is the transportation industry airlines and
busses and to make that information available to them because
we feel, I think, being that this is everywhere, transportation
is a key component to that, too, and they need to have that
information and they are more than willing to assist.
Mr. Wall. Yes, sir. I do believe that big business is
probably involved in it but their awareness of it is probably
not--they are not as complicit as you may think.
One of the things that I have seen in my travels the city
of Houston is doing a great job in stopping the trafficking
within their city by education.
So they have put in mandates that say every bus, every cab,
every hotel worker, every restaurant worker within that
community has to have some sort of human trafficking education
as well as any private business that is doing any business with
the city of Houston must sign a contract with them saying that
if they have knowledge of any human trafficking within their
labor force that their contract can be null and void.
That is just one small example of how, you know, a small--
not a small community, but a community can, you know, get the
word out and make sure that those businesses are not complicit
at all.
Ms. Azelton. I think that is just another component to
these investigations is community awareness. Whether it be
through big business, small business, our community has to be
aware of what trafficking looks like and who to report it to.
Mr. Rose. So one more question. I may be a New Yorker, but
I am humble.
So what, if anything, do you think are some lessons that
North Carolina can teach other States and other localities
throughout the country?
Ms. Azelton. I think we just have a lot to learn. I don't
know that there is anything that we can teach anyone else. I
think we have to learn from each other.
I think everybody has an experience and knowledge and
training that can help each other. We can all work together to
make these investigations better.
Mr. Wall. Yes, sir.
I feel like North Carolina, at this point, we are a little
behind a lot of the other States that have established this and
understood what human trafficking is and standing up task
forces and really getting together and pushing forward.
We are at the ground level. So as far as teaching anybody
anything, I don't think we are quite there yet. We are still in
the learning mode.
But we are moving forward and we are pushing as hard as we
can.
Mr. Martinez. Coming new into North Carolina, I have seen
from other places across the country is that even this panel
you can hear the passion and the dedication to this horrible
crime.
You see it in our panel and you can only imagine on the
agent level on what they do. I see it. I have seen it
everywhere.
So it is my priority to develop great partnerships here in
the State of North Carolina.
Ms. Long. Thank you. I don't know that I have much to add
to that. I agree that we are still in a learning mode and
working together is kind of how we are making our way through
it.
Mr. Rose. I am certainly noticing the cultural distinctions
between New Yorkers and the South. You all are--you don't do
yourselves justice.
I think it is--I am extraordinarily impressed by the great
work that you are doing and I do thank you for giving me the
opportunity to learn from you.
Sir.
Mr. Walker. Just a couple questions left, Chairman, if I
could, please.
I want to--I want to try to figure out are we--are we--I
know education is an issue here. But how are we reporting these
cases?
How do these victims know to make sure this is the number,
this is the place?
I know there is a National hotline. My question is, is it
the most effective way for law enforcement to get tips on human
trafficking cases.
Mr. Martinez.
Mr. Martinez. You asked earlier what are we doing for the
victims once an investigation has developed. HSI has the victim
assistance specialist that we have that would go into any
investigation and they take the victims and they start the
process of stabilization for the victims.
So our victim assistance specialist are constantly doing
education. They are out doing trainings and they are having
these contacts with the NGO's, and that relationship with the
NGO's is an important step, as my colleague said earlier.
Without them, we can't--we can't do what we do. So if there
is that relationship with our victim assistance specialist and
with our special agents, we are able to get more tips and more
victims that come forward with that.
Mr. Walker. OK. Anybody else want to address that?
Mr. Wall.
Mr. Wall. Yes, sir. I think it comes back to the
relationships with law enforcement, with the service providers.
Yes, the Polaris Project and the 1-800 numbers are a great
tool. But a lot of these service providers are going to see
these victims on the ground level probably before somebody
calls that 1-800 number and knowing that a service provider has
a law enforcement officer or agency to lean upon and directly
call that will serve them properly I think you will see the
numbers start to tick up.
Mr. Walker. Ms. Long, if there is a 12- or 13-year-old
young girl, young boy out there, showed up for school that has
been a victim of this, how do they find out where they go to
make sure their anonymity is protected but also--because these
deviant human beings have instilled in their mind that if they
say anything--well, first of all, they are the victim and they
deserve this.
No. 2, is if they do something--if they haven't already
created an addiction problem for them already they have put
them in fear of their life. How does that person get that
information to you?
Whatever the environment from our schools or hospitals, how
do they approach? How do they get this information into the
pipeline?
Ms. Long. Could be--yes, a few different ways, actually. So
we do have a law in North Carolina where particularly middle
schoolers are supposed to be educated on sex trafficking. So we
have a little bit more to develop with that as far as
recommending specific materials and curriculum to be used in
schools.
But schools are doing this now and the National Human
Trafficking Hotline is the number being given that will then
reroute them back to the closest NGO in their area providing
services.
Of course, if they are a minor as well then Child
Protective Services would be involved. Hospitals as well.
Atrium Healthcare out of Charlotte has launched an initiative
with a tool kit and a three-staff team that is kind-of
providing their own rapid response team within the hospital
system.
They presented to a committee of ours recently and said
they had seen about 127 referrals since March when they began.
So their model seems to be working well and we are looking
forward to seeing how it continues.
Mr. Walker. Mr. Wall, in your experience, the johns, for
lack of a better expression, who I think are abusers in this
process as much as anybody, are the penalties stiff enough for
these guys--guys and gals, I mean?
Mr. Wall. No, sir. Not at all. No.
If we do a proactive operation, which we do an outreach
operation for the females and then one to bring in the males as
far as the john cases, as you refer to. That is going to be a
misdemeanor. They are going to get a ticket and they are going
to walk away.
Mr. Walker. So let me get this straight.
So you get the trafficker, you have the victim, and you
have the johns.
Mr. Wall. That is correct.
Mr. Walker. In some cases, the victim may end up getting a
longer punishment or penalty in the justice system than the
actual john. Is that----
Mr. Wall. That is correct.
Mr. Walker. Is that not just ludicrous?
Mr. Wall. Yes, sir. Hundred percent.
Mr. Walker. Think about that.
Mr. Martinez, anything you want to weigh in on that in your
time and as a--would you agree with Mr. Wall as far as the
johns come out of this in a way--much less way than they should
be when it comes to the penalty and the punishment?
Mr. Martinez. Oh, absolutely, and victims are scarred for
life. It is something they carry with them forever.
So that has no comparison. I totally agree.
Mr. Walker. Just let me keep pushing on this. Help me
understand this because I want to make sure we get this.
Do the johns know when they go to these places or portals
or sites that the victims they are encountering, whether it be
young men or young women, do they know these people are being
trafficked?
Mr. Wall. It is my opinion--again, back to my statement, I
think they have to know. I think deep down they don't want to
believe that and they want to think that this person is here of
their free will since they are calling them and they meet them
alone.
But a rational human being, even though he is trying to buy
sex, has got to think is this really what this person has
chosen to do--did she walk in this room freely or he walk in
this room freely at their own free will and choosing to do
this?
Mr. Walker. What creates a spike in this in our
communities? What is it that you see that drives this at
different seasons, different times? What is it that drives a
spike into this?
Mr. Wall. I think it is seasons. It is events. It is----
Mr. Walker. Like sporting events and things?
Mr. Wall. Absolutely. You got sporting events. We just had
the State Fair, the furniture market here in North Carolina,
the MBA All-Star that we had. When you see the Super Bowl,
there is always a spike.
So anywhere you have a large contingent of predominantly
male individuals with excess money in a combined location away
from home, I think you are going to see a spiked increase.
Mr. Walker. Ms. Long, going back to the earlier question,
if you believe there were stricter enforcement penalties and
punishment on these johns, do you think that would help deter
some of these crimes?
Ms. Long. I do. I do think so, and I have--just last week
we learned about some States who are changing those penalties
and are making maybe the second offense a felony--you know, the
first a misdemeanor, the second a felony. And so that is
something we are very interested in our legislative committee
looking into.
Mr. Walker. Well, as I wrap up here today, I know the
Department of Homeland Security Blue Campaign that conducts
education outreach on human trafficking, they have sent us some
samples of their materials--they are on the front desk--if that
is helpful to any of your organizations.
Let me say thank you to the panel. I can tell the emotion
that, as difficult as this is, that you are still moved and
that speaks to me.
I would also like to thank all the NGO's that are present.
I know we are on a Federal witness hearing here. But let me say
I view that as a ministry and a calling.
Thank you to our other local law enforcement, our Guilford
County commissioners, and then to also Chairman Rose, who was
California to New York to North Carolina yesterday and getting
in Raleigh about midnight and driving over and coming to our
home State.
North Carolina is proud to have you here and we thank you
for your time and your concern in allowing us to have this
hearing here in North Carolina.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, sir. You know, in this era of
extraordinary hyper partisanship, it is an honor to work with
you each and every day.
So with that, I do thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony and the Members for their questions.
The Members of the subcommittee may have additional
questions for the witnesses and we ask that you respond
expeditiously in writing to those questions.
One thing I can think of is that subpoena you mentioned.
Without objection, the committee record shall be kept open
for 10 days.
Hearing no further business, the subcommittee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:25 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[all]