- THE UPCOMING IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION'S NEW GLOBAL SULFUR STANDARD FOR MARINE FUELS, WHICH IS SET TO TAKE EFFECT ON JANUARY 1, 2020
[Senate Hearing 116-349]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-349
THE UPCOMING IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL MARITIME
ORGANIZATION'S NEW GLOBAL SULFUR STANDARD FOR MARINE FUELS, WHICH IS
SET TO TAKE EFFECT ON JANUARY 1, 2020
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
DECEMBER 10, 2019
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-874
WASHINGTON : 2021
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska, Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
JOE MANCHIN III, West Virginia
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
RON WYDEN, Oregon
MIKE LEE, Utah
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
STEVE DAINES, Montana
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
CINDY HYDE-SMITH, Mississippi
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
Brian Hughes, Staff Director
Kellie Donnelly, Chief Counsel
Tristan Abbey, Senior Professional Staff Member
John Crowther, Senior Counsel
Sarah Venuto, Democratic Staff Director
Sam E. Fowler, Democratic Chief Counsel
Nicole Buell, Democratic Professional Staff Member
Armando Avila, Democratic Senior Professional Staff Member
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa, Chairman and a U.S. Senator from Alaska....
1
Manchin III, Hon. Joe, Ranking Member and a U.S. Senator from
West Virginia..................................................
23
WITNESSES
Capuano, Hon. Linda, Administrator, U.S. Energy Information
Administration, U.S. Department of Energy......................
25
Butler, John W., President & CEO, World Shipping Council.........
55
Morgan, Derrick, Senior Vice President, American Fuel &
Petrochemical Manufacturers....................................
60
Nerurkar, Neelesh, Vice President, ClearView Energy Partners, LLC
72
Webster, Jamie, Senior Director, Center for Energy Impact, Boston
Consulting Group, and Fellow at Columbia University's Center on
Global Energy Policy...........................................
79
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
Butler, John W.:
Opening Statement............................................
55
Written Testimony............................................
57
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
101
Capuano, Hon. Linda:
Opening Statement............................................
25
Written Testimony............................................
27
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
99
ConservAmerica:
Letter for the Record........................................
153
Manchin III, Hon. Joe:
Opening Statement............................................
23
Morgan, Derrick:
Opening Statement............................................
60
Written Testimony............................................
62
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
148
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa:
Opening Statement............................................
1
Letter from Dr. Capuano dated 11/7/19........................
3
Nerurkar, Neelesh:
Opening Statement............................................
72
Written Testimony............................................
74
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
150
Webster, Jamie:
Opening Statement............................................
79
Written Testimony............................................
81
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
152
THE UPCOMING IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL MARITIME
ORGANIZATION'S NEW GLOBAL SULFUR STANDARD FOR MARINE FUELS, WHICH IS
SET TO TAKE EFFECT ON JANUARY 1, 2020
----------
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 10, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:00 a.m. in
Room SD-366, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lisa
Murkowski, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
The Chairman. Good morning, everyone. The Committee will
come to order.
We are here this morning to examine the implementation of
the International Maritime Organization's New Global Sulfur
Standard for Marine Fuels. This is known as IMO 2020. This new
standard will formally take effect on January 1st of 2020, just
about three weeks from today.
IMO 2020 has been years in the making, decades in the
making, so this is really no surprise that we are up against
this implementation date, but I still think that for some, it
is like, where did this come from? Well, there is a little bit
of history out there. Its purpose, of course, is to reduce air
pollution from shipping around the world. It accomplishes that
purpose by limiting the sulfur content of marine fuel, which is
how much sulfur is in the diesel that ships use to move across
the ocean, and limiting that amount to 0.5 percent by mass.
Those sulfur reductions will bring global health benefits that
all of us should welcome and support.
At the same time, I think we can be proud that here in the
United States the sulfur content of marine fuel is already
limited to 0.1 percent by mass. As is true on so many different
environmental issues, the United States is leading the way here
and that is a good thing. Over the last several years the
global shipping industry has been preparing to comply with IMO
2020. Three primary options to do that appear to be number one,
of course, using low-sulfur diesel fuel; secondly, installing
exhaust scrubbers; or third, switching to liquified natural gas
which, of course, emits virtually zero sulfur.
No matter which method is chosen, I think we recognize it
takes time and it takes money. Whether it is a ship installing
a scrubber, a refinery making an upgrade to produce low-sulfur
fuel, or a company buying or converting to an LNG-powered
vessel, we all know it just takes time and, of course, it takes
money. It is generally agreed that the U.S. refining industry
is uniquely positioned to benefit from IMO 2020. The
investments have been made. Refineries are optimized. All of
that supports good paying jobs and will help mitigate potential
impacts to domestic and global fuel prices.
There is still some disagreement over what those exact
impacts will be, but I am glad to see a consensus, or at least
something that resembles a consensus, among the many analysts
that the impacts of IMO 2020 will be less than what was
projected just a year ago. We had a hearing back in February
and I remember asking at that point in time, are we ready for
this? And there was some criticism. It is like, whoa, is
Murkowski backpedaling on this saying that we don't need to do
it? But I was asking the perfectly legitimate question, are we
going to be ready? And I think that we do appear to be in a
better place today than we were back then.
What is critical now with implementation just a few weeks
away is for compliance to continue at full speed. There is no
stopping IMO 2020, and I certainly hope that no one will
construe that this oversight hearing was an effort to do that.
With that said, it is also important for us to be vigilant.
I come from a state that, as you all know, we pay some of the
highest prices for energy in the country. So I have been paying
very, very close attention to what IMO 2020 could mean for
Alaskans, especially those who live in rural and remote areas
where shipping prices are already very high and truly the case
of economic hardship for so many. I had written the
Administrator, Dr. Capuano, who is with us today. We appreciate
you being here. But I had written asking that the EIA closely
monitor implementation. I am going to enter your response to
that letter, Dr. Capuano, in today's hearing record. So I thank
you for that.
[Letter to Dr. Capuano and her response follows.]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. I welcome the panel that has joined us this
morning to share with us what you have seen in the markets and
what you believe may be coming soon. I think we recognize that
even while we have known that this is coming, there are some
complexities here. So we appreciate you being here to share
your expertise with us.
With that, I turn to my colleague, Senator Manchin.
STATEMENT OF HON. JOE MANCHIN III,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WEST VIRGINIA
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and thank you
for convening this meeting today to discuss the International
Maritime Organization's New Global Sulfur Standards for Marine
Fuels. With less than a month until their standards go into
effect, I look forward to discussing implementation with our
esteemed witnesses and I thank you all for being here today.
As you might know, West Virginia might not be on the firing
line of these new ocean vessels, but we are concerned. It is
somewhat familiar territory for me also because we have done
this work already on coal plants to cut emissions for
SOX and NOX and particulates, as you
know, and we have been successful at that. And let me tell you,
it made a big difference in states like mine. I have told
people before, I remember growing up, my mother would hang our
clothes out and they came back a little bit dirtier than when
they went out. So it did make a big difference, and we all
really, truly noticed it.
These new sulfur standards for open ocean shipping will
help us take another step in the right direction by ensuring
sulfur content in maritime fuels drops from 3.5 percent to 0.5
percent. This will be an impactful change as more than 80
percent of our global trade is transported by sea. In fact,
marine fuels account for just 7 percent of our transportation
fuels demand, yet they account for 90 percent of the
transportation sector's sulfur dioxide emissions. That is hard
to comprehend, 90 percent are coming from one source, even
though it is only 7 percent of the total.
It is estimated that as a result of these standards more
than two million barrels per day of high-sulfur fuel will be
displaced from the sector. Implementing these regulations will
dramatically decrease the SOX emissions which is
both good for the environment and for human health. My
understanding is that the IMO has also already implemented
efficiency standards and plans for reducing greenhouse gas
emissions so that the shipping industry moves forward on
climate solutions in addition to local air pollution.
There are three main options for reaching the new 0.5
percent standard using lower-sulfur diesel fuels, switching to
other lower sulfur emitting fuels such as LNG or biofuels or
outfitting ships with scrubbers to clean high-sulfur fuel oil.
In U.S. waters, ships already are required to comply with a
more stringent standard, but I look forward to hearing about
how industry is prepared for this switch for global routes.
At this point it is estimated that only three to five
percent of the total global ship fleets will be outfitted with
scrubbing technology. That means that in short-term, at least,
most ships will switch to using lower-sulfur diesel fuels. With
increasing demand for cleaner fuels, the U.S. is well-
positioned to capture that increased market share with fuels
already in the market. We checked with some of the refineries,
and they say they are capable of meeting this demand.
This puts American refineries and energy producers at an
advantage. We are ahead of the curve because, I have said, we
have had sulfur standards in place since 2015 that are five
times more stringent than the new global sulfur standards, and
our refiners have invested billions in upgrading their
infrastructure to make cleaner fuels. The IEA estimates that
the new standard will further increase refining capacity to
meet increased demands for low-sulfur bunker fuels by 300,000
barrels per day. And as new ships are being built, other low-
sulfur fuels such as LNG are expected to play an increasing
role in helping ships meet the new standards.
Some forecasts show that the amount of LNG used as bunker
fuel globally may double by 2030 as a result of this rule from
three percent to seven percent. This is a success story for
many U.S. companies. We need to keep our eye on the ball and
ensure that we continue to position U.S. companies to lead the
world in clean energy. Ensuring that we maintain a competitive
advantage can go a long way in promoting our nation's energy
security while benefiting the economies and communities of oil
and gas producing states, such as my home State of West
Virginia. We keep saying that we need to continue to innovate,
and elimination is not going to solve the world global problem.
West Virginia ranks fourth among the states in total energy
production. It is the seventh largest producer of marketed
natural gas in the nation. Our underground gas storage capacity
accounts for almost six percent of the nation's total capacity.
Promoting sound policies and regulations that responsibly tap
into these resources and others, including those in Alaska and
along the Gulf Coast, will only benefit our nation's energy
security and will add much needed jobs. That is important for
our economy and for geopolitical balance around the world. It
is also important for human health and the environment. We have
made great progress reducing air pollution and acid rain with
scrubbers and cleaner fuels. This rule keeps our foot on the
gas. We also need progress reducing global carbon dioxide
emissions, which the EIA said in a report last month, rose in
2018 for the first time since 2014. We must all be cognizant of
that. This is a concerning trend. I hope today's conversation
can highlight the types of solutions we should be pursuing.
With that, Chair Murkowski, I look forward to hearing from
our esteemed witnesses today.
The Chairman. Very good, thank you.
We will begin this morning's panel with Dr. Linda Capuano,
who I have just introduced, who is the Administrator for the
Energy Information Administration (EIA) and has been before
this Committee many times. We welcome you back.
Mr. John Butler is the President and the CEO of the World
Shipping Council. Thank you for joining us this morning.
Mr. Derrick Morgan is the Senior Vice President for Federal
and Regulatory Affairs at the American Fuel and Petrochemical
Manufacturers (AFPM) Association. Thank you.
Mr. Neelesh Nerurkar is the Vice President for ClearView
Energy Partners. Thank you for joining us.
And Mr. Jamie Webster has also been before this Committee
before. He is the Senior Director at the Boston Consulting
Group's (BCG) Center for Energy Impact. So we welcome you to
the Committee.
We would ask that you try to keep your comments to about
five minutes. Your full statements will be included as part of
the Committee record. Once you have all concluded your
statements, we will have an opportunity for questions and your
responses.
Again, thank you for joining us, and Administrator Capuano,
if you would like to begin please.
STATEMENT OF HON. LINDA CAPUANO, ADMINISTRATOR,
U.S. ENERGY INFORMATION ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
ENERGY
Dr. Capuano. Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Manchin and
members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to
testify about EIA's view on the effects that the upcoming IMO
2020 regulations may have on the global oil market as presented
in our November Short-Term Energy Outlook, or STEO. The
upcoming regulations take effect on January 1st and will limit
marine fuel sulfur content to 0.5 percent by weight, down from
3.5 percent which was established in 2012. We expect this will
increase demand for low-sulfur crude and put about $2 per
barrel of upward pressure on light, sweet crude oil prices in
2020.
EIA expects the price impact to dissipate as the market
adjusts. This is particularly relevant to states like Alaska
where diesel fuel is important to the economy. However, we also
expect the projected slowing growth of global GDP to slow oil
demand growth and cause global oil inventories to generally
increase placing an offsetting downward pressure on oil and
petroleum product prices. As a result, our November STEO
forecasts Brent crude oil prices to average slightly higher
than $60 per barrel in 2020 compared with the average of $64
per barrel in 2019. Relative to refined products, the bunker
fuel is a small share of the global and U.S. liquid fuels
market.
However, low-sulfur refined products have experienced
upward price pressure in the U.S. as ship operators purchase
and store low-sulfur marine fuels. Trade Press reports that the
price differential between low- and high-sulfur fuel oil on the
U.S. Gulf Coast has increased over threefold in the last three
months. Similar trends have emerged on trading locations around
the world. The price effects from this shift in marine and fuel
demand is most visible in the low- and high-sulfur residual
fuel oil market, but other refined, excuse me, other refined
petroleum products such as diesel fuel, gasoline and jet fuel
may also be showing small price increases.
Relative to retail prices at the pump, in general, we
expect the price premiums for low-sulfur, refined products to
be reflected in higher refining margins through 2020. We also
expect these price premiums will be offset by the forecasted
lower crude oil prices. As a result, we expect that 2020
gasoline and diesel retail prices at the pump to be similar to
those in 2019.
Relative to U.S. exports, the current high refining margins
are providing economic incentive for global refiners to
maximize low-sulfur distillate fuel output. Much of the U.S.
refinery capacity, in particular, is well-positioned to produce
the low-sulfur diesel fuel, and we project U.S. refinery
average utilization rates will increase to more than 90 percent
in 2020. Because U.S. demand for bunker fuel is relatively low,
we expect U.S. refiners will export much of the increased
production to supply increasing global demand. We estimate that
U.S. exports of crude oil and petroleum products started
exceeded imports in September of this year. We expect the U.S.
net exports will continue to grow in 2020 and that low-sulfur
fuels will provide a large share of the increases in exports.
However, in the long-term, our Annual Energy Outlook 2019
projects that the U.S. net exports of diesel will eventually
decrease as the global shipping industry installs more
scrubbers that will reduce the demand for low-sulfur diesel and
as more liquified natural gas technologies are incorporated
into new ship construction and the number of LNG-powered ships
increases. Although we expect limited effects on the price of
crude oil from the IMO 2020 regulations, there are many
unknowns about how the global refining and shipping industries
will respond and how actual industry decisions will affect
crude oil prices.
For example, in the short-term, smaller, more remote crude
oil, excuse me, smaller, more remote ports may face logistical
and fuel availability issues compared with larger, more active
ports. However, we believe that supply patterns will evolve
over time and ship owners will adjust to potential short-term
dislocations of fuel.
In summary, despite the upward pressure on prices from the
IMO 2020 regulations, we expect crude oil prices to average
slightly higher than $60 per barrel in 2020 as the downward
pressure, oil price pressure, from the slowing global economic
growth outweighs concerns about the IMO 2020 regulation. EIA
continuously monitors global economic conditions as part of our
forecast analysis. The impact of the IMO's sulfur regulation
for marine fuels will be included in that analysis which we
update and publish monthly in our STEOs and annually in the
AEO.
Chair Murkowski and members of the Committee, thank you for
the opportunity to present this information and this concludes
my testimony.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Capuano follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Administrator.
Mr. Butler, welcome.
STATEMENT OF JOHN W. BUTLER, PRESIDENT & CEO,
WORLD SHIPPING COUNCIL
Mr. Butler. Thank you, Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member
Manchin, members of the Committee. I appreciate the invitation
to testify today.
The World Shipping Council's members carry over 90 percent
of the United States' international containerized ocean import
and export commerce. Approximately 1,200 oceangoing liner
vessels, mostly container ships, make more than 28,000 port
calls in the United States in a given year--almost 80 port
calls a day. The industry provides American importers and
exporters with door-to-door delivery service for almost any
commodity to and from about 190 countries around the world.
Approximately 35 million 20-foot equivalent units of
containerized cargo are imported into or exported from the
United States each year.
I have submitted a written statement for the record. This
morning, I'd just like to highlight a few points from that
longer statement.
First, the implementation of the IMO 2020 Marine Fuel
Sulfur Regulation will not disrupt the critical flow of
containerized international trade moving into and out of the
United States. The international liner shipping industry will
function the same next month and the months after as it does
today.
Second, as the Chairman has pointed out, this standard that
will go into effect on January 1 has been in the works for over
a decade. The 0.5 percent sulfur limit was adopted in 2008 by
governments working through the International Maritime
Organization, or IMO. That limit was subject to a formal review
at the IMO in 2016 and the IMO, with the support of the United
States, determined that sufficient fuel would be available to
meet the 0.5 percent standard by 2020. These global reductions
in the sulfur content of marine fuel are anticipated to result
in substantial improvements in public health.
My third point and especially because of the long lead time
between adoption and implementation, governments, the shipping
industry, fuel suppliers and the IMO have had the opportunity
to prepare for the clean fuel requirement. Those efforts
include regulatory amendments and guidance undertaken by both
the IMO and the U.S. Coast Guard as well as extensive
preparations across the industry in terms of engineering, crew
training and contracting for fuel supplies. All affected
parties have been working for the past several years to ensure
that the new limits are implemented as smoothly as possible.
Fourth and finally and most important from the ocean
carrier perspective, we need a level playing field in terms of
enforcement in order for this regulation to work as designed.
Although we do not expect major disruptions in broader
petroleum markets, there will be a cost differential associated
with this cleaner fuel. If everyone is not playing by the same
rules, that cost differential can penalize responsible actors
and reward bad actors. On this point it is critical that the
U.S. Coast Guard and the EPA, the IMO and governments around
the world continue to emphasize that they will consistently
enforce this requirement.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify. I welcome your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Butler follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Butler.
Mr. Morgan, welcome.
STATEMENT OF DERRICK MORGAN, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, AMERICAN
FUEL & PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS
Mr. Morgan. Thank you, Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member
Manchin and members of the Committee. It's my pleasure to be
here today to present AFPM's perspective on the IMO 2020
regulation.
AFPM, the American Fuel and Petrochemical Manufacturers,
represents more than 90 percent of the refining and
petrochemical capacity in the United States. Our members obtain
crude oil and natural gas and manufacture it into the gasoline,
diesel, jet fuel, marine fuel, home heating oil and thousands
of other products that make modern life possible. The subject
of today's hearing, IMO 2020, is nearly 12 years in the making,
as you pointed out, Chairman Murkowski.
It is poised to be a tremendous success story for the
environment, for American manufacturing jobs and for U.S.
energy security. In 2008, the IMO committed to lower sulfur in
marine fuels and determined the final timetable and sufficient
supplies in 2016. In this way, the world is starting to catch
up to the lower-sulfur standards we've already implemented in
U.S. waters, starting in 2012 and then rationing down to 0.1
percent in 2015. AFPM fully supports an on-time implementation
of IMO 2020 and consistent global enforcement of the new
standard.
My written testimony includes some detailed explanations,
so I'll just highlight a few major points.
First, our member companies have invested tens of billions
of dollars to become the most complex and flexible refining
industry in the world. For example, the first chart in the
appendix to my written testimony shows refiners in regions such
as Russia and the Middle East are simply not as complex as here
in the United States and they produce a higher percentage of
high-sulfur fuels. Investments in the U.S. have increased the
ability to process a wider variety of feedstocks more
efficiently and produce cleaner fuels, including for IMO 2020.
Second, the complexity and flexibility of American
refineries combined with lower-sulfur crude oils produced
domestically should lead to increased exports and an even more
positive trade balance on petroleum and petroleum products.
This rule will benefit American manufacturers and our employees
while reducing sulfur emissions.
Third, although the U.S. is particularly well-positioned
for IMO 2020, the global industry as a whole is also ready.
AFPM has been a member of a coalition of national refining
trade associations from around the world called the Marine
Platform 2020. The Platform's goal is to support implementation
of IMO 2020 and to advise governments and stakeholders about
implementation. And that's just what we've been doing as AFPM.
I had the opportunity and privilege to join the United
States delegation to the last two Marine Environment Protection
Committee meetings at the IMO, and I can tell you the result of
the meetings was an increased understanding by the world
governments about how IMO 2020 will work in practice. The
discussion was not if or when the new standards take effect,
but the how, a specific detail, such as sampling and
enforcement. In the marketplace there is already compliant fuel
available at major ports globally and pricing benchmarks have
been in place for much of the year already.
As with any new program of this magnitude, there will be
bumps in the road and even unforeseen challenges. Local
availability and quality in some ports may present challenges
for shippers, but these are solvable and will be worked out by
the marketplace. Several of our members are working to position
themselves and their bunker fuel supply of partners as the
ready answer to the question, where can I get quality and
compliant fuel?
On a more macro level, I've included some relevant quotes
in my testimony referencing analysis at EIA and IEA. These
analyses are largely in line with expectation of investment
banking community and other independent experts that
implementation has already begun and there is sufficient
compliant fuel available. The doomsday scenarios of some
analysts that grabbed headlines in the last year with
predictions of much more expensive crude oil and diesel fuel
are just not materializing.
In summary, as a result of years of multinational
coordination and planning and investment by the refining and
shipping industries and hard work by the professionals at EPA
and the U.S. Coast Guard, IMO 2020 is expected to have
substantial environmental benefits and promote U.S. energy
security.
Again, I appreciate the opportunity to share our views and
I look forward to answering any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Morgan follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Morgan.
Mr. Nerurkar, welcome.
STATEMENT OF NEELESH NERURKAR, VICE PRESIDENT, CLEARVIEW ENERGY
PARTNERS, LLC
Mr. Nerurkar. Thank you and good morning, Chairman
Murkowski, Ranking Member Manchin and distinguished members of
the Committee. My name is Neelesh Nerurkar. I analyze energy
and climate policy at ClearView Energy Partners, LLC, an
independent research firm that serves institutional investors
and corporate strategists. Thank you for having me as part of
your conversation today.
Earlier in my career, when I was working at the
Congressional Research Service, I considered it a privilege to
support this Committee's critically important energy and
environmental policy responsibilities. In my current capacity
it's an honor to contribute to your discussion.
ClearView's clients look to our firm to provide objective,
transparent analysis of market dynamics. Last year, we received
many inquiries after media reports of alarming outlooks for the
IMO 2020 fuel changeover, including oil market chaos and price
spikes for middle distillate fuels like diesel. At the time our
firm offered a contrarian perspective. We anticipated a more
muted oil market result and our current stance remains
consistent with that view.
I'd summarize ClearView's IMO 2020 outlook in three points.
First, the IMO adopted the sulfur cap more than a decade ago
and remain committed to its implementation; second, the global
refining and shipping sectors have taken steps to mitigate
potential shortfalls of low-sulfur marine fuel; and third, the
change is not taking place in isolation. Trade tensions and
global economic slowdown have dampened oil demand growth which
may ease the transition. Let me briefly explain the three
points.
The IMO sulfur restrictions are intended to produce health
and environmental benefits including reductions in
cardiovascular disease, lung cancer, asthma and acid rain. The
IMO set its 2020 limit in 2008. It officially reaffirmed this
deadline in 2016, and it's since focused on sulfur cap
implementation and long-term carbon emissions goals.
The global shipping industry uses about 3.4 million barrels
a day of high-sulfur fuel oil as of 2018. Our firm looked at
nine global fuel production and consumption variables and how
they could address the sulfur cap gap, the new demand that the
2020 rules would create. Refiners have many ways to make low-
sulfur marine fuel. We modeled a distillate intensive scenario
as an acid test to feasibility. In that scenario, 900,000
barrels a day of gap closure could come from distillation,
conversion and desulfurization capacity additions, 800,000
barrels a day could come from higher refinery utilization rates
and 400,000 barrels a day could come from diesel yield
maximization. Refiners could choose other options as well. For
example, they can use a broader part of the barrel to make very
low-sulfur fuel oil. An early report suggests that many have
done so.
The shipping industry also has been preparing. Scrubbers
that allow ships to continue using high-sulfur fuel oil could
close the gap by another 500,000 barrels per day. Slow
steaming, sailing slower, could cut another 100,000 barrels per
day. LNG bunkering could displace around another 50,000 barrels
a day. And in our base case, a 20 percent non-compliance rate
could amount to another 700,000 barrels per day. Finally, not
that it would be good news, but a slowing global economy could
weaken non-marine distillate demand growth and a U.S.-China
trade war could reduce fuel reused in the shipping sector.
Taken together, this implies a 2020 low-sulfur marine fuel
shortfall of roughly 100,000 barrels per day.
Our analysis acknowledges several risks. For example, a
high compliance scenario might imply a 500,000 barrel per day
shortfall. On the other hand, the rapid expansion of very low-
sulfur fuel oil production and slower economic growth might
lead to no shortfall. Closing a shortfall of 100,000 barrels
per day could come out of inventories or it could be a demand
response to higher prices. The shortfall, however, looks modest
in comparison to the 36 million barrel per day global market
for middle distillates which suggests limited price impacts.
We believe the shipping industry may now be approaching the
peak of transition. A straightforward metric for market stress
in this case is diesel prices, and notably they've remained
relatively flat. This is not to minimize the challenge. The
maritime refining industry has undertaken vast preparation and
considerable investment. Reports of fuel quality and limited--
fuel quality concerns and limited fuel availability could still
point to challenges, especially at smaller ports and during the
early months of transition.
That said, I would suggest that the data thus far does not
appear to validate predictions for dramatic widespread
dislocations.
Madam Chairman, this concludes my prepared testimony. I
look forward to answering questions you or your colleagues may
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nerurkar follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Webster, welcome.
STATEMENT OF JAMIE WEBSTER, SENIOR DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR ENERGY
IMPACT, BOSTON CONSULTING GROUP, AND FELLOW AT COLUMBIA
UNIVERSITY'S CENTER ON GLOBAL ENERGY POLICY
Mr. Webster. Thank you, Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member
Manchin. My name's Jamie Webster. I'm with the Boston
Consulting Group's Center on Energy Impact. I know we've
already had several witnesses, so I don't want to repeat some
of the same comments. What I would like to highlight is that
despite this clear standard, we're still dealing with
significant uncertainty as we roll forward and that uncertainty
is likely to last at least through the first half of 2020.
Chairman Murkowski, your letter to the EIA in September, I
think, perfectly captured that uncertainty that we're looking
at. That said, the clear standard that was put out has really
helped both the shipping industry and the refining industry to
get ready for this. And I think we're going to be in a much
better position as many others have said, relative to some of
the, some of the commentary that was made a year or a year and
a half ago.
I also think that there's some valuable lessons in this IMO
transition. Boston Consulting Group, like many groups, sees
that over the next several years and several decades there are
going to be significant energy transitions that take place.
We've already had some here in the United States, and they're
going to continue.
I think the lessons that we've learned here is the
importance for industry to have a very clear mandate on what
the change is going to be as well as making sure that different
industries are able to talk with one another as these changes
go forward. I've had the privilege with BCG of being able to
sit with both refiners as well as shipping industry, as well as
logistics and it was very clear that if there had been some
earlier discussions, that would have helped even more with some
of this, some of this uncertainty.
I'd also say that for us, as we're looking at the length
and magnitude of what this could end up being, I think, a
smaller disruption than many people thought. We're looking at a
few key measures.
One is the number of scrubbers that are being installed.
About a year, year and a half ago, very few ships were showing
any real interest in putting in scrubbers. But in the last,
less than a year, you've seen a real boost in that interest.
And there is now, if you lined it up in a queue, there's a line
of approximately 350 miles long of ships waiting to put
scrubbers in because they see that that's going to be
beneficial for them. The constraints holding back the amount of
ships that can actually go in is obviously berthing space as
well as talent and some special alloys that need to be put in.
The second thing that we're going to be looking at is we're
going to be looking at our friends from AFPM and their members
as well as those around the world in terms of understanding
exactly how much fuel is able to come on without creating some
significant disruptions. While we do see some pricing
differentials, obviously, have already occurred and will
continue to occur, we're not overly concerned about that. We're
also going to be focused on global economic growth which has
already been talked about here, and the odd thing that actually
is slower economic growth actually reduces the impact from
this.
And finally, it's compliance. Our view on compliance is
that it's actually going to be relatively high. I've had a
chance in the last couple of months of traveling to Asia and a
couple of other countries, countries that had, for a while,
were discussing potentially not complying with the IMO and it
does seem that at this point almost everybody is on board with
that at this point. So I think the compliance is actually going
to be relatively high.
We do think that there's going to be a cost of between $25
billion and $30 billion globally for this change. I will also
say that there's a lot of uncertainty around that. Other firms
have come up with numbers as high as $60 billion, but realize
this is not a U.S. number. This is a global number and this is
something that is going to be applied over the next couple of
years. And so, while we expect that shippers are probably going
to be able to pass these costs all the way down to the consumer
level, it's unlikely, except in perhaps some remote
communities, for it to be a significant, significant change.
Finally, we're looking at, sorry, we are also looking at
compliance and how that is going to, going to roll through.
I appreciate the attention of the Committee on this
important issue. I do think that there's a lot of lessons as
this relates to future energy transitions and look forward to
your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Webster follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Very good, thank you, Mr. Webster.
Thank you, each of you, for your comments this morning.
This is actually very encouraging to hear that you feel that we
are in a pretty good place and that the United States is
leading for lots of good reasons--the environment, the jobs
that are created and the energy security initiatives.
My colleague has another appointment very shortly, so I am
going to defer to Senator Cassidy to begin the round of
questions.
Senator Cassidy. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Dr. Capuano, of course, all politics is local. I am hearing
about how Louisiana Light Sweet is going to have a $2
differential upon that sour crude from elsewhere. But you said
it is going to last for two years. When I look on Wikipedia
though, there are a lot of countries with light, sweet oil
which, I presume, is if already not in compliance inherently is
soon to be.
So it seems like, is there not enough of the light, sweet
in the distillates worldwide to meet demand? Because you
mentioned there will be a shortage of demand.
Dr. Capuano. So, to be more specific, we're seeing that
you'll see a price differential initially in 2020 which will
dissipate as you move out of 2020. It's being offset by the
fact that the lower demand globally for energy fuel oil will
compensate for that. It really becomes more of a question of
getting the right fuel to the right place at the right time.
And there's some adjustment----
Senator Cassidy. So the Gulf Coast, where we have Louisiana
Light Sweet off the coastline----
Dr. Capuano. Yeah.
Senator Cassidy. ----with our refineries right there, that
is one more reason to make New Orleans and Lake Charles your
hub for international shipping. Is that a fair statement?
Dr. Capuano. Correct. Yeah.
And so, what'll happen is there'll be some, some shipping
routes will adjust over time and that's, I think, where the
focus would be.
Senator Cassidy. You threw in LNG as part of the mix, I
think, you or Mr. Butler. How quickly will people transition
because it seems like the price differential is even more
favorable for liquefied natural gas?
Dr. Capuano. You bring up a really good point. So, the
decision that, the decision that needs to be made, which I
cannot answer how the businesses will make that decision, is
you can either buy light, sweet crude. You can buy the low-
sulfur fuel. You can buy a scrubber and buy high-sulfur fuel
and reduce the sulfur yourself or you can go to LNG, an LNG
ship.
Like I said, we have done long-term projections, and you'll
see in our AEO that we do see growth in the LNG shipping.
Senator Cassidy. Now, growth could be--or growth can be----
Dr. Capuano. Yeah. And over time will tell, time will tell.
And we, again, look at data and project forward. I might, and
some other, the--some other people have mentioned decision, the
decision-making that might go on in choosing between an LNG and
a scrubber. Can someone make a comment?
Senator Cassidy. Mr. Webster, a thought on this?
Mr. Webster. Thank you for your question, Senator.
So we do anticipate that LNG shipping is going to grow over
the next couple of years. Some of the decisions----
Senator Cassidy. But quickly or modestly?
Mr. Webster. I think it's actually going to be relatively
slow. It's starting from a very low base. I don't see it as
something where it's going to be some giant amount. There's
approximately 60,000 ships that, kind of, traverse the
international----
Senator Cassidy. How much does it cost to retrofit?
Mr. Webster. If I recall, it's around a 30 to 30 percent
increase and you also have to deal with, which I think my
colleague from the Shipping Council can discuss, is there's an
impact in terms of how much you can actually ship on the ship
because, of course, the LNG material takes up more space in the
ship.
Senator Cassidy. Got it, okay.
And then the local, Mr. Butler, you mentioned about the
local and country enforcement. But I am presuming that there is
a whole set of countries that we know that are going to
enforce. The U.S. is going to enforce. France is going to
enforce. Germany is going to enforce. Australia. Japan.
Shipping routes are typically not going to be between, you
know, they are international. How likely is it that a ship
would not eventually go to a country that, by golly, we know is
going to enforce? Do you follow what I am saying? Can we rely
upon this network of countries that we trust to enforce to
capture all of the shipping just because it is international
and, by definition, sooner or later they go through a
jurisdiction which does enforce?
Mr. Butler. Senator, I mean, this is probably the most
critical question with respect to this regulation at this point
because both from the standpoint of sending the right signals
to markets--the more people that comply, the higher the
compliance rate, the more clear signal you'd get from the
demand side and the better response you'd get from the supply
side.
Speaking of the IMO----
Senator Cassidy. Well, I have limited time. My specific
question with international shipping routes being what they
are, what is the likelihood that any ship could escape the
jurisdiction of a country that, by golly, we know is going to
enforce this standard?
Mr. Butler. The likelihood of escape, so long as the
signatories to this convention enforce, the likelihood that a
ship can escape is quite low.
Senator Cassidy. Now some of those countries may have
signed, but we don't trust them. Just the countries that we
trust, how much do we think that they are going to be able to
enforce this?
Mr. Butler. Well, I have to ask you to define that
universe, but this is where I was going a minute ago which is,
it's critical that countries like the United States and other
developed countries that already have experience in enforcing
the emission control areas the way we do in the U.S. and
Canada, that we keep this enforcement issue on the front
burner.
Senator Cassidy. Great, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cassidy.
Senator Manchin.
Senator Manchin. Thank you, all. I appreciate very much you
enlightening us on this matter. We discussed there are three
main methods the marine fleet can utilize to meet the new IMO
regulations, including switching to lower-sulfur fuels, using
cleaner alternative fuels and LNG or biofuels. Which one do you
think is the most cost-effective and what adjustments will need
to be made?
I have a follow-up question to you, you might want to think
about. I am old enough to remember when basically unleaded gas
came on to the market. All the engines had to be, kind of,
retrofitted, catalytic converters, not that they even talked
about biofuels and ethanol and all that.
What adjustments, I mean, what cost of adjustments are
there? Are they going to be fighting back, pushing back? Have
they made those adjustments? Looked into what engine
adjustments are needed rather than retrofitting? A gasoline
engine can be retrofitted to LNG. Can a diesel fuel engine be
retrofitted to LNG? Does anybody know those answers? Do we have
any engine experts here?
Mr. Morgan. I believe that LNG would require a new engine.
Senator Manchin. A new engine.
Mr. Morgan. Yeah. But the, I think, you know, every harbor
will have a competitive marketplace for the fuels. We're seeing
an introduction in a lot of these ports of a very low-sulfur
fuel oil.
Senator Manchin. Which one do you think they are going to
switch to?
Mr. Morgan. I think a lot of it will be very low-sulfur
fuel oil and that will be green gas oil which is more akin to
like a diesel.
Senator Manchin. That would be the cheapest way----
Mr. Morgan. So there would be some that go a more diesel-
like route and some that go to a fuel oil route that's just
lower-sulfur that, I think, we've seen a number----
Senator Manchin. And we touched on the enforcement, you
know.
Mr. Morgan. Yeah, I think----
Senator Manchin. The only thing we can enforce is what is
coming into our ports, correct?
Mr. Morgan. That's right. Each country is responsible for
enforcing it in their ports.
Senator Manchin. Their ports.
Mr. Morgan. In their ports or that and the flag state also.
So if a ship has a flag of a certain country, that flag state
can also enforce the measure. So it's both port states and flag
states that enforce the measure.
Senator Manchin. And you believe that we will be prepared
starting next month?
Mr. Morgan. Yes. The professionals at the U.S. Coast Guard
have already been enforcing the ECA, so the Emission Control
Areas, that's actually much lower than this new proposal in our
waters and their enforcement is world class and is looked at as
a model around the world. So we will definitely be ready.
Senator Manchin. I had one other question. The emissions,
EIA reported emissions from 2018 went up for the first time
since 2014. It is primarily due to higher natural gas emissions
from more extreme summer and winter weather and transportation-
related petroleum emissions. Does the EIA expect high emissions
to continue in 2019 as they have in 2018, and can you discuss
the outlook for natural gas deployment and what implications
that might have for emissions?
Dr. Capuano. You're referring to the fact that EIA had
forecasted rising emissions of 2.7 percent in 2018?
Senator Manchin. Yes.
Dr. Capuano. We expect that U.S. energy-related carbon
dioxide emissions will decline by 1.7 percent in 2019 and 2
percent in 2020.
Senator Manchin. That is attributed to what?
Dr. Capuano. That lower forecast energy consumption in 2019
and the demand, lower demand, in space cooling and the weather.
Those are the major factors.
Senator Manchin. Okay.
Of course, we talked about the refineries. You think there
is not going to be a shortage? You think we are able to meet
those demands----
Mr. Morgan. Yes, indeed.
Senator Manchin. ----and be able to ship this low-sulfur
fuel that is basically refined in America right now, the United
States, to these other ports?
Mr. Morgan. Yes, I think on two fronts the United States is
well-positioned. On the upstream side for crude oils, the crude
oils produced in the United States are lower in sulfur and so,
all things being equal, will be more valuable on the world
market for refiners that are not as complex and need to start
with the lower-sulfur level in order to make the products that
are in demand.
And then also on the refining side, because our refining
sector is so complex and flexible, we can take a variety of
feedstocks, including higher-sulfur fuels and we can turn that
into lower-sulfur products.
Senator Manchin. Have you seen any movement whatsoever?
Have they stockpiled right now so some of the countries in some
of the ports which have a lot of activity from importing and
exporting, have they started bringing in this lower-sulfur fuel
to meet this type of demand? Have you seen that type of
transaction?
Mr. Morgan. Yes.
Senator Manchin. Going back to the United States because we
are the one main supplier right now, correct?
Mr. Morgan. We are a very important supplier in the world
market, certainly. And exports have been increasing, especially
distillate fuels and ports are getting prepared to have the
stockpiles on hand of both low-sulfur fuel oil and in some
cases, marine gas as well.
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you. I appreciate the discussion about
the enforcement piece of it, because while we have had these
ECA standards in place and, as you point out, the U.S. Coast
Guard has been good, as they are, in making sure that those
standards are being met. I do appreciate that this is now going
to be a step up, whether for the U.S. Coast Guard or for EPA on
enforcement.
I wrote a note to myself making sure that we are checking
in with the Administration to make sure that from a budget
planning perspective going forward they are factoring this in
to that expanded mission set there.
I appreciate, again, I think the, not the optimism, but,
kind of, the reality check that the sky is not falling. We are
moving forward. The clarity of these standards has been very,
very important, not only here in this country but around the
world, globally. We are going to see better, greater
environmental positive impact and that is very, very important.
But it seems that every one of you has had, kind of, little
asterisks about the overall negative impact. It is going to be
fine, except for those, perhaps, remote locations.
Director Capuano, you mentioned the smaller more remote
ports might have logistical issues. It has been suggested that
in some of the areas, such as Alaska or Hawaii, that rely more
on diesel, you know, and if we're not, if it is not maritime
fuel, it is aviation fuel for us. And so, a couple questions,
and this is directed to you, Administrator.
You have mentioned that you are going to be doing
continuous monitoring on this which we appreciate. I think you
actually said, monthly, which is great. I am curious to know to
what extent you actually narrow it down to focus on some of
these more remote and rural areas in the country--Alaska,
Hawaii--that have the potential to be more negatively impacted
because of our high transportation costs that will be impacted?
Dr. Capuano. The current EIA data collection does not go
down to the state and the port level, to the smaller ports.
However, we do monitor the trade press. As I said, we will be,
we pay attention to the IMO each month now. And so, if we start
to see something changing within a specific area as a result of
communications through the trade press, we will then go
investigate it and it would be something that we could talk
about as a special issue. But it's not something that we
routinely collect.
The Chairman. Well, we want to really try to understand.
And again, the reason I raise this, the reason I am asking is
not because we want to back off of this, but again, we have
some very, very challenged parts of the country and we want to
be able to figure out how they move forward in a way that is
not going to damage their very, somewhat fragile economies.
Mr. Morgan, let me ask you. Have you assessed the regional
refining capacities individually, the refineries that supply
places like Alaska and Hawaii and other remote and rural parts
of the country? Are you convinced that they too are ready for
the implementation?
Mr. Morgan. As you mentioned, there are some challenges,
especially getting fuel into Interior Alaska. It's an expensive
proposition. Alaska has five refineries and produces the bulk
of the needs for Alaska. Some additional fuel is imported,
especially from Washington State and some other locations. I
don't believe that the IMO specification will present a
significant additional challenge to the challenges that already
exist.
One factor is that home heating oil sulfur specifications
in Alaska are actually, haven't been reduced like they have
been, for example, in the Northeast United States where it's on
par now with on-road diesel. And so, actually, the sulfur in
home heating oil in Alaska will allow a little bit more
flexibility in the short-term. And so, I think that the
challenges that have always been there will continue to be
there, of course, but Alaska's five oil refineries are prepared
for this.
The Chairman. We are actually not at five anymore, but that
is, kind of, a sad story.
What about AV gas, aviation?
Mr. Morgan. Same. The refineries in Alaska produce the bulk
of the aviation fuel. It's actually higher than the gasoline
fuel demand, as you know, there, and diesel is higher still. So
I assume that that product mix, of course the individual
companies will make those decisions, but I assume it'll
continue to remain at the same level to meet the demands in
Alaska.
The Chairman. Let me ask a question to you, probably, Mr.
Butler. The considerations that a shipping company would make
in determining do we install the scrubbers? Do we move to an
LNG retrofit? And I appreciated your example, your visual, Mr.
Webster, about 350 miles of ships waiting to have scrubbers
installed. That says to me that we have a backlog here in terms
of our capacity, whether it is to build out LNG vessels and we
know that we have some that are being built for the Alaska
trade. We have seen one, a couple, that have gone out to Puerto
Rico. We would love to see more of these coming on, but we have
shipbuilding capacity that, I think, is limited.
How much of a factor is the capacity to do the build-out to
more LNG-powered vessels, the ability to move quickly with the
scrubber installation or the factors that are under
consideration by the shipping companies?
Mr. Butler. So there are quite a number of factors with
respect to each of those decisions. Maybe I'll cut to the end
first and then work backward.
The Chairman. Nice.
Mr. Butler. And that is, we expect that well over 80
percent of the compliance will come from burning one type of
low-sulfur fuel oil or the other.
The Chairman. Okay.
Mr. Butler. As Senator Manchin said, he had a couple of
statistics on projections with respect to scrubbers and LNG and
there will be increased penetration of those technologies in
the short-term, but they're not going to make up anything like
the bulk of the compliance option. It's simply a matter of
what's available and the cost and the disruption involved with
retrofitting to some of the other technologies.
Some folks like scrubbers. Some folks don't. There are some
operational challenges associated with scrubbers and then a lot
of people are looking at this and saying, well, I see a cost
benefit if the spread between low-sulfur and high-sulfur fuel
oil stays high for a long time. I get a payout from the
scrubber, but if that differential shrinks in a fairly short
order, maybe it's not worth taking that step.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Let me turn to Senator Heinrich.
Senator Heinrich. Ranking Member Manchin asked a good
question which is, can you convert diesel over to liquid
natural gas? And the answer is, yes. There are some
complications there because diesel uses compression ignition
whereas liquid natural gas does not so you have to introduce
some sort of an ignition source or you can just use a very
small amount of diesel which then, it will compression ignite.
The Chairman. It is so good to have an engineer on the
Committee.
Senator Heinrich. You can convert those things over. And I
think it is important for this discussion because we have to
realize, sort of, where we----
Senator Manchin. [off mic]
Senator Heinrich. ----uh, no, but if you look it up on MIT
Technology Review, you can read all about it.
It is important for this discussion because we have been
burning tar for a long time for maritime applications. When we
talk about fuel oil, bunker fuel, 3.5 percent sulfur, none of
us would allow a power plant in our hometown to burn this
product because it is, kind of, what is left over after all the
other good stuff comes out of the refinery process.
It is helpful to understand in context that makes
international maritime shipping the sixth largest emitter of
greenhouse gas as if it were a country. It is a bigger source
of greenhouse gases than Germany. That doesn't take into
account carbon black or black carbon which we used to call
soot. Sounds a little fancier, black carbon, but that has an
incredibly disproportionate impact on things like snowpacks in
the West and melting sea ice in the Arctic.
So we have a long way to go here beyond just looking at the
0.5 percent. But I am curious, Mr. Butler, what the World
Shipping Council is doing, in addition to the work on sulfur
that we are discussing today, to reduce your CO2
pollution levels and to look at the impact of black carbon in
shipping?
Mr. Butler. Starting with the CO2 question. This
is following the carbon, or the sulfur discussion at the
International Maritime Organization. The Marine Environment
Protection Committee at IMO is, they can ``walk and chew gum.''
They do a lot of things but carbon emissions is very much top
of the agenda right now.
Senator Heinrich. What are, specifically, your trade
organizations? What are you doing to lead upfront?
Mr. Butler. Well, next week we're going to be, along with
most of the other trade associations that have observer status
at the IMO as we do, we're going to be making a quite detailed
lengthy proposal urging the IMO to set up a new research and
development body to--funded by a fee on each ton of fuel
burned--to look at the question of what are the fuels of the
future because, as I'm sure you know, we have an IMO standard
that calls for a 50 percent absolute reduction in carbon
emissions by 2050.
Senator Heinrich. 2050.
Mr. Butler. We can't get there with existing technology.
Senator Heinrich. What is the differential in terms of
carbon emissions from bunker fuel today switched over to
natural gas?
Mr. Butler. Well, there's a lot of debate about that. At
the point of combustion there is a benefit to natural gas.
There is a debate going on about the life cycle emissions of
greenhouse gases with respect to those two fuels.
Senator Heinrich. With respect to methane? Is that what you
are referring to?
Mr. Butler. That's part of it, yup.
Senator Heinrich. Yes, well that is an issue of whether or
not we capture methane. So we need to start capturing methane.
But within the shipping industry what is the increment from
bunker fuel down to natural gas?
Mr. Butler. Well, I think it's looked at, at point of
combustion, as probably 25 percent improvement.
Senator Heinrich. Okay.
Mr. Butler. If you have efficient combustion.
Senator Heinrich. Right.
Mr. Butler. Because there's a question there.
Senator Heinrich. It is also worth noting that liquid
natural gas emits almost zero black carbon. So that is an
additional benefit to getting some of these conversions in the
pipeline.
Ms. Capuano, do you, or actually, Mr. Webster, what do you
estimate is a current payback period for conversion from fuel
oil to liquid natural gas? Do you know what those figures are?
Mr. Webster. Yeah, we didn't look at that. We looked at how
much it would be for a scrubber at current rates.
Senator Heinrich. Okay.
Mr. Webster. Which is between two and three years,
depending on what the spread is, but the spread right now, it's
quite short. So, going back to Senator Manchin's question, so
if you wanted to pick the best, kind of, option today----
Senator Heinrich. It would be?
Mr. Webster. ----the scrubber in many ways is that best
option and then longer-term----
Senator Heinrich. And scrubbers would remove black carbon
as well as sulfur, correct?
Mr. Webster. I believe so. You said that, Senator, yeah,
yeah.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Heinrich.
Senator Hirono.
Senator Hirono. Thank you, Madam Chair.
For Mr. Butler, Hawaii depends on international maritime
shipping to meet our needs more than any other state. So in
Hawaii the two largest shipping companies have both announced a
three percent fuel surcharge to their shipping customers to
cover the costs of the change to lower-sulfur fuel which is
lower than what some consumers in Hawaii had feared earlier
this year. The companies are investing in new ships as well as
scrubber systems for their older ships that will let the older
ships continue to use the higher-sulfur fuel.
What has guided the decisions by your member shipping
companies decisions on whether to use low-sulfur fuels in their
ships versus installing a scrubber to continue burning high-
sulfur fuels? Is----
Mr. Butler. Well, again, a lot of it depends on, there are
any number of factors that go into it. Some folks, as an
operational matter. I mean, scrubbers, depending on the size of
the ship, they can take up a significant amount of space on the
ship. So, as an engineering matter, if you have room in the
engine room and engineering spaces, that's always a question as
to whether you can actually do it.
And then there are questions of cost tradeoff. And I think,
you know, that's always, as with any technological bet, that's
always an educated guess because we don't know in the future
what the cost of the low-sulfur fuel is going to be. You talk
to folks like those to my left, you get their best opinion
about what the markets are going to do and then you make that
cost decision based on what your ships look like, what your
trading profile looks like.
Senator Hirono. I think you testified that most of your
memberships will burn the lower-sulfur fuels rather than going
to scrubbers.
Mr. Butler. Everything we see is that the vast majority of
the vessels will indeed comply----
Senator Hirono. Using the----
Mr. Butler. ----by using the lower-sulfur fuel.
Senator Hirono. And then, I had a subsequent question,
which I think Mr. Webster may already have responded to. How
long are your members expecting to need to recoup the
investments that they are making to comply with the rule? I
suppose an investment is installation of scrubbers.
Mr. Webster testified that it would maybe, it would take
two to three years to recoup the investment in a scrubber which
doesn't seem that long a timeframe to recoup.
Mr. Butler, would you like to comment?
Mr. Butler. Well, I think maybe those--as a trade
association we don't have specific analysis on that. A lot of
it depends on the individual situation, but I have heard that
sort of a number based on certain assumptions about a continued
spread between high-sulfur and low-sulfur fuel. But again, at
the end of the day it depends on, in two or three years, what
that spread is.
Senator Hirono. So, for Mr. Butler, again. Do you agree
with Mr. Webster that price increases for consumers will likely
not be significant given the small share of shipping in the
total product price?
Mr. Butler. I think, as a broad matter, that's probably
correct. When you look at the price increase directly to the
vessel operators, the carriers, it's substantial because it
hits in one place. By the time that increase is spread out
across the value of the cargo on that ship, it's quite
diffused.
Senator Hirono. So, Mr. Webster, do you think that because
you can spread out the cost of compliance to the total, you
know, products being shipped, would that apply to a place like
Hawaii that has a particularly high reliance on shipping to
meet our needs?
Mr. Webster. Senator, thank you for the question.
We haven't examined Hawaii, specifically, but our view on a
global basis is that it should be quite small in terms of how
that goes across. There was one analysis by Flexport which
stated that each television would be, at even a large spread,
would be about $0.50 more per television next year. Obviously
televisions also go down about 17 percent a year. So it's quite
small.
Senator Hirono. That is good to hear because there have
always been concerns that somehow or other the shipping to
Hawaii and the Jones Act adds so much to the cost to consumers
and, frankly, it does not. And so neither will this particular
change.
So, for Mr. Nerurkar, I think you talked a little bit about
the public health benefits and environmental benefits of this
2020 rule. Could you just talk a little bit more about the
benefits to both health and environmental benefits of this
lower-sulfur fuel?
Mr. Nerurkar. Sure. There was a study in the Journal of
Nature last year that shipping emissions contribute to about
400,000 premature deaths and also 14 million cases of asthma
and that the implementation of the 2020 standards would reduce
that by 34 percent and 54 percent respectively.
Senator Hirono. What is the study you are referring to?
Mr. Nerurkar. It's in the Journal of Nature.
Senator Hirono. Journal of Nature.
Mr. Nerurkar. Yeah.
Senator Hirono. What issue?
Mr. Nerurkar. In my prepared comments link.
Senator Hirono. Oh.
Mr. Nerurkar. And I'm happy to send----
Senator Hirono. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Hirono.
Senator King.
Senator King. I apologize for being late. I think I may
recover some ground. I hope not to take too much time.
I guess one question, Mr. Butler, is there sufficient
refining capacity to produce the amount of low-sulfur fuel that
we are going to see demanded within the system?
Mr. Butler. The short answer is yes. I would defer to Mr.
Morgan on the refining capacity, but whereas and this was
brought up earlier in the hearing, whereas a couple of years
ago there were real questions, I think, about whether refiners
in the end would step up with the investments necessary to
produce this fuel, what we're seeing now is much more
encouraging.
The other thing I would mention that hasn't come up yet
today is that there are already ships on the water burning the
low-sulfur fuel today because it's, you know, you don't fill up
every three days at the gas station with these vessels.
Senator King. Right.
Mr. Butler. So we're already in the implementation phase.
Senator King. Mr. Morgan, you concur that there is not
going to be a bottleneck here?
Mr. Morgan. Yes, I do. The United States, in particular,
has some room, as Administrator Capuano has talked about, to
increase utilization rates. In addition, because our refineries
have additional complexity, they'll be able to use those
complex pieces of the refinery to produce more low-sulfur fuel.
Senator King. Mr. Butler, and I think Senator Cassidy may
have touched on this, you are expecting international
compliance as well as the U.S.? You don't see this as us doing
something that nobody else is doing?
Mr. Butler. No, Senator. I don't see us as being the only
ones enforcing. With that said though, the U.S. has in the past
had a leadership role in terms of enforcement and with this
regulation perhaps more than many others that we have seen
coming out of the IMO, that enforcement piece is simply
critical.
This is not a situation where regulation says to a ship
owner, you have to install a particular piece of equipment,
something like that. This is 24/7/365. It's an operating
requirement. And so, it will require diligence by governments
around the world.
Senator King. And do these regulations apply to cruise
ships as well as transport?
Mr. Butler. They do.
Senator King. All major shipping.
Mr. Webster, can you give us a, sort of, percentage or
technology breakdown between low-sulfur fuel scrubbers and LNG?
Which is best? Forget about price for a minute, but just what
do the technologies tell us?
Mr. Webster. Um, so, in terms of best, that's a difficult
question, as has been highlighted by some of the other
witnesses.
I would say for installing a scrubber, it's around, right
now, around $4.7 million, approximately. That number has been
coming down, but your operational----
Senator King. But low-sulfur fuel requires no new
equipment, is that correct?
Mr. Webster. That is correct.
So it's effectively a choice between do I want to spend
CapEx or do I want to have a higher operating expense with the
addition----
Senator King. The assumption is the low-sulfur fuel will
cost more, is that correct, Mr. Morgan?
Mr. Morgan. Yes, it typically has, historically and
requires additional, usually it requires additional processing
in a refinery.
Senator King. Can you give us a--it will increase the price
that is being paid now by five percent? Ten percent? Two
percent?
Mr. Morgan. Well, the current, there are current spreads on
the market and the low-sulfur fuel oil has trended above marine
gas oil which would be, kind of, the two low-sulfur varieties
and both of those are above what the high-sulfur fuel oil is
now.
Senator King. Right.
Mr. Morgan. The way----
Senator King. Can you give me a number, I mean, I am just
trying to get a ballpark. Is it----
Mr. Morgan. I'll be happy to provide that to you
afterwards, yes.
Senator King. Thank you.
Mr. Morgan. They definitely change daily and in different
locations are different prices for sure, but they are a bit
more expensive. There are environmental benefits, obviously,
that come along with that, but definitely having cleaner air
does cost money.
Senator King. Sure. And we didn't get Mr. Webster to LNG. I
take it that would, well, I know you had the discussion with
our resident engineer, Senator Heinrich. What kind of
conversion requirements would be necessary to use LNG?
Mr. Webster. So we think a retrofit would cost around $20
million and a new ship about 20 to 40 percent more than a, kind
of, conventionally-fueled ship, at present. I will say as you
go down the experience curve, those numbers will, of course,
come down.
And you mentioned cruise ships before. So cruise ships have
been the ones that have shown the most interest in both
scrubbers and looking at LNG, obviously, as they go into ports
that are monitoring those sorts of emissions.
Senator King. Thank you. Very informative hearing. I
appreciate all of you being here.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator King.
It has been. It has been very interesting. You know, I
think about what we are seeing in our state and I listened to
Senator Hirono's questions. I mean, we are two states that are
certainly entirely reliant on shipping and air. We do get some
that is across the Canadian border after a couple thousand
miles, but the vast majority of what we receive in our state
comes to us through shipping. And it's not just our fuels, it
is the plywood that you build with and it is our food source,
85 percent of our food to the state.
Senator King. Well, if you tip the globe just right and
draw the map, you are not remote at all, necessarily.
The Chairman. We are not remote. We are in the center of
the universe and you know that.
Senator King. Yes.
The Chairman. But it is that center that is still
surrounded by a great deal of water. We have watched with great
interest as the industry has changed. The requirements that we
saw through the ECA requirements and the standards for the
cruise ships that were coming in. We have seen companies,
Saltchuk has been a very early leader in terms of working to do
LNG conversion. That is going to be significant for us.
But when you still have so many communities that are
reliant on diesel generation for the operation of their
communities and that diesel has to come up from the Lower 48--
it has to be transferred to a barge that goes upriver several
hundred miles and you are hoping that the water is high enough
because otherwise you might only be able to get a barge in
there once a year. The logistics that you speak to that we
worry about, that could take what was otherwise just modest
price increases and, in a region, have impact that is more than
just modest. These are the things that I am interested in
following and understanding and we appreciate, again, the level
of monitoring.
The issue that was raised about compliance. Global
compliance is something that, I think, we all should be
attentive to as well.
I want to ask one last question, and I will throw it out
there to any one of you.
So when we had this, some of this discussion in February,
there was a great deal more concern and I think it was you, Mr.
Nerurkar, who said that ClearView had not been as concerned as
some of the others in terms of what the potential price impacts
may be. So we are sitting here now. This is December. Did the
others just misread it? Have the refineries been working double
time to get ready for this? Has there just been an awareness
that, look, there are not going to be any waivers granted so we
better get into the game here? What has happened between
February and now that allows you to have this level of
certitude with what you are sharing with us?
And I throw that out to any of you.
Mr. Nerurkar.
Mr. Nerurkar. I think there have been two main factors that
have caused this dynamic. The first is that we were looking at
the broader oil market picture and some concerns about global
economic growth and trade tensions that might slow oil demand
and make the transition easier. The second factor is that we
were looking at the capacity for the refining sector to adjust,
and that might have been underestimated.
And so, what we're seeing now is the transition is, kind
of, getting to its peak is that, if anything, refiners are
providing more of this very low-sulfur fuel oil than might have
been expected and things are going more smoothly than people
might have thought a year, two years ago.
The Chairman. And I think one of you mentioned that one of
the things that has helped has been the clarity of the
standard, the certainty that this is the standard that we are
going to, this is the date that we are going to and this is it.
There is not a lot of grey or nebulous matter there. I am
assuming that has helped. Sometimes we don't set standards with
very clear certainty.
Any other comments on what has changed between February and
now?
Mr. Webster.
Mr. Webster. One other that I would say, Senator, is the
amount of scrubbers that are getting put in. There really has
been this real interest in suddenly putting them in and lots of
companies looking at that are looking at, kind of, a hedging
mechanism and saying, we're not quite sure what the prices are
going to be so we're going to put in say, 10 or 15 percent of
our ships with scrubbers. And that's why you're seeing so much
of a backlog of those that are getting scrubbers. And of
course, if you have a scrubber you don't need to have this new
compliant fuel.
The Chairman. Right, right.
Mr. Butler, were you going to weigh-in there?
Mr. Butler. The only thing that I would add is I think
it's, part of it, is simply a function of as you get closer to
a deadline like this, the commercial negotiations really kick
into high gear. And so, you have a lot more information flowing
in the market about supply and demand.
Two years ago, we were hearing that it was hard for our
members to get good information from their fuel suppliers about
what this might look like because everyone was still trying to
figure it out. When you get to the point of saying, well, I'm
going to start needing deliveries in Q4, Q3/Q4 of 2019 and you
have to talk about price and where is this fuel going to be,
it's a much more concrete discussion and I think that's also
been part of it.
The Chairman. Yes, it becomes real.
Mr. Morgan.
Mr. Morgan. Yeah, I would echo a lot of what has been said
and the refining industry has really positioned itself well, I
think, here with the complexity for sure and also the
competition. We, there is competition between and among the
different companies that are members, for example, to provide
that best solution and to provide it on a scale that is helpful
for, you know, some of John's members and other shippers as
well.
And a lot of that can't really be discussed in a public and
open way because people are competing against each other to
provide that need. And once again, the engineers and
professionals in the refining industry, I think, have done a
good job to make sure that the fuels that are needed are gonna
be there.
The Chairman. Very good.
Senator King, any follow-up?
Thank you very much. We appreciate the discussion here this
morning and your very sound efforts to make sure that we are
current and up-to-date with this as we go into this new year
with these new standards that, I believe, will be the right
thing from an environmental perspective, certainly, and it
sounds like it is not going to hurt the jobs and the economic
benefits that we will see here in this country. We want to keep
an eye on price because at the end of the day that is what
really matters to a lot of those folks that are in some pretty
remote areas and are paying high costs anyway.
So we will keep an eye on this, but thank you for what you
are doing to help educate and inform the Committee.
With that, we stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:20 a.m. the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]