- DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
[Senate Hearing 116-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
----------
WEDNESDAY, MAY 22, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 9:47 a.m., in room SD-124, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Lisa Murkowski (Chairman)
presiding.
Present: Senators Murkowski, Alexander, Blunt, Capito,
Hyde-Smith, Daines, Rubio, Udall, Leahy, Tester, Merkley, and
Van Hollen.
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR LISA MURKOWSKI
Senator Murkowski. Good morning to everyone. Thank you,
Secretary Bernhardt, for being here before the subcommittee as
we review the fiscal year 2020 budget request for the
Department of the Interior.
Secretary, welcome. This is your first appearance before
this subcommittee, but during your tenure as Deputy Secretary
and now as Secretary, we have had the chance to work together
on many of the issues that are very important to Alaska as we
are working to responsibly develop our resources, address the
multiple issues that face our Native peoples, address the
environmental issues that we face, such as remediation of
legacy wells, and certainly better management of our Federal
lands. We are making progress, but I think we know that there
is always more to do.
The Department administers many programs that impact
Alaskans, while also being responsible for stewardship of much
of the Federal lands that comprise over 60 percent of our
State.
Alaskans need the Department to be a reliable partner, and
I sincerely appreciate your commitment and certainly the
attention that you have provided to Alaska.
The fiscal year 2020 budget request for the Department of
the Interior is $11.5 billion for programs within the
jurisdiction of the Interior subcommittee. That is roughly $1.6
billion below the enacted level. That is a reduction of 12
percent.
While I support many of the components in this budget
request, there are also some areas and portions that raise
concern. But like every President's budget request, we know
that this is a proposal and that Congress will enact the final
budget for the Department.
There are lots of issues this morning. You will hear from
myself and from my colleagues. I would like to hear more about
the Department's proposed reorganization. I am generally
supportive of all executive agencies that take a hard look at
their internal processes and work to improve efficiency and
coordination within their agency.
Now that you have taken over as Secretary, I am interested
in learning more about your plan for the proposed reorg and the
details of the steps you are taking to implement it.
The request rightly calls for significant and continued
investment in energy security, mineral security, and
responsible development. Promoting domestic energy production
creates American jobs, generates revenues, and a return on the
taxpayer dollars as well as, certainly, a very critical focus
of enhancing national security.
Equally important is critical mineral development and
protection. The request recognizes the importance of critical
minerals in part by proposing to begin an Outer Continental
Shelf (OCS) Critical Mineral Inventory. Know that I support and
applaud the administration for prioritizing the need to reduce
our Nation's dependence on foreign sources for critical
minerals.
I am also hopeful that the Department will find a way to
move forward with a new 5-year plan for offshore leasing that
includes Alaska.
I strongly disagree, and I said so previously, with the
recent District Court decision on the Arctic OCS which
reinstates President Obama's end-of-office decision to withdraw
the vast majority of the Beaufort Sea and all of the Chukchi
Sea from responsible development.
As we have seen production fall in Alaska, foreign imports
have grown significantly in States like California and others.
We can and should reverse this trend, and safe Arctic
development, including in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge
(ANWR) and the National Petroleum Reserve-Alaska (NPR-A), will
help achieve that. I trust the Department to find the best
pathway forward with the new 5-year plan and responsible
development of our Arctic resources.
In other news for Alaska, I do appreciate that this
request, unlike those in years past, does not propose a cut to
the Alaska conveyance program. This is something that I have
been working on since I came to the Senate. In fact, I believe
my first significant legislation said we are going to complete
the conveyances that are owed to the State of Alaska and to our
Native peoples, and we are going to do it by the 50th year of
Statehood. Well, I think this year is now our 60th year. We are
still working on that commitment and that promise, but we have
waited a long time. And the fact that both the State and our
Native people are still owed title conveyance of millions of
acres of land from the Federal Government is something that has
been a real raw spot.
So know that each year, we fought to fund this program. I
am glad to see that the administration has backed away from the
attempts to cut it.
When we speak about our Native peoples, I think it is
important to recognize that my home is home to one-half of all
federally recognized Tribes. They call Alaska home. The Bureau
of Indian Affairs provides essential programs for Alaska
Natives that are fundamental to the Federal Government's legal
obligations to our First Peoples.
I have been concerned by some of the proposed reductions
that we see within the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA). This is
particularly regarding the elimination of the small and needy
Tribes and the housing programs, as well as proposed decreases
to important human services, natural resources, real estate,
and construction programs. These are areas that I am going to
be asking you about this morning.
Know that I want to work with you to ensure that all these
programs are properly funded so that we can meet our trust
responsibilities.
I have made a real effort over the recent years to do more
with Tribal court funding. I know that that is an issue that my
colleague here and many on this subcommittee support, and we
are pleased to see that that is included in this year's budget.
I was pleased to see the administration proclaim May 5 as
Missing and Murdered American Indians and Alaska Native
Awareness Day. This is an issue again that many of us on the
subcommittee who serve not only on this subcommittee, but serve
on the Indian Affairs Committee, have been very concerned about
what we have come to learn about this. Some would describe it
as an epidemic. You do not have statistics like we have with
our Native American, Alaska Native women without having a very
serious problem around the country.
As we work together to develop and implement strategies to
help, I think it is important that we focus on these rural
areas that lack adequate public safety. They face high rates of
violence, abuse, murder, and trafficking. It is going to take a
lot of coordination. It is going to take a lot of communication
and the resources to address this and do it right. So we look
forward to working with you on that.
Of course, we cannot talk about funding needs for public
lands without addressing deferred maintenance. This is a
problem across the Department. We have worked in this
subcommittee to help address backlog maintenance issues, but
quite frankly, we just do not have enough discretionary funding
available to solve the problem.
The principles behind this budget request's Public Lands
Infrastructure Fund proposal, as well as the Restore Our Parks
Act, which Senator Alexander has championed, along with Senator
Portman and some others, would certainly help address the
difficulties that we face in finding the resources. You and I
have had several discussions about the need to address the
deferred maintenance backlog at our Nation's parks and our
refuges as well. Know that you have got a lot of eager folks on
this subcommittee willing to work with you, and certainly in my
role as Chairman of the Energy Committee. We want to make sure
that this very significant and important issue is addressed.
There are a number of topics I hope to learn more about
today, including how the proposal fulfills our commitment to
science and addresses natural hazards, as well as meets our
goal of better stewardship of public lands. We do not have as
much time as we would probably like within the subcommittee. I
know that there are other subcommittees that are meeting this
morning as well, so we will try to get through our business as
quickly as we can.
With that, I turn to my Ranking Member and friend, Senator
Udall.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR TOM UDALL
Senator Udall. Thank you, Madam Chair, and Happy Birthday
again.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you.
Senator Udall. Happy Birthday again.
Secretary Bernhardt, thank you for appearing before the
subcommittee this morning in your first hearing since you were
confirmed as Secretary of Interior.
Although this is a budget hearing, I am not going to spend
much time going over your budget proposal. I think it is fair
to say the administration's proposal is dead on arrival. We
simply are not going to defund the Land and Water Conservation
Fund or reduce the Payment in Lieu of Taxes program or cut
programs to fulfill programs that fulfill the trust and treaty
obligations to Native Americans.
Instead, we will get to work on a bipartisan budget
agreement, as we have done in the past, and we will prevent
sequestration and meet our needs as a Nation.
We could also spend this entire hearing probing your
various conflicts of interest. It is clear you are making
decisions that benefit former clients instead of the American
people, but the Inspector General has opened an investigation,
and we will be interested in reviewing those findings.
So I will instead use my limited time talking about policy.
Let me start with climate change.
Mr. Secretary, you said at a hearing last week you are,
quote, ``not losing sleep'' over scientific reports that carbon
dioxide is at the highest levels ever recorded in human
history. This is deeply troubling.
Let me tell you, along with many Americans, I am losing
sleep over climate change and over this administration's
stubborn refusal to address its threat.
What we see with our own eyes every day--extreme weather
events, droughts, heat waves--is clear. We are already seeing
that our national parks and public lands are some of the most
vulnerable. Tribal Nations are in the bull's eye. Our forests
in New Mexico and across the Southwest are experiencing more
catastrophic wildfires.
Drought in the Colorado River looks like it is here to stay
at a time 40 million of people rely on that increasingly
stressed source of water.
As my colleague, Chairman Murkowski, well knows, Alaska
Natives are literally losing their communities to increasing
ocean levels and facing the decline of traditional food sources
like walrus because of decreased sea ice. And this data point
exemplifies the crisis: Glacier National Park in Montana is
unlikely to have any actual glaciers by 2030.
Wildlife habitats are changing, and more species than ever
are threatened with extinction. A United Nations panel just
identified climate change as a major cause of our current
biodiversity crisis, which threatens 1 million species of
plants and animals worldwide.
Climate change is the most pressing issue of our time. It
is an existential threat.
Secretary Bernhardt, Federal law, including the Federal
Lands Policy Management Act, the National Park Service Organic
Act, and the Wilderness Act, require the Department to manage
Federal lands and waters for the benefit of future generations.
It is impossible to meet that mandate if you disregard climate
change.
I was troubled you attempted to lay the Department's lack
of action at Congress' feet during recent testimony before a
House Committee. This is not about ``shalls,'' as you put it.
Blaming Congress is a dodge. This is about how you choose to
exercise the broad discretion Congress vested in the Department
of the Interior.
Past administrations chose to take on climate change, to
harness the agency's vast authority to tackle our generation's
defining issue, but instead, this administration is actively
working to dismantle every tool to address the threat,
including gutting the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) methane
waste rule and rescinding policies that address climate change
planning and mitigation.
This administration's focus on energy dominance has wiped
out all climate change efforts. There are also plenty of other
areas where I see the devastating effects of your policies.
For instance, on the 5-year anniversary of the Organ
Mountains-Desert Peaks National Monument in Southern New
Mexico, I am concerned about Interior's reduction of national
monuments, even those with broad support in the community.
I am troubled by efforts to roll back species protections
where it is gutting sage grouse management plans or weakening
Endangered Species Act regulations and reports that the
Department is actively working to politicize science, including
burying a study showing the devastating effects of the
pesticide chlorpyrifos on 70 percent of the species listed
under the Endangered Species Act.
I am concerned that the Department is making funding
decisions in Aamodt that threaten an Indian water rights
settlement that took 51 years to resolve. After months of
negotiations, the Department is now withholding appropriated
dollars. The parties and the project are shovel-ready, but
Interior is stalling.
And I am concerned by the actions that disregard the
importance of natural and cultural resource values if they get
in the way of development. We see this in the Department's
efforts to expand oil and gas development in the region
surrounding Chaco Culture National Historical Park in New
Mexico. The Department keeps pressing forward, even though
Native American Tribes and Congress have objected to the effect
that this development will have on such a sacred landscape.
I could go on, but I am eager to ask questions and hear
what you have to say. You have had a hand in many of these
decisions, Secretary Bernhardt, decisions I view as deeply
damaging. So I appreciate the chance to have a frank discussion
on these policies.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Udall.
Mr. Secretary, you have the subcommittee's undivided
attention here this morning. We would ask that you provide
whatever statement that you would like, and then we will have
an opportunity for the questions and the back-and-forth.
Welcome to the subcommittee. Thank you for being here.
STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID BERNHARDT, SECRETARY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
Secretary Bernhardt. Good morning. Can you all hear me? I
am a little deaf, and I never am quite positive. Okay.
I would like to request that my written statement be
included in the record at the appropriate place.
Senator Murkowski. Your full statement will be included and
incorporated as part of the record.
Secretary Bernhardt. Great.
Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, Members of the
subcommittee, I am here to discuss the President's 2020 budget
request for the Department of the Interior.
Senator Murkowski laid out the highlights, our request
totals $12.6 billion. This is actually about $925 million above
last year's request, even though it is down from the enacted
level, and it is my understanding that your jurisdiction is
about $11.5 billion of that $12.6. So you are the large share
of this.
This budget meets the administration's goal of managing
Federal spending with restraint. I recognize that we proposed
the budget, and you address it.
I do want to highlight some important components of it,
though, during our short time.
Of our total request, about $4.9 billion supports land
management operations of the Bureau of Land Management, the
National Park Service, and the Fish and Wildlife Service,
including resource development operations, conservation
stewardship activities, and our Federal wildlife
responsibilities.
Increasing recreational opportunities on Federal lands and
waters is among our highest priorities, and approximately $970
million is for recreation and public access programs.
The request also makes an investment, $1.5 billion, for
infrastructure maintenance and construction, which includes
about $640 million for National Park Service construction and
maintenance.
As Senator Murkowski referenced, Interior has struggled to
address deteriorating infrastructure and maintenance backlogs
at our parks, at our refuges, our Indian education schools, and
even some of our major water facilities. I really hope that we
can work together to see if there is a way to address these
needs and meet them in some way.
We have proposed the Public Lands Infrastructure Fund as
part of our budget. It is actually a pretty significant thing
to get the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to go along
with some mandatory spending. So it is not without effort that
we did that.
Conservation stewardship is key to our mission, and our
efforts would not be possible without our partners across the
Country. This budget includes a request of about $465 million
to support the Payments in Lieu of Taxes program.
Obviously, combatting wildland fire is critical to our
mission. We spent about $528 million in 2018 on fire
suppression. Our request this year of $384 million for
suppression meets the Appropriations Act requirements for the
average.
The budget also includes about $194 million for proactive
fuels management, and we really fundamentally believe that
active fuels management is a necessary tool to address
wildfires. The administration has also proposed a number of
forest management legislative reforms as part of our budget.
Those are largely categorical exclusions.
Last year, our energy and minerals portfolio contributed
about $150 billion to the economy and supported about 740,000
jobs nationwide, and the budget supports continued economic
strength and energy security. The budget includes $30 million
to advance the administration's critical mineral strategy,
which Senator Murkowski referenced.
I think it is not insignificant that in response to some of
the trade dialogue, yesterday the Premier of China was at a
critical mineral, rare earth facility. I certainly hope you
will think about that as you look at that component of our
budget.
The budget continues our important relationship with the
insular areas and our commitment to tribal prosperity and self-
determination. We believe it would strengthen and improve the
delivery of education services to Native children and also
collaboration across Federal and Tribal agencies to address
criminal justice issues, including the significant escalating
reports of missing and murdered persons in Indian Country.
In terms of big-picture items, we do intend to proceed with
the Department's reorganization efforts, with some modification
to what Secretary Zinke proposed, and I am happy to visit with
you about that.
I do believe that we can all benefit from focusing more of
our operations West, closer to where our assets are actually
located.
I do intend to continue an aggressive approach to dealing
with harassment in all forms. We developed a very strong
harassment policy. I have worked with the bureaus to implement
and develop plans, and we are holding them accountable. The
reality is we have made strides, but we have a great deal more
work to do in that area. And it is toxic to our culture.
Mr. Udall, I respect your comments about ethics, but I will
tell you I am working very hard to transform the Department's
ethics program overall. By the end of this fiscal year, we will
have doubled the number of career ethics officials hired in the
entire previous administration.
I have also directed the Ethics Office to begin
consolidating our disparate ethics functions into a
comprehensive departmental program to create a better
functioning and robust program, and we will be submitting a
reprogramming notice to you on that in the near future.
With that, I will conclude my statement, and I look forward
to answering any of the questions you have.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. David Bernhardt
Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and Members of the
subcommittee, I appear before you today to discuss the President's 2020
budget request for the Department of the Interior. Interior's 2020
budget totals $12.6 billion, of which $11.5 billion supports activities
within the jurisdiction of this subcommittee. The 2020 request reflects
the administration's support for Interior's important missions and is
$926.2 million above the President's 2019 request for Interior. Thanks
to the work of this subcommittee, in fiscal year 2020 Interior will
have access to additional funding in the event of a severe wildland
fire season, through disaster cap authority.
2020 budget priorities
Interior's 2020 budget reflects the administration's effort to
strike the right balance of protection and sustainable use of resources
in a way that provides proper conservation stewardship of our land and
resources, enhances the safety of our communities, increases energy
security, and allows America to prosper within our budgetary
parameters. The budget invests to grow jobs and prosperity, promote
safe and secure communities, strengthen America's energy security, meet
Interior's Trust responsibilities, and continue to reorganize the
Department of the Interior.
At the same time, this budget meets the administration's broader
economic objective to manage Federal spending with restraint. We've
focused our resources to take care of the assets we have, expand public
access to our lands, and invest where Interior can make a significant
contribution to national objectives.
Complementing our funding request, the President's 2020 budget
request features two significant legislative proposals to address
wildfire risk through forest management reforms, and to rebuild
America's public lands infrastructure.
promoting jobs and economic growth
The administration is committed to economic growth and prosperity.
The2020 budget supports working lands, good-paying American jobs,
common sense regulatory reform, expanded opportunities for the outdoor
recreation economy, and increased revenue to States, Tribes, and local
communities. Interior balances access for Americans to enjoy their
public lands, managing these special places and natural resources for
generations to come and the development needed to serve the public and
fuel local economies.
Of Interior's $12.6 billion 2020 budget request, $4.9 billion
supports the land management activities of the Bureau of Land
Management (BLM), the National Park Service (NPS), and the Fish and
Wildlife Service (FWS). These operating funds support the primary
activities to meet the unique resource mission of each bureau. This
funding supports resource development, day-to-day operations, and
conservation stewardship activities for Interior's great places; and
fulfills the Department's Federal wildlife responsibilities.
America's Federal lands and waters contain tremendous job-creating
assets, supporting more than 1.8 million jobs in energy, recreation,
grazing, conservation, and hospitality. The stewardship of these
resources and partnerships with communities bordering the public lands
drive job opportunities and economic growth.
Interior's resource management programs directly support important
jobs across America. The budget invests $92.0 million in the BLM
Rangeland Management program, which supports western ranching families,
by managing nearly 18,000 livestock grazing permits and leases on the
public lands. The BLM public domain forestry and Oregon and California
grant lands programs support jobs and local economies through timber
and timber product sales. The 2020 budget includes $107.2 million for
these programs to support timber sales and forest management projects.
Consistent with the targets established under Executive Order 13855,
the request supports an estimated 280 million board feet in timber
sales in 2021, continuing annual increases from the 2018 production
level of 226 million board feet.
The 2020 budget includes $12.3 million for BLM's Other Mineral
Resources Management program which manages development of leasable
minerals. Funding in 2020 will be used to streamline program
activities, expedite processing of applications, and facilitate more
timely inspection and enforcement actions.
The U.S. Geological Survey's (USGS) mineral resources program works
to understand the fundamental science and identify supplies of mineral
resources to support land use decisions across the United States. This
program directly supports the administration's efforts to strengthen
America's energy and critical minerals security as outlined in
Executive Order 13817. The program is working to identify domestic
supplies of 35 critical minerals needed for manufacturing and
technology innovation. The 2020 budget for the USGS includes $30.3
million for critical minerals work. This investment will provide the
advanced topographic, geologic, and geophysical data needed to locate
U.S. critical mineral resources to inform management of private-sector
domestic development, reduce dependence on foreign sources, and support
job creation and technological innovation.
To increase U.S. economic strength, the administration has
challenged Federal agencies to reduce the regulatory burden on
Americans. We are working to ensure our regulations reflect advances in
science and technology and foster innovation and economic growth. We
have also established standard goals to reduce page length and review
times, internal processes, and applied project management practices to
improve Interior's National Environmental Policy Act review and
clearance activities. As part of this effort, we are also working to
revise outdated processes and leverage technology to deliver better
service. The 2020 budget invests in improvements to make it easier to
do business with Interior, including more timely processing of coal,
oil and gas, grazing management, communications infrastructure, and
surface mining reclamation plan reviews.
Our efforts to improve Interior's review and permitting activities
directly contribute to a stronger infrastructure in the United States.
Interior reviews and approves permits for Federal and private sector
uses of Interior lands, including energy and minerals development,
pipelines, and transmission infrastructure. The 2020 budget requests
$107.5 million for planning and consultation, which includes support
for the FWS to perform reviews required under Section 7 of the
Endangered Species Act and thereby avoid unnecessary delays in Federal
infrastructure projects.
Investment in Interior's infrastructure also benefits local
economies. Interior's infrastructure crisscrosses the country in
roughly 2,400 locations. In many communities our operations are a major
economic driver. Interior owns approximately 43,000 buildings, 106,000
miles of road, and 77,000 structures--including dams, schools,
laboratories, employee housing, and irrigation and power
infrastructure. Many of these assets are deteriorating. In 2018,
Interior's deferred maintenance backlog was over $18 billion, of which
nearly $12 billion is associated with NPS assets. The 2020 budget
invests $1.5 billion across Interior for infrastructure maintenance and
construction to care for our assets. This includes $639.8 million for
NPS construction and maintenance. Complementing the request is proposed
legislation to establish a Public Lands Infrastructure Fund, setting
aside up to $1.3 billion a year, $6.5 billion over 5 years, from 50
percent of energy development revenue that would otherwise be credited
or deposited as miscellaneous receipts to the Treasury. Within
Interior, the Fund would be available for infrastructure needs in NPS,
FWS, the Bureau of Indian Education (BIE), and BLM.
According to the U.S. Commerce Department, in 2016, America's
outdoor economy accounted for $412 billion of the U.S. GDP. Interior
plays a major role in supporting America's outdoor economy through
access to our public lands. Every year, hundreds of millions of visits
are made to our national parks, national wildlife refuges, and BLM
public lands to do everything from rock climb, kayak and camp to
snorkel, hunt, and fish. Recreation visits to BLM and NPS lands alone
support more than 350,000 jobs.
Increasing recreational opportunities for more Americans through
our public lands and waters also brings more economic opportunity for
our neighboring gateway communities. Increased public access to
America's lands is among our highest priorities. The budget for our
primary land management bureaus includes roughly $970.9 million for
recreation and public access programs to increase the public's
enjoyment of Interior's unique resources. In FWS, this request supports
safe and reliable access to outdoor recreation for over 55 million
visitors to the national wildlife refuges. The refuge system has more
than 377 units that offer high-quality hunting opportunities and 312
units that are open to fishing. These activities, along with special
events and outdoor education programs, annually generate $2.4 billion
in economic activity and support more than 35,000 jobs. The 2020 budget
includes $9.1 million for FWS to improve trails, open new areas to
hunting, fishing and other recreation, increase awareness through
updated websites and recreation maps, and deliver engaging
environmental education programs at the refuges.
In 2018, the 418 units of the national park system hosted over 318
million visitors. The 2020 request for NPS includes $237.1 million for
Visitor Services to support informative programming, concession
management, and other activities to enhance the visitor experience. The
budget invests $10.0 million to expand outdoor recreation opportunities
including fishing programs for youth and other novice anglers, improve
recreational related infrastructure and resources, and coordinate with
State, local, business, and nonprofit stakeholders to increase access
to outdoor recreation.
Responsible stewardship also means being a good neighbor. The 2020
budget maintains the administration's continuing support for the
Payments in Lieu of Taxes program, recognizing the inability of local
communities to collect property taxes on certain Federal lands in their
jurisdiction. In 2018, Interior made payments to over 1,900 local
governments across the United States. Communities traditionally use
these payments to help deliver vital services such as firefighting and
police protection, construction of public schools and roads, and
search-and- rescue operations. The 2020 budget includes $465.0 million
in direct appropriations to support these payments.
collaborative conservation of wildlife, habitat and cultural resources
Conservation stewardship is a key component of Interior's overall
mission and is shared across all bureaus. Whether implementing resource
conservation projects, providing grants, scientific expertise, or
educational programs to support land, water, and wildlife conservation,
Interior is a leader in protecting and managing America's resources for
current and future generations to enjoy. The Department's conservation
efforts would not be possible without our partners across America.
Our partners include the sportsmen and sportswomen who live
America's conservation ethic. They volunteer and frequently provide
private and partnership resources to care for wildlife habitat, species
management, and collaborative conservation. Through the Pittman-
Robertson and Dingell-Johnson Act programs, sportsmen and sportswomen
contribute over a billion dollars each year to wildlife and habitat
conservation and outdoor recreation projects. Every time a firearm,
fishing rod, hook, bullet, motor boat or boat fuel is sold, part of
that cost goes to fund conservation.
Increased access to hunting and fishing on public lands not only
supports the outdoor economy but it actively supports conservation of
these lands. Sportsmen and sportswomen also help to leverage roughly
two to one the Federal contribution for Interior's North American
Wetlands Conservation Act Grants. The 2020 budget includes $40 million
for these grants, which support projects to improve the health of
wetlands, support migratory birds, and enhance nearby water quality.
The 2020 budget also includes $31.3 million for State and Tribal
Wildlife Grants supporting State and Tribal projects to benefit local
wildlife and their habitats through planning and restoration.
The 2020 budget prioritizes partnerships, species recovery, and
proactive wildlife and habitat conservation to avoid species from
becoming endangered. The budget includes $95.0 million to recover
listed species, and $26.4 million for a range of proactive species and
habitat specific conservation and restoration programs to avoid the
need to list species. The $67.8 million request for FWS Habitat
Conservation features $54.4 million for the Partners for Fish and
Wildlife Program, which leverages the Federal investment for
conservation projects with local non-Federal partners all across the
country.
BLM's multiple use mission enables work, such as grazing, to
continue on the public lands, but also ensures conservation of many
species and their habitats--safeguarding the Nation's public lands as
well as peoples' livelihoods. BLM manages more wildlife habitat acreage
than any other Federal agency--supporting conservation efforts for
3,000 species and preserving and restoring essential habitat for 430
threatened or endangered species. The 2020 BLM budget includes $118.4
million for Wildlife and Habitat Management. Management activities
benefit native prairie, wildlife, and livestock, and help stabilize
soils, maintain and improve water quality, reduce surface runoff and
control flooding, improve ecological site conditions, and enhance
overall environmental well-being.
Habitat corridors are a feature of many of the tracts of land
managed by BLM and are important for migrating wildlife. The Department
is working with States to research and protect the migration corridors
of some of North America's most iconic big-game species by protecting
the range of moose, mule deer, elk, pronghorn antelope, bighorn sheep,
and other species who share the ecosystem benefit. The 2020 budget
invests $18.4 million across Interior to continue to support and expand
migration corridor partnerships and conservation opportunities.
America relies on the NPS to protect and maintain the natural
beauty of the parks' iconic landscapes as well as the artifacts and
structures which help tell America's history. The $2.4 billion request
for national park operations includes $321.6 million for natural and
cultural resource stewardship across the parks. The FWS mission focuses
on the conservation, protection, and enhancement of wildlife and their
habitats. The 2020 FWS budget includes $234.4 million for Wildlife and
Habitat Management in the national refuge system.
USGS provides science, consistent monitoring, observation and
mapping to support the Department's conservation mission. USGS research
provides insight into changes in the natural world--our water, lands,
geology, wildlife--and how they may affect our communities. The 2020
budget includes $141.0 million for scientific work related to
ecosystems, supporting investigations related to specific ecosystems,
such as Florida's Everglades; or biological threats to species,
including White Nose Syndrome in bats.
Water is vitally important to the health and well-being of
Americans and our lands and wildlife. The USGS works with partners to
manage water monitoring networks across the country which are relied
upon by land managers, industry, and communities concerned about the
availability of water or risk of flooding. USGS also addresses water
quality issues, such as the prevalence of harmful algal blooms, which
pose risks to natural resources reliant on water but also people. The
2020 budget includes $179.9 million for USGS Water Resources programs
to monitor, understand, and inform water challenges for the benefit of
land and wildlife conservation, and communities across the country.
active management for healthy forests
Dense undergrowth has amassed on Federal lands, providing fuel for
catastrophic wildfires and worsening insect infestation, and spread of
invasive species and disease. These conditions are harming the Nation's
forests, rangelands, and watersheds, and placing people, their homes,
and their communities at risk. These conditions also make it more
dangerous for wildland firefighters to fight the fires. Active fuels
management is a necessary and important tool to combat these threats,
save lives, and protect property.
In tandem with the budget, the administration proposes a package of
forest management legislative reforms to help address this serious
risk. By providing the Department with additional tools to expedite
timber salvage operations in response to wildfires, insect and disease
infestations, and other disturbances, the Department can more
effectively reduce the risk of wildfire, utilize forest materials
damaged as a result of those events, and better allocate resources to
support restoration activities. Interior's 2020 budget includes $194.0
million in Wildland Fire Management to support aggressive fuels
reduction work and pre-suppression activities to help mitigate the
incidence of catastrophic wildfires. The budget also includes $161.8
million for timber management programs in the BLM and the Bureau of
Indian Affairs (BIA), to prioritize planning and preparation activities
affecting timber sales volumes and forest health. In addition, the BLM
budget includes $92.0 million to support healthy rangelands through
weed reduction, vegetation treatments, and permitted grazing
operations. The NPS budget includes $4.0 million specifically to
improve active forest and vegetation management in the national parks.
Complementing this initiative, Interior continues to work closely
with partners to improve the sage-steppe working landscapes of the West
which are vitally impacted by wildland fires. The 2020 budget includes
$55.5 million to implement sage-grouse management plans and continue
cooperation with Western States on greater sage-grouse conservation.
This funding will be used to remove conifers, create fire breaks,
remove fire-prone invasive plants, and protect and restore habitat for
all sagebrush dependent wildlife. At the end of 2018, nearly 1.5
million acres had been treated. The 2020 budget also includes $75.7
million to continue management of Wild Horses and Burros on America's
rangelands.
More active forest management like expedited timber salvage can
reduce the risk to firefighters and revegetation crews, speeding the
recovery of lands. The expedited recovery of wood products also
provides an economic benefit. In turn, the fire risk to people,
communities, recreation facilities, and infrastructure is reduced.
safe and secure communities
The Department of the Interior is the proud home of 3,600 Federal
law enforcement officers with duties as varied as the bureaus'
missions. Interior has highly specialized units in three major cities,
drug enforcement teams in Indian Country, urban search-and-rescue units
that provide hurricane response, and backcountry units that operate in
the wilderness for days at a time. The 2020 budget includes a total of
$930.3 million for law enforcement programs, continues successful
border enforcement and drug enforcement programs, and supports a new
initiative to address the epidemic of violence and missing persons in
Indian Country.
Interior's law enforcement officers help to secure Interior lands
on the southern border. Over 12.5 million acres under Interior
jurisdiction are within 50 miles of the United States-Mexico border.
More than 655 miles of land along the border are managed by Interior's
bureaus. Interior works closely with the Department of Homeland
Security to increase security on the southwest border, including 75
border miles on Tribal lands, primarily managed by the Tohono O'odham
Nation in Arizona. Currently, about 300 miles, or less than half, of
Interior's border lands have a vehicle barrier, pedestrian fence, or
wall.
Fulfilling the President's commitment to end the opioid crisis in
America is another top priority of the Department. This budget includes
$10.0 million including an increase of $2.5 million, to continue
support for the fight against opioids in Indian Country. BIA drug
enforcement agents are part of the Federal Opioid Reduction Task Force
addressing the increase in drug-related activities through interdiction
programs to reduce drug use, distribution, and drug-related crime to
help communities in Indian Country battle the opioid crisis. In the
first year of operation, the Task Force conducted 8 undercover
operations leading to more than 180 arrests and seizure of more than
1,000 pounds of narcotics worth more than $9.0 million that were
intended for sale in Indian Country.
Interior's wildland fire suppression operations are part of a
vitally important partnership across all levels of government to fight
wildfires on public lands and minimize risk to nearby communities. In
fiscal year 2018, Interior spent more than $528 million on wildfire
suppression efforts alone. The 2020 budget includes $383.7 million for
wildfire suppression, pursuant to the requirements under the
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2018. Consistent with the Act, 2020 is
the first year resources are also available through a wildfire budget
cap adjustment to meet U.S. Forest Service and Department of the
Interior fire suppression needs. The 2020 budget assumes a preliminary
split of $300 million of the authorized cap adjustment resources for
Interior requirements, with the remainder allocated to the U.S. Forest
Service. The administration will reallocate resources between agencies
as necessary to meet actual wildfire suppression needs.
Employees from across Interior also serve as part of Federal
emergency response efforts. In the event of a natural disaster, our
employees work to protect and rebuild Interior's assets, but are also
part of the community working to help recovery. USGS scientists play an
important role preparing for and addressing the aftermath of natural
hazard events. USGS provides important scientific and monitoring
information to emergency responders, policy makers, and the public to
reduce the risk of losses from a wide range of natural hazards,
including earthquakes, floods, hurricanes, landslides, tsunamis,
volcanic eruptions, wildfires, geomagnetic storms, and drought. The
2020 budget includes $145.0 million for the USGS Natural Hazards
programs. This funding maintains important nationwide monitoring
networks that are vitally important to emergency managers.
an era of energy prosperity
By advancing common sense policies that appropriately engage in
domestic energy development, the Trump administration is putting
America on a path towards continued low fuel costs, high paying jobs
and greater energy security. Under the Trump administration, crude oil
and natural gas production has hit all-time highs, U.S. net energy
imports have fallen to their lowest levels since 1982, with the U.S.
becoming a net exporter of natural gas in 2017 and expected to become a
net exporter of energy overall, including petroleum and other liquids,
by 2020.
Interior manages a good portion of the natural resources on
America's public lands and waters, including oil, gas, coal,
hydropower, minerals and renewable energy sources. The Department plays
an important role in the Nation's future energy security and our
overall economic well-being. Altogether, Interior's energy and mineral
portfolio contributed an economic output of over $150 billion and
supported an estimated 740,000 jobs nationwide. The same year, Interior
shattered prior records in onshore oil and gas and offshore wind energy
lease sales, and disbursed $8.9 billion in revenues to States, Tribes,
local communities, and the U.S. Treasury, an increase of $1.8 billion
from 2017.
The 2020 budget requests $777.0 million in discretionary resources
for energy-related programs across the Department. Together with permit
fees and other mandatory funding, Interior's 2020 energy programs total
$830.1 million. A large portion of these energy development activities
occur on the Outer Continental Shelf. The 2020 request includes a total
of $393.9 million to support responsible exploration and development of
America's offshore energy resources, which remains an important
component of the administration's energy strategy. Within this request
is $193.4 million for the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management's (BOEM)
oil, gas, and renewable energy leasing and exploration activities. The
continued efforts of the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement
(BSEE) are integral to a strong offshore energy program. The budget
includes $200.5 million for BSEE's work to ensure safe and
environmentally sustainable energy exploration and production. BSEE is
committed to the continual advancement of the effectiveness of its
inspection program, enhancing its permitting processes around greater
quality assurance and consistency, reforming overly burdensome
regulations, ensuring high levels of preparedness in the event of oil
spills, and expanding the renewables program.
The 2020 budget includes $190.4 million in current and permanent
funding for BLM's onshore oil and gas activities, of which $137.3
million is requested in direct appropriations. Funding will expand
areas available for leasing, expedite permitting, and improve program
management. The 2020 budget advances activities in Alaska and New
Mexico, and continues work to streamline leasing processes and speed
the review of Applications for Permits to Drill. Interior has already
reduced wait times for these permits by 57 days (from 120 days to 63
days). The budget will also help to expedite the processing of rights-
of-way permits needed to move energy to consumers.
The 2020 BLM budget includes $29.1 million for renewable energy
activities. This funding will support the review and siting of
geothermal resources, wind and solar energy projects on public lands,
and rights-of-way applications to connect these projects to
transmission lines. The 2020 budget includes $19.8 million for the BLM
coal management program focused on reducing permit processing times,
simplifying the lease application process, and improving the timeliness
to complete lease sale fair market value determinations. BLM's Federal
coal leasing program supplies more than 40 percent of the coal produced
in the United States.
The 2020 budget for BIA includes $25.5 million for energy and
mineral development programs in Tribal communities. Income from energy
and mineral production is the largest source of revenue from natural
resources on trust lands. In 2018, more than $1 billion in revenue from
oil, gas and mineral activities was disbursed to Tribes and individual
Indian mineral rights owners. Tribes use this revenue to develop
infrastructure, provide healthcare and education, and support other
critical community development programs.
An important component of Interior's natural resource programs is
the collection and disbursement of billions of dollars in receipts from
development. The 2020 budget includes $147.3 million for the Office of
Natural Resources Revenue (ONRR) to ensure Americans receive an
accurate return for their public resources. In 2020, ONRR will continue
to implement a critical new Minerals Revenue Management Support System
to update and improve management and accountability of Interior's
significant revenue collections.
fulfilling our trust and insular responsibilities
The Department of the Interior is responsible for fostering the
government-to-government relationship with Indian Tribes and Alaska
Native Villages and overseeing relations with U.S. territories and
insular areas.
The United States has an important relationship with the affiliated
insular areas including the territories of American Samoa, Guam, the
U.S. Virgin Islands, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands. With China's escalating influence in the Pacific region,
Interior's insular responsibilities and obligations contribute
meaningfully to broader administration policy objectives in the region.
In 2020, the Office of Insular Affairs will implement activities to
bolster healthcare capacity, strengthen island economies, and fulfill
U.S. Compact obligations. The Office will also participate in foreign
policy and defense matters concerning the U.S. territories and the
freely associated states. The 2020 budget includes a total of $610.7
million in current and permanent authority, with $84.1 million in
current appropriations.
Interior provides services directly, or through contracts, grants,
or compacts, to 573 federally recognized Tribes with a combined service
population of nearly 2 million American Indians and Alaska Natives. The
Department is committed to Tribal prosperity and working together with
Tribes to address challenges in economic development, education, and
law enforcement. Interior supports Indian self-determination to ensure
Tribes have a strong voice in shaping Federal policies directly
impacting their ability to govern and provide for the safety,
education, and economic security of their citizens. Interior's Tribal
programs deliver community services, restore Tribal homelands, fulfill
commitments related to water and other resource rights, execute
fiduciary trust responsibilities, support the stewardship of energy and
other natural resources, create economic opportunity, and provide
access to education.
The 2020 budget for Indian Affairs prioritizes programs that serve
the broadest service population and addresses Federal responsibilities
and Tribal needs related to education, social services, infrastructure,
law enforcement, and stewardship of land, water, and other natural
resources. The 2020 budget includes $1.9 billion for BIA, and $936.3
million for BIE. Within this is $367.4 million to fully fund the
estimated Contract and Tribal Grant Support Costs Tribes incur from
managing Federal Indian programs.
The 2020 budget takes action to improve the quality and efficiency
of the BIE schools. In 2020, for the first time, we request funding for
BIA and BIE separately, as part of an effort to improve overall
transparency, accountability, and autonomy for the effective delivery
of BIE school services. This step is consistent with direction from
this subcommittee which began 5 years ago, urging the Department to
consolidate all responsibilities related to Indian education under BIE.
The changes in the 2020 budget respond to your direction and other
longstanding criticism that the lines of authority for BIE services
were not clear, it was too difficult to determine who had final
accountability for delivering services, and BIE did not have sufficient
independence to ensure school needs were met.
The 2020 budget is the result of a detailed review within Indian
Affairs, looking at the services provided to the BIE schools and the
different roles of BIA, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for
Indian Affairs, and BIE. The review considered where it made sense to
decouple overlapping functions and where it made sense to continue
cross-servicing to BIE with clearer agreements in place. The 2020
request reflects this review and strengthens BIE's ability to deliver
materials and services, carry out needed health and safety inspections,
and ensure repairs are made. The BIE budget includes $867.4 million to
continue core Indian education elementary, secondary and post-secondary
programs. It also includes $68.9 million to support facility
construction, repairs, deferred maintenance, and capital improvements.
The 2020 BIA budget requests $1.5 billion for Operation of Indian
Programs. This includes $409.2 million for the Public Safety and
Justice programs providing law enforcement, corrections, and court
services to Indian communities. The 2020 budget also includes $326.0
million for Tribal Government programs with $178.9 million for Self
Governance Compacts.
The 2020 BIA budget includes $184.1 million for Natural Resources
Management supporting resource conservation, economic use, recreation,
and protection of Tribal resource rights. Within this amount is $54.8
million for Tribal forestry programs which complement of the
administration's forest management legislative reforms. The budget also
includes $11.2 million for the Tribal Management/Development Program
which supports Tribal management of fish and game programs on Indian
reservations. These programs ensure the protection of millions of acres
of habitat necessary for the conservation of fish, wildlife, and plant
resources and significantly contribute to the economic development of
Tribal communities and the growing national demand for outdoor
recreation and tourism.
The budget maintains a strong commitment to meet Tribal settlement
agreements and includes $45.6 million for BIA Water Rights Settlements.
At this funding level, BIA remains on track to meet current water
settlement commitments within the legislated timeframes. Across
Interior, the budget includes $178.6 million for Indian Settlement
commitments.
government reform
President Trump challenged Federal agencies to modernize and reform
the executive branch and Interior is leading the way to better serve
the American people. The absolute first step is fostering a culture of
ethics and respect amongst colleagues. There is zero tolerance for any
type of workplace harassment at Interior. The Department is instilling
a culture change through clear management accountability, swift
personnel actions, reporting procedures for harassment conduct,
improved training, and substantive action plans. In the area of anti-
harassment efforts, each bureau and office has made significant headway
to put a diverse set of measures in place to prevent and address
unacceptable conduct.
We have also launched an internal Workplace Culture Transformation
Advisory Council across the Department to keep a focus on Interior's
workplace environment. The Council will look at common issues raised in
the Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey, ways to improve employee
engagement, and building career paths that cross bureau silos; all with
the goal to transform Interior's workplace culture for future
generations.
Another management priority is creating a strong ethical culture to
ensure Interior employees honor the public's trust to manage funds
responsibly and avoid conflicts of interest. The expectations for
appropriate employee conduct have been made clear, and the Department
has set goals and expectations for qualified ethics officials
sufficient to ensure our operations are conducted ethically.
Over many decades, the Department of the Interior experienced new
bureaus becoming established on an ad hoc basis with their own unique
regional organizations. This ultimately resulted in a complicated
series of 49 regional boundaries among 8 bureaus. This complexity led
to the situation where bureau regional leadership was focused on
different geographic areas, did not have adequate and shared
understanding of the needs and perspectives of regional stakeholders,
and opportunities to share administrative capacity across bureaus were
difficult to recognize and implement. Members of the public were often
frustrated by problems in inter- bureau decisionmaking where
uncoordinated timelines and processes could lead to unnecessarily long
delays in reaching a decision. In 2018, Interior began a reorganization
effort focused on making improvements across each of these areas.
Interior's reorganization is driven by the need to improve our
delivery of service to the public. The Department developed a
reorganization strategy that relies on unified regions across Interior,
moves some staff west to be closer to the resources and customers they
support, improves coordination and collaboration among Interior's
bureaus, and reviews standard administrative processes across Interior
to find smarter ways to conduct business operations.
Last year, Interior took the first step in the reorganization.
After working closely with stakeholders across the country on options
to consolidate Interior's 49 different regions into common regions,
Interior adopted 12 unified regions for a subset of the bureaus. As a
result of Tribal consultation, BIA, BIE, and the Office of the Special
Trustee for American Indians will not realign their regional field
structure.
Establishing unified regional boundaries across bureaus is the
cornerstone of reforms to improve Interior's service delivery to the
public. Within each shared region, bureaus will focus work on the same
resources and constituents and improve coordination across the
Department. For the public, fewer regions will make it easier to do
business with Interior, particularly when the public interacts with
several bureaus or jurisdictions. For Interior's business, the move
will strengthen inter-bureau coordination and understanding, joint
problem-solving, and mutual assistance.
Bureaus and offices have begun to work across organizational lines
to identify ways to maximize the benefits of the new regions. In 2019,
we are analyzing options to relocate more operations out West, where
the preponderance of bureau assets and acres are located, to better
serve our customers. As part of the planning, we are considering
relative cost, accessibility, and the specific functions where it makes
sense to be closer to field assets. We are also reexamining some of the
Department's common business operations to leverage consistent best
practices across Interior. In 2020, the budget requests $27.6 million
to continue implementing the reorganization with three areas of focus:
Implementation of the Unified Regions ($12.1 million), Relocation and
Regional Stand Up ($10.5 million), and Modernizing Interior's Business
($5.0 million).
legislative proposals
Forest Health.--The Administration proposes a comprehensive package
of legislative reforms to proactively reduce the risk of wildfires
through better management of Federal forests and rangelands. The
proposed legislation would provide categorical exclusions on Interior
lands for active forest management, including the ability to harvest
dead, dying, or damaged trees and proactive fuels management including
the use of fuel breaks. These changes are much needed to help reduce
fire risk, improve forest health, minimize after fire impacts, prevent
re-burn of fire impacted areas, and improve safety for wildland
firefighters.
Public Lands Infrastructure Fund.--The budget proposes $6.5 billion
over 5 years for a Public Lands Infrastructure Fund to address deferred
maintenance needs in the Departments of Interior and Agriculture.
Within Interior, the Fund will support infrastructure improvements
through an allocation of 70 percent for national parks, 10 percent for
national forests, 10 percent for wildlife refuges, 5 percent for BIE
schools, and 5 percent for lands managed by the BLM. The Fund will be
supported by the deposit of 50 percent of all Federal energy
development revenue that would otherwise be credited or deposited as
miscellaneous receipts to the Treasury over the 2020-2024 period,
subject to an annual limit of $1.3 billion. Interior and Agriculture
would prioritize projects, monitor implementation, and measure results.
Recreation Fee Program.--The budget proposes to reauthorize the
Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement Act, which expires in September
2020. As a precaution, the budget also proposes appropriations language
to provide a 2-year extension of FLREA through September 2022.
Cancel Southern Nevada Public Land Management Act Account
Balances.--The budget proposes to cancel $230.0 million in unobligated
balances from the Southern Nevada Public Land Management Act (SNPLMA)
program over a 3-year period.
EPAct Geothermal Payments to Counties.--The budget proposes to
restore the disposition of Federal geothermal leasing revenues to the
historical formula of 50 percent to the States and 50 percent to the
U.S. Treasury by repealing Section 224(b) of the Energy Policy Act of
2005. That section changed the distribution to direct 50 percent to
States, 25 percent to counties, and 25 percent to the Federal
Government.
conclusion
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the President's 2020
budget request for the Department of the Interior.
In closing, this is a budget that prioritizes core functions
important to the American people within budget parameters.
Complementing this funding request is legislation to provide up to $6.5
billion over 5 years to address the deferred maintenance backlog on our
public lands.
This budget advances collaborative conservation with investments in
the America's natural and cultural resources, support for conservation
stewardship partnerships, a focus on species recovery and proactive
conservation activities to avoid the need for listing, and reforms to
improve the health of our forest and rangelands and reduce risk from
severe wildfires.
I look forward to working with you to support the President's 2020
budget request. I am prepared to address your questions at this time.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
REORGANIZATION
Let me begin with the proposal for the reorganization
efforts. When Secretary Zinke first came in and outlined his
proposal, it was a pretty expansive overhaul of a pretty
expansive Department, and I think we all listened with
interest, not entirely sure how that was all going to unfold.
One of the concerns that I shared with him was the fact
that it is important that we evaluate and then reevaluate
internal operations that go to the effectiveness of a
Department when you are trying to do a pretty substantive
overhaul. You have to keep the wheels on the bus of those
agencies that every day are responding to the matters on the
ground, whether it is the needs of our Native peoples, whether
it is the management of our public lands, or whether it is the
operations that go on with our insular affairs. Your Department
is huge and vast.
Can you share with me and the subcommittee a little bit
more of your vision and concrete details of this
reorganization? We read a little bit about it in the press. An
article this morning in one of the trade journals speaks to a
portion that is directed at the United States Geological Survey
(USGS), obviously something that we care about, BLM, and the
proposal to move those operations or those headquarters out
West.
Can you share where you are with your review, your
analysis, the type of analysis that you have used in order to
get you to this direction, and how you are going to proceed?
Secretary Bernhardt. So let me start by putting the
reorganization in context for you.
Senator Murkowski. Great.
Secretary Bernhardt. From my perspective, Secretary Zinke's
reorganization vision had three different components. The first
component was an effort to unify the various regional
boundaries that the Department had for its senior management
and its regional structure, and what we essentially did was
move from 49 combinations of regional boundaries down to 12. We
excluded from any change, the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the
Bureau of Indian Education, but for those other agencies, they
now have 12 common regions.
We worked with you and your staff on that last summer, and
actually, in August of last year, you all approved the
demarcation of the regional boundaries.
There is a benefit to everybody having a similar region. I
think it allows every bureaus within the Department to be
focused on essentially the same geographical area. And I think
that is a good thing. I think that is a good thing for managing
the Department overall. So we will continue to implement that.
The second element that the Secretary was focused on was
moving some of the headquarters elements West, and on one hand,
I think that was driven by an interest to ensure that folks
have a perspective on the areas that they manage and be closer
to the ground, but the real benefit that I see from moving our
resources out is really shoring up our local and State and
regional offices in a way that they can provide citizen
services more effectively and more efficiently, and prioritize
those resources there. So we have----
Senator Murkowski. That is not all departments that you
would seek to relocate headquarters?
Secretary Bernhardt. That is right, and I think it is very
likely that when I come to you with the reorganization--or
reprogramming request for that, which I have not done, but when
I do, I think I will be able to delineate for you. We will
start with BLM, and I will delineate for you the headquarters
elements that would remain--and there would be significant
headquarters elements remaining here because there are
functions that have to occur here--and how we would delineate
the staff. And I will be able to walk you through every single
staffer in terms of slots, so that you can have a sense. And we
will bring that up and do that relatively soon.
The USGS, we are also considering moving elements West for
them to be a little more centrally located. There are strong
views in the House about that, and I respect those views. And
we will work with you all on that.
The third component of Secretary Zinke's proposal, since I
am getting close to time, was establishment of a unified
command structure in each region, and there was going to be a
unified commander with his own bureaucracy. From my
perspective, I am not sure that that is required.
Every Secretary struggles in Interior to figure out how can
we better manage and organize the Department to deal with
issues that cross jurisdictional boundaries within the
Department, to deal with situations that are important to
localities or States, and where there are multiple views in
Interior. Different models have been tried over time.
Alaska has a model where the Secretary's office has a
staffer in Alaska precisely to reconcile those types of things.
There have been histories of using counselors, histories of
using field-level assistants. I have authority to do a variety
of things that do not require reorganization.
I have been working with the regional facilitators who have
been working on this for a couple years now or I guess a year
and a half now, on a concept where senior managers in each
region have to operate together on certain issues to ensure
that they are all on the same page with maybe either a first
among equal or someone being actually designated as a
Secretarial representative.
I do not think we need the additional bureaucracy, to be
completely fair, and so that would mean that that would be a
substantial change to what our request is. We still need some
resources to make it work, but I think we could have a much
more streamlined thing.
There is a lot of tension between who has responsibility in
these types of situations, and I think we can facilitate that
through clear guidance and memos and avoid a lot of the hurdle
associated with it.
I am sorry to go over time.
Senator Murkowski. I appreciate you laying the groundwork
for that because I know there have been issues and questions
because there just is a lot of unknown, and as long as it
remains unknown, it worries people.
I think my takeaway with you this morning is to make sure
that there is this communication with the subcommittee about
any reprogramming, and that there is a clear understanding as
to the rationale and the analysis. We look forward to that
back-and-forth as you are getting closer to making some
decisions there.
Secretary Bernhardt. I worked with your folks on both sides
of the aisle on good faith in the delineation of the
boundaries, and we will continue to do that. We are not going
to surprise you in any way.
Senator Murkowski. I appreciate that.
Let me go to my colleague, Senator Udall.
Senator Udall. Thank you.
MONUMENTS REVIEW
Mr. Secretary, on March 27, I sent you a letter along with
16 other Senators asking for answers on a number of questions
that related to your position, on a number of issues related to
monuments review performed by your predecessor, Secretary
Zinke.
I received a response from one of your aides, Casey
Hammond, last week that did not even attempt to answer the
question. So I wanted to revisit the issues again with you.
As you know, the President has already attempted to modify
the Bear's Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante national
monuments, and the Department has moved forward with certain
activities that implement his direction.
But Interior's 2017 report also included recommendations to
modify eight other monuments, including two monuments in New
Mexico, the Rio Grande del Norte and the Organ Mountains-Desert
Peaks.
The letter we sent you asked you to clarify that the
Department does not intend to take any additional actions to
implement the recommendations in the report, including actions
to revise the boundaries or make planning changes to the two
monuments in New Mexico I just mentioned affected by the
review, the Rio Grande del Norte and Organ Mountains-Desert
Peaks.
This is really a yes or no, Mr. Secretary. Has the
Department taken any actions to date or does the Department
have any plans to take future actions, including making
additional recommendations to the White House for presidential
action that implement changes to the eight other monuments
called for by Secretary Zinke's review?
Secretary Bernhardt. Senator, thank you for that question.
I am going to give you a little more than a simple yes or
no, but I think the answer is no, and here is why. From my
perspective, the Secretary was asked to put a report together
by the President. He put that report together. He submitted it
to the President. It is before the President, and I have not
received any request to do a different report, and so I will
not take any action on any monuments.
The President is ultimately the holder of the pen with the
Antiquities Act.
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLANNING
Senator Udall. Let us move on to the issue of resource
management planning and national monuments. I want to make sure
you and I agree on the law.
Is it true that the Department takes a number of preleasing
steps before it ever issues a lease for oil, gas, or coal on
public lands, such as undertaking a resource management plan or
identifying areas open to leasing and associated constraints?
Secretary Bernhardt. The answer to that is yes. It is
generally true.
Senator Udall. And is it not true that the BLM Land Use
Planning Manual describes specific steps in coal and fluid
minerals leasing as identifying areas open to leasing and
constraints at the land use planning level? In fact, I think--
and you have said yes to this--the Secretary may not hold a
lease sale under this part unless the lands containing the coal
deposits are included in a comprehensive land use plan. That is
CFR 433421.
Do you agree that the Department considers relevant land
use plans a necessary preleasing step prior to issuing leases?
Secretary Bernhardt. At this time, I cannot think of an
exception to that general rule.
Senator Udall. Are you aware that each Interior
appropriations bill since fiscal year 2002 has contained a
provision prohibiting the Department from expending funds for,
quote, ``leasing, preleasing, or related activities'' under the
Mineral Leasing Act within the boundaries of a national
monument as such boundary existed on January 20, 2001?
Secretary Bernhardt. I am not familiar with that specific
limitation, but I have no reason to doubt what you read.
Senator Udall. The preferred alternative in the management
plan for the Grand Staircase-Escalante monument surround and
surrounding lands identifies opening lands removed by the
proclamation to oil and gas and coal leasing as well as
constraints and coal suitability determinations. As we both
agreed, these activities are part of the Department's typical
preleasing activities. How is this preleasing work not a
violation of appropriations law?
Secretary Bernhardt. Well, I do not think it is, but I will
go look at it and----
Senator Udall. I hope you look at it because----
Secretary Bernhardt [continuing]. Come back.
Senator Udall. I hope you look at it because it is pretty
clear to me.
Secretary Bernhardt. Roger that.
Senator Udall. I will be asking the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) to look into this issue and what I
believe to be a clear violation of the Antideficiency Act. In
the interest of the rule of law and safeguarding taxpayer funds
from mismanagement, will you commit to halting all further
Department work on this proposed plan until the GAO has ruled
on this issue?
Secretary Bernhardt. I will commit to studying the issue
personally and coming back and tell you what----
Senator Udall. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Udall.
Senator Blunt.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Chairman.
Secretary, I was going to ask about the reorganization
plan, and all my time would have been gone. So I am glad that
the Chairman asked about that, and we are obviously interested
in that and going to continue to be watching that as you begin
to put it in place.
STE. GENEVIEVE NATIONAL HISTORIC PARK
You would be surprised if I did not talk about the Ste.
Genevieve National Historic Park.
Secretary Bernhardt. I would be surprised if you did not.
Senator Blunt. A year ago, Chairman Murkowski and I were in
Ste. Genevieve, and the Park Service signed six different
agreements with the State, with the county, with the city, with
the Foundation for the Restoration of Ste. Genevieve. We
benefit from the fact that the community for 200 years has
helped maintain and continue to have attention to the unique
properties that are there.
I know you have already required one historic property. We
are in the process of acquiring five more historic properties
and a building for the visitors center. I know you are working
hard on this, and I believe I have your continued commitment to
make it a priority.
Secretary Bernhardt. You absolutely do, and I was told last
night everything is going swimmingly. I said if there is a
peep, I need to know.
Senator Blunt. And swimmingly is the transfer of 200-year-
old houses----
Secretary Bernhardt. Fair enough.
Senator Blunt. Exactly. Well, everything we can do to get
this in place. Obviously, the action of the Congress created a
lot of attention.
Can you tell me any of the plans you have to hire and
develop staff for that park unit?
Secretary Bernhardt. So we are going through that right
now. I just brought in a new Director of Operations, David
Vela, who you all know from his nomination process, which I
hope will restart again soon. And he is looking at that. We are
going to make sure that is taken care of.
Senator Blunt. And do you have any specific----
Secretary Bernhardt. Dates?
Senator Blunt [continuing]. Dates or----
Secretary Bernhardt. I really hazard to give you a date on
a recruitment.
Senator Blunt. You have an acting superintendent now. Do
you think that will be the case for the foreseeable future, or
do you have a time when----
Secretary Bernhardt. I think we will have it resolved in
the foreseeable future, but I think it is months, not weeks.
MISSOURI RIVER MANAGEMENT
Senator Blunt. Okay. Let us talk about the river a minute.
Since the Missouri River Management Plan in 2004, we have had a
flood, a significant flood every year except the two drought
years we only had a minor flood, but we have had significant
floods.
The Mississippi obviously is managed in a different way. It
floods as well, but the fish and wildlife concerns on the
Mississippi have always been looked at, I think, in
coordination with the impact on people and property. The 2004
Missouri River Plan really did not do that, and the river
itself, the navigation issues on the river were ignored. A lot
of the things that were taken out for river management were
taken out hoping that there would be positive impact on
wildlife, particularly on birds and fish, but none of that has
really worked.
In fact, the Corps has gone back and decided not to do more
of what it had already done because what it had already done
was not working.
I guess what I have told the Corps and what I would like to
repeat to you is, if there are actions that you know have a
negative impact on people and you do not know will have a
positive impact on fish and wildlife, do not do them until you
know they have a positive impact.
This is an important time, I think, to revisit the River
Management Plan, and I am wondering if you have any thoughts on
fish and wildlife elements of that or why the Mississippi River
appears to be managed on a dramatically different standard on
these issues than the Missouri River.
Secretary Bernhardt. Well, it is my hope that they are
managed upon the same legal standard because the legal
standards should be the same and on paper.
We are in a process right now of modifying our--what are
called our Section 7 regulations for the Endangered Species
Act, and I think those will be done sometime this summer.
I think once those are done, it would be useful to sit down
and have a discussion about whether those might change the
scope of a consultation and whether it would be a good idea to
reinitiate consultation with the Corps of Engineers.
So that is right around the corner, and I would be happy to
visit with you more about that.
Senator Blunt. When do you expect those to be out for
comment?
Secretary Bernhardt. I think we have already taken comment,
so they will be out in final. I would expect them out no later
than July.
Senator Blunt. Good. All right. I will look at that, and I
think we will be talking. I want to talk to you about that and
how it might impact a second look at the Missouri River
Management Plan.
Thank you.
Secretary Bernhardt. Look forward to it.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Blunt.
We will now turn to the Vice Chairman of the full
Committee, Senator Leahy. Welcome.
Senator Leahy. Well, thank you very much, Senator
Murkowski.
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT REGULATIONS
Secretary, glad to see you here. Let me go into an area
that concerns me. We had a bicameral, bipartisan, Republicans
and Democrats, both House and Senate, group that expressed
concern with the Department's proposed rule to revise its
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) regulations. I know you are
expecting this question. I thought the rule would seriously
undermine the letter and spirit of FOIA and dramatically
restrict the public's ability to obtain information.
In our letter, which was addressed to you, not to the
Department, we asked the Department to go back to the drawing
table, reconsider the proposed rule.
Now this morning, there are reports that the Interior
Department has allowed political appointees to referee
responses to FOIA requests, to interfere in them, something
that raises real questions of illegality, going into everything
including from previous Secretary Zinke who had a different
view, I think. I hope your view of the Department of the
Interior is different than his. His was so political that on
the day of John McCain's funeral, all of us on the bus of
Senators, Republicans and Democrats, noticed there was only one
Federal building that we went by that had not lowered its flag
in respect to John McCain. That was the Department of the
Interior, the same Department where they were ordered to raise
a personal flag for Mr. Zinke when he walked in, but the only
Federal building that did not lower their flag in respect to
John McCain.
But let me ask you this. What is the legal basis for the
Department's so-called awareness review process by which
political appointees who are not in the traditional FOIA office
are given the opportunity to weigh in and potentially influence
responses to FOIA requests? Is there a legal basis for that?
Secretary Bernhardt. Well, there is certainly a legal basis
for the employees to be made aware of the FOIA documentation or
the response documentation that is coming out.
Senator Leahy. I am talking about the people who are
experts in FOIA, and now they have political appointees coming
in telling them what they----
Secretary Bernhardt. So, first off, it is a process. It is
very longstanding in the Department. What is different is that
a memo was put together to explain it. But it is very
longstanding in the Department where an awareness review is
provided. You get to look at the documents, say, hey, is there
anything in here that might not be responsive, might be
privileged, and then you can go ask a lawyer about it.
That is a longstanding process. We definitely formalized
it. It is completely legal.
What is troubling to me when I read that article this
morning was the concept that it would be slowing the reviews
down because that is not what the policy says. The policy says
basically you have a certain amount of time, and these go out.
Senator Leahy. You can still get out on time, but I am
concerned not so much slowing down, but changing so that it is
not an honest answer.
Secretary Bernhardt. Well, the issue----
Senator Leahy. We have----
Secretary Bernhardt [continuing]. If it is responsive, it
is going out.
Senator Leahy. Well, we expressed our concern about the new
rule. Sixty-five thousand public comments. Sixty-five thousand
public comments were submitted about it. Why not just
reconsider the proposed rule and rewrite it?
Secretary Bernhardt. So I think that I am deciding that
now. First off, to me, it was very significant that you did
send a bipartisan letter with such strong and focused views.
Of the four concerns that you raised, I think that you made
four very specific and good points, and so I am considering
whether we should scrap it, whether we should proceed with it,
or whether we should significantly modify it.
Senator Leahy. I hope you will keep us posted on that.
Secretary Bernhardt. I would be happy to----
Senator Leahy. Most Senators, I found in both parties, who
cross the political spectrum believe in FOIA and having it
work.
Senator Cornyn and I have strongly pushed that in both
Republican and Democrat----
Secretary Bernhardt. And I appreciate that. I believe that
FOIA is an important vehicle.
To be completely candid with you, some of the changes in
the 2016 Act create significant and different burdens, and so
it is trying to figure out how to optimize those burdens in the
right and most responsible way, how to give some people some
response instead of just having them queued forever, and so
this is a process that was put together by some extraordinarily
good career lawyers.
And my view is we will either come out with a very
responsive policy or we will not move forward.
Senator Leahy. Okay.
Secretary Bernhardt. And I appreciate your views on it.
Senator Leahy. Well, keep me posted on that.
My time is up, but I am going to submit for the record, if
I might, Madam Chair, a question about the National Park
Service's modifying longstanding procedures to nominate
properties to the National Register of Historic Places.
I mention that because it is not just a perfunctory
question. This is very real to me, and I would hope that you
would look at the question and give me a response.
Secretary Bernhardt. I will respond to it, Senator. I will
respond to it.
Senator Leahy. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Murkowski. Of course, Senator Leahy, your question
and all questions submitted for the record will be incorporated
as such.
Senator Daines.
Senator Daines. Thank you, Chair Murkowski.
Welcome, Secretary Bernhardt.
I want to tell you, first of all, I very much appreciate
the Department's proposed funding for the North American
Wetlands Conservation Act (NAWCA) as well as these other
conservation grants.
LAND AND WATER CONSERVATION FUND
However, the proposed budget cuts for funding for the Land
and Water Conservation Fund (LWCF) program frankly were a slap
in the face to Congress.
Here, the Senate just passed that great bipartisan lands
package, which included in that was a permanent authorization
of LWCF, and the numbers that came frankly from the
administration were very, very disappointing.
I can tell you I will continue to fight for full dedicated
funding for LWCF. It is a critical tool. Seventy percent of
Montana's fishing access has been funded through LWCF. We need
this also to provide access to our public lands.
HARASSMENT
I want to pivot now and talk about national parks. As we
have discussed before, two of my biggest priorities as Chairman
of the National Park Subcommittee are addressing the growing
Park Service maintenance backlog and eliminating workplace and
sexual harassment. I believe unless we act decisively on both,
we risk losing the qualities that make our national parks so
unique.
I recently met with the new Yellowstone Park
superintendent, Cam Sholly. He is off to a great start. I am
pleased to have him there, as he is working to build a better
workplace environment.
As you know, the Park Service has been plagued with sexual
and workplace harassment issues over the years passed. I have
seen some positive movement lately, but we cannot let up on
this issue.
The question, Secretary Bernhardt, could you update me on
what you as Secretary are doing to address this problem in the
parks as well as throughout the Department?
Secretary Bernhardt. Senator, first off, let me acknowledge
that there is much more to do on harassment across the
Department, but what we have done over the last year has really
been unprecedented.
We established an anti-harassment policy. I worked with the
bureaus to develop a pathway for each of them, and they are
implementing that.
We are at a point now where we have mechanisms in place to
track how these matters are handled. We are providing civil
treatment for leaders training across the board. We have just
established a Workplace Cultural Transformation Advisory
Committee within the Department, and so we have taken a lot of
steps and a lot of steps in a relatively short time, and so I
think we have done a tremendous amount.
There is more to do. I have asked the IG to look at what
more is out there, and I think they will have some additional
suggestions. But we are making real progress.
Senator Daines. Thank you. Leadership on this issue begins
at the top, and I want to thank you for your focus on it. We
cannot let up. We have got, I think, some momentum here. Thank
you for continuing to lead in that area.
DEFERRED MAINTENANCE BACKLOG
On the backlog issue, Congress is taking action on the Park
Service backlog, this bipartisan Restore Our Parks Act. My
question for you is, what is the Department doing to address
the growing debt of this maintenance backlog?
Angus King describes backlog as debt. I think it is the
right way to think about it.
What is the Department doing to address this issue?
Secretary Bernhardt. So our budget has about $640 million
in it for maintenance backlog, but we also have the bill. And
this is the one thing. When I went through my confirmation
process, every single member on both sides of the aisle that I
met with seemed supportive of the notion of addressing the
maintenance backlog, Senator Alexander, others, and we have to
find a legislative way to address it.
We have our proposed fund that is part of this bill, and
obviously, you have the Restore the Parks Act. We have to make
progress on this, and our infrastructure is just simply
deteriorating. There is no other way to say it. It is crumbling
beneath our feet, and people love the parks. They are going to
continue to come.
We have fees, but we have to address the maintenance.
Senator Daines. Thank you. Thanks for your support of that
legislative action.
CATEGORICAL EXCLUSIONS
Last question. Now it is almost the end of May. We are
gearing up for wildfire season in places like Montana. Your
Department along with Secretary Perdue have offered some
legislative proposals to reduce red tape, including categorical
exclusions. I support giving our land management agencies all
the tools necessary to quickly and effectively protect our
communities from catastrophic wildfire.
One effort I am working on is facilitate more statutory
flexibility to treat forest lands around roads through
categorical exclusions that would help reduce human-caused
fires--I believe over 90 percent occurs sometimes within a mile
of roads--provide faster access to the fires for firefighters,
healthier forests, and more logs to mills.
Question. There is a myth. There is a myth that the public
is not involved when a CE is used. Can you correct the record
and discuss how Interior does in fact seek public input when
using categorical exclusions?
Secretary Bernhardt. Absolutely. We go through a public
process to establish the categorical exclusion, and then we
provide opportunities as we utilize them as appropriate. So
there is a process.
We just did a categorical exclusion I will be announcing
today. It is not on fire, but it is the first categorical
exclusion Reclamation issued in 30 years. We went through a
process.
Whether it is working with you legislatively, we would like
to find a way to have a few more tools in our toolbox because
the situation is not good, and people just need to honestly
recognize that.
Senator Daines. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Daines.
Senator Merkley.
Senator Merkley. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
CARBON EMISSIONS
When you breathe in a lung full of air, does it have more
or less carbon in parts per million than when you were born?
Secretary Bernhardt. It has more.
Senator Merkley. Do you have a sense of what percent more?
Secretary Bernhardt. I do not want to hazard a guess and be
wrong.
Senator Merkley. Well, it is about 27 percent more because
we looked up your birth date. For me, it has hit 33 percent.
That is a tremendous amount of increase in a single human
lifetime, never experienced by humans on this planet ever
before.
And we just hit a high a few days ago of 415 parts per
million. It was not that long ago, we were talking about how
dangerous it would be to exceed 350.
Now, you were asked by the House whether you lose sleep
over the issue of carbon pollution and climate, and you said
no. And I am very struck----
Secretary Bernhardt. That is not accurate. I was not losing
any sleep to the 415 parts per million. It was not a general
climate question. That is just a fact.
Senator Merkley. I have not lost any sleep over it,
unprecedented levels of carbon pollution.
Secretary Bernhardt. That is not what the question was. It
was----
Senator Merkley. Are you losing sleep over the
unprecedented levels of carbon pollution?
Secretary Bernhardt. The question was am I losing sleep----
Senator Merkley. I am not asking what the House question
is; I am asking you the question now for the record.
Secretary Bernhardt. I think the Department and I are very
committed to dealing with----
Senator Merkley. Okay. I am not interested in your----
Secretary Bernhardt [continuing]. Issue associated with the
climate----
Senator Merkley. Excuse me. But you are not answering the
question. It is a yes-no question. I take it the answer is no.
Is it a yes or no?
Secretary Bernhardt. I am certainly concerned that carbon
pollution----
Senator Merkley. Okay. Let me put it--let us put it
differently.
Secretary Bernhardt [continuing]. Is increasing.
Senator Merkley. The folks in Puerto Rico suffered a
hurricane that was much more devastating because of the higher
temperatures of the ocean water that gave it energy, and
estimated by the Puerto Rican government, 3,000 people dead,
and $90 billion in damage. Do you lose sleep over that?
Secretary Bernhardt. I absolutely lose sleep over the fact
that we may not appropriately respond to crisis incidents,
unquestionably.
Senator Merkley. It is not a crisis. It is a catastrophe
caused by carbon, which you are promoting.
How about Paradise, California? They suffered the campfire;
85 people died. Other people drive out through an inferno
because of the changes in the forest conditions driven by
carbon. Do you lose sleep over their deaths?
Secretary Bernhardt. I absolutely believe that we need to
be more aggressive in our forest management practices. I
believe that we need to----
Senator Merkley. That was not the question, but you can
give that answer to somebody else, if you do not want to answer
the questions I am giving.
Folks in Houston suffered Category 4 Harvey. One hundred
and seven people died, $125 billion of damage driven by carbon
pollution. Do you lose sleep over that?
Secretary Bernhardt. I certainly was--I lost sleep
addressing that particular situation.
Senator Merkley. Do you lose sleep over the carbon
pollution that is driving it?
Secretary Bernhardt. I think it is an issue that needs to
be addressed, but I do not lose sleep over it.
Senator Merkley. Well, I am sorry you do not lose sleep
over it because you should because in this generation, we are
dramatically transforming the planet.
In Oregon, we already have had five significant fires this
year. This is May. This is not what we think of as fire season.
We are now starting to see a fire season that is 2 to 3 months
longer than it was.
Oregonians are losing sleep over fire, not just because the
forest burned, because of the smoke damage and all the impacts
on our economy throughout the State.
I lose sleep over seeing a picture of a lake in Alaska
boiling in a robust boil with methane bubbling up out of it. Do
you lose sleep over that?
Secretary Bernhardt. I certainly think that we have to
study closely our changing----
Senator Merkley. No, that is not the question. Do you lose
sleep over it?
Secretary Bernhardt. I lose sleep over whether I am going
to make----
Senator Merkley. I am asking you to answer my question, not
you pontificating on some other topic.
Secretary Bernhardt [continuing]. Whether some
infrastructure exists----
Senator Merkley. Do you lose sleep over the fact that the
Blue Water feedback loop in the Arctic is greatly accelerating
the speed in which it grows warmer?
Secretary Bernhardt. I certainly want to know as much about
that as possible.
Senator Merkley. Okay. So here is the thing. The policies
you are promoting are doing enormous damage to our planet. Your
grandchildren----
Secretary Bernhardt. I----
Senator Merkley. Excuse me. Do not interrupt me.
Your grandchildren, your great grandchildren are going to
live in a planet deeply compromised by the policies you are
promoting. That is an immoral thing to do to the generations to
come, and I would hope that you start thinking about that,
maybe lose some sleep, and maybe decide you are going to be
part of the solution rather than part of the force driving the
catastrophe.
Senator Murkowski. Let us go to Senator Hyde-Smith, please.
Senator Hyde-Smith. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
DOUBLE-CRESTED CORMORANTS
Mr. Secretary, Mississippi leads the Nation in farm-raised
catfish production, which supports thousands of jobs and
contributes hundreds of millions of dollars to the State's
economy annually.
Catfish production is an important component of the
Southern economy, and it accounts for roughly 70 percent of
U.S. finfish production.
Avian predation and aquaculture has become just a serious
problem as catfish ponds provide a constant and readily
accessible supply of forage for the birds. The extent of fish
loss is to double-crested cormorants, the key predator on
catfish.
They are estimated to cost industry as much as $80 million
each year. So this is a huge problem in Mississippi.
To comply with the 2016 court order, the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service removed regulatory provisions that allowed the
take of double-crested cormorants at aquaculture facilities.
While I sincerely appreciate your Department's efforts to
provide alternative options to catfish producers, such as
issuing individual permits, the application process is very
time consuming, and the number of cormorants that can be
lethally taken annual is capped.
In short, our catfish farmers are hurting. I understand the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is conducting an environmental
assessment in order to reinstate the general depredation orders
for cormorants. What is the status of the environmental
assessment pertaining to the cormorants? Does the fiscal year
2020 budget request recommend adequate funding to ensure this
and other important environmental reviews can be executed
swiftly and effectively?
Secretary Bernhardt. So I am hoping we actually finish it
before we would need this particular budget, but let me get
back to you on the specifics.
We can certainly complete it. There is no question about
that, but we should be able to complete it far faster and we
want to make sure we have the resources, and I would love to
call you this afternoon. And I will tell you exactly where we
stand, but I think we are in pretty good shape. Margaret
Everson is on top of that one.
Senator Hyde-Smith. Thank you. That sounds very good and
promising.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
And, Mr. Secretary, the National Park Service manage grants
to help preserve historically significant Civil Rights sites,
including several in Mississippi. Will you discuss the
importance of this grant program and future plans to continue
the important work of preserving these sites?
Secretary Bernhardt. Well, I think these sites are part of
the American story, and they are important. And, you know, we
have been pretty aggressive of highlighting certain sites.
There are certain sites that were in the Public Lands Act
as well, and we will work with you on that.
Senator Hyde-Smith. Great. Thank you very much.
Secretary Bernhardt. Thank you.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator.
Let us go to Senator Tester, please.
Senator Tester. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for
being here today, Secretary Bernhardt. I appreciate your
appearance and justification of a budget that is a proposal,
but nonetheless, it is a proposal that I am very concerned
about.
LAND AND WATER CONSERVATION FUND
Look, it has been said that the Land and Water Conservation
Fund is the best conservation tool the Federal Government has
to offer. I will not expect you to agree with that, but you
have got to admit it is pretty darn effective, correct?
Secretary Bernhardt. I am--I support----
Senator Tester. Bit fan?
Secretary Bernhardt [continuing]. The Land and Water
Conservation Fund.
Senator Tester. Okay.
Secretary Bernhardt. I am thrilled that you reauthorized
it.
I understand that our budget does not reflect that in your
minds. I have been taken to the woodshed for it.
I do think I have a chance, now that it is permanently
authorized, to make another pretty good fight in the next
budget, but I know that does not come----
Senator Tester. Yes. Well, I mean, just to be honest, it is
at zero in your budget.
Secretary Bernhardt. I know.
Senator Tester. It is not even----
Secretary Bernhardt. I know.
Senator Tester. Okay. So if you are for it--I know your
predecessor was for it. Did Mulvaney cross it out? I mean, how
does it go to zero if you are the Secretary?
Secretary Bernhardt. Well, it is quite a thing to go
through that process. But overall, we ended up overall with
$925 million more than the 2019 request.
Senator Tester. Yes. But----
Secretary Bernhardt. And we got the park maintenance
backlog.
Senator Tester. I got it.
Secretary Bernhardt. But I understand you----
Senator Tester. I have got it, but I am of the belief--and
you can agree or not; it does not matter--that this funding is
more important now than ever before, and this program has been
around for almost 50 years because I think these ecosystems are
going to go away. And I think it is incumbent upon us to get it
funded not at zero, not at half, not at 600, but at $900
million, which is what it was first established at. It is worth
far less now than it was when it was first----
Secretary Bernhardt. I think there have been 2 or 3 years
where that----
Senator Tester. Yes. When it has hit $900 million, but
otherwise not. But I think that is where we should be because I
honestly will tell you that without, they go away. I would hope
that--because we were here last year, and Ryan came in and
talked about how he supported it. But the numbers still stunk.
And I got it. You are doing some stuff for parks, and you
need to be congratulated for that. But on the other side of the
coin, LWCF at zero is beyond not acceptable.
Secretary Bernhardt. I initiated a policy that every dollar
we spend for access or for new acquisition has to include
public access as a----
Senator Tester. I think that is good, and I appreciate it.
Secretary Bernhardt. We share that purpose.
Senator Tester. Yes, absolutely. I agree with that.
BLACKFEET BADGER-TWO CASE
I am not an attorney; you are. And so I just had a couple
questions with Badger-Two, and these are straight up, no agenda
behind them. But the appeal was dismissed, and the Department
said that the interveners have no standing. Is it possible to
bring that case back up again?
Secretary Bernhardt. I think that, ultimately, the Attorney
General makes the specific legal filing.
Senator Tester. But as an attorney--and I am asking this
honestly.
Secretary Bernhardt. I would have to look and see whether
it was dismissed with prejudice or not. I honestly do not know.
Senator Tester. But do you believe if it was not, then it
can be brought back up again by the Department?
Secretary Bernhardt. If it was dismissed without prejudice.
I would have to look at it. I am happy to look at it and get
back to you on it.
Senator Tester. Okay. Well, I think that is an important
point if we are going to deal with Badger-Two, as we both know
is pretty sacred ground, especially for the Blackfeet. And it
is something that I am okay with your plan, but the plan has
got to work. And it cannot box things out.
Secretary Bernhardt. I understand that.
Senator Tester. Okay.
Secretary Bernhardt. I mean, I think you have to win in the
Court of Appeals.
Senator Tester. No doubt, but if we have blocked ourself
out of going forward with that at a later date, I think we have
made a mistake, okay?
Secretary Bernhardt. Roger that.
RURAL WATER PROJECTS
Senator Tester. Okay. Rural water projects, it is kind of
like the Land and Water Conservation Fund. In 1998, I ran for
the State legislature. The project in North Central Montana, if
my memory served me correct, was 100 million bucks. The one in
Northeast was about the same. Those projects now are four times
that much, maybe more, maybe six times that much.
The funding level in this budget is not where it needs to
be, and by the way, both those water projects have impacts upon
Tribal water compacts that have been passed long ago.
I had the same fight with the previous administration, and
I am sure it was the same thing in the Bush administration and
the same thing probably in the administrations of Clinton and
before that. How are we ever going to get these projects done
if we are going to fund them at a pittance? It is not zero, not
like the Land and Water Conservation Fund, but it is pretty
darn close in the overall scope of things.
Secretary Bernhardt. Look, I really appreciate it. I began
my career working on a water rights settlement as a lawyer, and
it is fantastic when they get done. But it is a long road, and
I understand that immensely.
Senator Tester. Okay.
Secretary Bernhardt. We want to resolve them and bring them
up here and have you resolve them because they matter to
communities immensely, and I appreciate that.
Senator Tester. The chairwoman and Ranking Member have
heard me say this before on other issues, but if they are the
right thing to do and you do not fight for them, it is pretty
hard. It is really pretty hard.
Secretary Bernhardt. Fair enough.
Senator Tester. Thank you very much for being here, Mr.
Bernhardt. Thank you.
Secretary Bernhardt. Thank you.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Tester.
Senator Alexander.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Secretary, welcome. Glad to have you here.
LAND AND WATER CONSERVATION FUND
I want to associate myself with the concern of Senator
Tester, Senator Daines, most of us have mentioned in support
for the Land and Water Conservation Fund.
I was chairman of President Reagan's Commission on
Americans Outdoors in 1985 and 1986, and we reaffirmed support
for that, which started 20 years earlier under the Rockefeller
Commission in the 1960s. And I think we took, under Senator
Murkowski's leadership, a tremendous step forward in
reauthorizing permanently the Land and Water Conservation Fund.
And I for one am ready to see that every year, we fund it at
the $900 million that we said we would a half century ago
because the deal is that you put an environment burden--and
that is drilling for oil--and you compensate for that with an
environment benefit. And that is $900 million a year for Land
and Water Conservation Fund.
So I support that and will continue to do that, but I like
the principle of catching people doing things right, and let me
catch you doing something right by talking about something else
that has broad bipartisan support, which the Chairman mentioned
in her opening remarks, which is the Restore Our Parks Act.
THE RESTORE OUR PARKS ACT
Am I correct that in the President's budget, there is a
provision for $6.5 billion for the Restore Our Parks Act?
Secretary Bernhardt. That is right.
Senator Alexander. And am I correct that this is the first
administration that has been willing to fund deferred
maintenance in exactly that way?
Secretary Bernhardt. I am certain of that.
Senator Alexander. I am certain of that too.
And I am certain also that if we did not have that kind of
support from the administration that we would never have a
chance of success with this, and the success is that we have 37
Senate cosponsors--26 Democrats, 11 Republicans. We moved ahead
with it last year, and it should be the bill that has the best
chance of passing Congress this year with the broadest support.
Can you think of any way you can defer--you can deal with
the deferred maintenance issues in the Great Smokey Mountains
and the other national parks without some extraordinary funding
solution like this?
Secretary Bernhardt. I believe it will never happen unless
we do something like this.
Senator Alexander. And you have said it before, but I want
to ask you again. The administration has this in its budget,
and it has your full support and the President's support; is
that correct as well?
Secretary Bernhardt. That is absolutely correct.
Senator Alexander. Okay. And will you work with us to try
to develop a way working with our leaders, like the Chairman
and Ranking Member who are both here, both very interested in
national parks, and the House to try to pass that this year?
Secretary Bernhardt. I am begging to.
Senator Alexander. Thank you very much.
JAMES K. POLK PRESIDENTIAL HOME STUDY ACT
I want to ask you quickly about the James K. Polk
Presidential Home Study Act. I am again indebted to the
Chairman and Ranking Member and others for the lands bill
because that took another step toward taking this home of what
many consider a near great President and putting it as part of
the National Park Service. I say near great because only three
or four are considered great, three or four near great, and
then there are the rest.
[Laughter.]
Senator Alexander. So Polk is way up there, not just in the
opinion of Tennesseans, but in the opinion of historians who
study such things. And the Polk Home, which is not part of any
governmental operation, has 1,300 artifacts and original items
from the President's years in Tennessee and Washington. He is
most notably remembered for helping to acquire 800,000 square
miles of territory during his administration.
You and I have discussed this before. The Lands Package
said that the Polk Home is ``conclusively nationally
significant,'' and so now it is time to have a special study to
move toward making it a part of the National Park Service. Will
you commit to putting a priority on that special study for the
Polk Home?
Secretary Bernhardt. I can tell you that they got a pretty
swift kick yesterday to get going on the study. So I am pretty
sure that that prioritization has already happened.
Senator Alexander. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Rubio.
Senator Rubio. Thank you. Thank you for being here.
I do not have any homes for you to study, but we should.
Florida, unfortunately, has not been successful in electing a
President. We tried, but----
[Laughter.]
Senator Rubio. Two people going, and it did not work out.
EVERGLADES RESTORATION PLAN
First of all, let me start by thanking you. I think the
President amending his budget request to the full $200 million
for the Everglades is extraordinary, and this is not just an
environmental project. It most certainly is--it is intricately
tied to all of the water issues, which have an extraordinary
economic impact on the State.
You are the chair of the South Florida Ecosystem
Restoration Task Force, and we have a very united delegation.
In fact, I wanted to thank our delegation in the House
yesterday for getting that in there, their appropriations
process.
And so we look forward to working with you to ensure the
expedited implementation of the Comprehensive Everglades
Restoration Plan, as you are well aware and we have discussed,
the Federal Government has fallen behind in its commitment. The
State of Florida has lived up to it.
OFFSHORE DRILLING
But there is a second issue that we have spoken about and
previously discussed at length, and that is the offshore
drilling potential off the coast of Florida. As we have
discussed in the past, I do think when it comes to Florida,
there are some special considerations before determining where
drilling and where exploration should be able to take place.
Let me start by saying I am an enormous supporter of
America energy independence. I think we have seen both the
economic and geopolitical benefits of it, and that is why last
year, I voted alongside the Chairwoman to allow exploration in
designated areas of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. It is
my belief that this Nation's status as a net importer of energy
had constrained our foreign policy options for way too long,
and Alaskans were clearly interested in the economic
opportunities available to them from this.
The situation in Florida is different, number one, and I
think it would be very wise, as we have discussed, for the
administration to recognize the difference.
First of all, among Floridians, there is virtually no
support for drilling off the coast of Florida. There is none
among our delegation. There has been none among any leading
statewide political officeholders for as far as I can remember,
and I have not seen any public polling on it recently, but I
assure you, it would not do well. And there is a lot of reasons
behind it. One of it is our coastal economies. Literally, the
entire economy of much of coastal Florida is directly related
to access to the water, and that includes our fisheries.
The other is one that people may not be as aware of. It is
military readiness. As you know, out in the Eastern Gulf, we
have a very unique test range that is utilized by the U.S.
military. We have nothing else like it domestically, and there
is real concern about anything--put it to you this way. The
military does not want anything down there they cannot blow up
because it is a very valuable test range.
And you add to that, the fact that there are ample oil and
gas reserves already available for leasing and extraction
activities, both on land and offshore. As you can see, we are
now set to become a net energy exporter by next year, and that
is why I support, at a minimum, an extension of this 2006
congressional moratorium on drilling activities beyond 2022 in
the Eastern Gulf.
So if we put aside for a moment the environmental and the
economic concerns, the one thing that does concern me is that
it is clear the administration believes that the military
training and weapons testing occurring in the Joint Gulf Range
Complex can coexist to some degree with drilling and related
activities.
The military leaders I have spoken to have all said that
they do not agree with that view.
So I think the first question I would have is, if it comes
down to a final decision and we have this intractable conflict
in the Eastern Gulf between the Interior Department and the
Secretary of Defense, how in your view is that issue resolved,
and who wins out?
Secretary Bernhardt. So, first off, I really appreciate the
question and the information, and we have talked about these
issues a little bit in the past.
In terms of the defense issue, I do not think there would
ever be an intractable conflict, and the reason I say that is
we work very closely with Defense, and to the extent they have
told you a view, I cannot imagine a situation under our current
MOU where they would have an interest and we would be in a
conflict. And to the extent that that existed, it would have to
rise to my, I guess, and the Secretary of Defense's paradigm to
work out.
But I do not believe for a minute that Interior would ever
get to that situation. We take the military issues very
seriously. We listen to them very closely about their needs,
and I just do not see that happening.
Senator Rubio. Okay. Thank you.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Rubio.
Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Welcome, Mr. Secretary.
And just to follow up briefly on Senator Rubio's line of
questioning, as I understand it, the Department has delayed its
efforts to open pretty much the entire Atlantic Coast to
drilling, delayed not by choice, but because of a series of
lawsuits that have been filed. But my question is, Can you
confirm that that is all on hold for now?
Secretary Bernhardt. That decision rests with me, and I saw
the litigation playing out and saw the court decision. I wanted
to hold off to figure out exactly the best pathway forward.
That is on me, and I am holding that for the time to figure
out the best litigation pathway and then how that affects our
plan because if we guess one way or another with the District
Court decision, we are in Court of Appeals, and then we are
wrong, that is a lot of work. This is a big process, and so I
have paused it until I figure out the pathway. So it is on me,
and I admit that.
Senator Van Hollen. Well, I am glad you paused it. I hope
you will permanently pause it.
I will say Secretary Zinke, when I asked him about this at
a previous Appropriations Committee hearing, provided pretty
strong assurances that we would not be opening Maryland's
section of the coast. But my view is--well, that was after the
President talked about not opening Florida, and it became such
a political game.
WELL CONTROL RULES AND MIGRATORY BIRD TREATY ACT
Let me move to something else. I am very alarmed by the
proposed new regulations that weaken the well control rules
that were put in place after the 2010 Deep Water Horizon
explosion off the Gulf of Mexico, especially weakening the
requirements for oil companies to test fail-safe devices called
``blow-out preventers.''
As you may know, the American Petroleum Institute had
pushed for some of the changes that you have now made during
the original review, and a bipartisan commission had
recommended that the API rules not be adopted because they were
not strong enough.
I will be following up with you on that as we watch those
regulations go through the process.
At the same time that you have taken action that, in my
view, increase the risks of big oil spills, you have also
undertaken a legal opinion, solicitor's opinion, an M-Opinion
with respect to the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, which would
eliminate the liability under that act for the mass killing of
birds in cases like the Gulf of Mexico oil spill.
In that spill, BP paid $100 million in fines. Under the
Migratory Bird Treaty Act for the loss of the killings of
migratory birds, those funds went into the North American
Wetlands Conservation Funds.
So why is it Mr. Secretary that you have decided to give a
pass to big oil companies and BP when it comes to liability
under the Migratory Bird Act?
Secretary Bernhardt. First off, I have not given them a big
pass.
I think that when you look at that opinion and the dynamics
around it, it is difficult. I was a solicitor at one time, and
I suspect that almost every solicitor at one time or another,
depending on perspective, was asked to look at the Migratory
Bird Treaty Act, its application of strict liability for
incidental take, and the split in the circuits on it.
The reality is that I think that opinion was issued 10 days
before the end of the administration. When they took a look at
it----
Senator Van Hollen. Mr. Secretary, is that--you are arguing
that that is reason to reverse it?
Secretary Bernhardt. No. I am saying it is absolutely not a
reason to reverse it.
But what it did mean is that the folks that drafted it were
not going to have to have any responsibility in implementing
it.
When we looked at it, there was clearly a split in the
circuit.
Senator Van Hollen. Mr. Secretary, I am sorry. I see my
time is running out.
I would point out when you were solicitor, I think I have
got a list of about five regulations that you issued in the
last 5 days.
Secretary Bernhardt. Absolutely.
Senator Van Hollen. So that is a pretty weak argument,
unless you did a really bad job in your 5----
Secretary Bernhardt. I am not saying that. I am saying----
Senator Van Hollen. But here is the question: Why would you
reverse a provision that holds companies like BP liable under
the Migratory Bird Treaty Act for mass killing of migratory
birds? Why would you change----
Secretary Bernhardt. I think the legal ambiguity before the
opinion was helpful to the Government. I think the opinion was
an overreach. I continue to believe it was an overreach, and as
a result, it has to be addressed because it swung too far.
Look, about 2.4 billion birds are killed a year by cats,
and the concept that strict liability should apply here is----
Senator Van Hollen. Mr. Secretary, are you suggesting that
there has been a case brought against a pet owner because the
cat ate a bird?
Secretary Bernhardt. I am absolutely not.
Senator Van Hollen. Is that what you are suggesting?
Secretary Bernhardt. No, but what I am saying----
Senator Van Hollen. Because that would be silly, right?
Secretary Bernhardt. What I am saying is the absurdity of
the concept that strict liability should apply to those type of
situations is an example of why creating that type of opinion
and leaving it here was an overreach.
Senator Van Hollen. But, Mr. Secretary, let me ask you
this. You are using the argument that it should not apply to
somebody, a pet owner whose cat kills a bird, which we all
agree that it should not apply, and using that argument to get
BP and other big oil companies off the hook for a mass killing
under this act. Is not that true?
Secretary Bernhardt. My view is that it would be wonderful
if you would like to create an incidental liability provision.
It would be great for Congress to do that, but that is not what
the Migratory Bird Treaty Act was trying to do when it was
written.
Senator Van Hollen. Would you support to do that?
Secretary Bernhardt. I would absolutely work with you on
that effort.
Senator Van Hollen. We will look forwards to doing that.
Secretary Bernhardt. I would like to make sure that it is a
provision that is responsible and not as broad reaching as I
just described.
Senator Van Hollen. We are happy to sit down with you. I
think the record shows that the kind of hypotheticals that you
used are not ever ones that are being----
Secretary Bernhardt. There is an element of selective
prosecution here, sir.
Senator Van Hollen. I think--yes, and people are focused on
big companies like BP in the case of mass bird killings.
But, anyway, I appreciate your invitation.
Secretary Bernhardt. I will work with you. I will
absolutely work with you.
Senator Van Hollen. I hope--actually, I was going to reach
out to you, Madam Chairman, because I think there is a
bipartisan place where everyone get together----
Secretary Bernhardt. The reality on this act, just as an
aside, the predecessor to the Migratory Bird Treaty Act was a
provision that was held unconstitutional or there were concerns
about constitutionality, but it was written in this committee,
so just FYI.
Senator Murkowski. There you have it.
Senator Van Hollen. All right. Thank you.
Senator Murkowski. Let us go to Senator Capito.
Senator Capito. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and to remain on
your good side, Happy Birthday.
[Laughter.]
Senator Capito. Yes, yes.
Secretary Bernhardt, welcome, and thank you for coming. I
would like to thank you and your staff at the National Park
Service for your assistance in moving forward with my efforts
to re-designate the New River Gorge National River as a
national park and preserve. So we are moving forward on that,
and I hope we can count on the Department's continued support,
technical support.
They have been terrific. We just had a meeting down there
several weeks ago, and it will, I think, be a great thing when
we get that over the finish line.
I also want to thank you--over the years I have talked with
this subcommittee and with your predecessors--about the need to
build a multiuse facility at the Canaan Valley National
Wildlife Refuge in West Virginia, and I am very happy that the
project has been approved, funded, and that you will be joining
me in July to mark the midway point of construction.
Secretary Bernhardt. Right.
Senator Capito. I want to thank you again and the officials
at the Interior, Fish and Wildlife. It is going to be a great
thing for the many visitors and for those who live in and
around that area, so thank you for that.
I was going to ask you about our Restore Our Parks Act, but
I think you made that pretty clear with Senator Alexander, how
important that is, and also the considerations that the
administration has made for park maintenance.
FEDERAL LAND TRANSPORTATION FUNDING
So I am going to kind of go to a different issue on the
parks, and that is the--in the context of the highway bill,
several of my colleagues have highlighted disparity between the
Forest Service and the National Park Service in terms of
funding they receive for Federal land transportation, with the
former receiving far more funding.
Indeed, it has been estimated that half of the nearly $12
billion national maintenance backlog for the Park Service
relates to road management.
Secretary Bernhardt. That is correct.
Senator Capito. Are you aware of the imbalance that exists
between these Federal land agencies concerning--I am talking
here about the National Park Service and the Forest Service.
Secretary Bernhardt. I am aware that there is an imbalance.
Senator Capito. How do you prioritize your Federal projects
within the Federal land transportation program?
Secretary Bernhardt. So we develop a list of priorities
every planning cycle, and that is the way we do it based on
criteria that the Park Service has developed.
Senator Capito. And then work through that top to bottom,
from top priority down?
Secretary Bernhardt. Well, I hope that that is the way we
work through it.
Senator Capito. Yes, I would assume so.
Secretary Bernhardt. But, I mean, otherwise there is no
reason to do the prioritization.
Senator Capito. What does that leave in terms of backlog? I
quoted a figure, but----
Secretary Bernhardt. Well, I think it is over--I think it
is nearly half. It is over $6 billion.
Senator Capito. Over 6, yes.
Okay. The scale of the need, what are the impacts on the
operations of the agencies and public access to Federal lands
for recreation and other purposes if you do not get these roads
fixed? I mean, obviously, this is critical.
Secretary Bernhardt. It is significant to the public. There
is no question about it.
Senator Capito. Do you find that there is a lot of outcry
from different areas, from visitors to the parks or visitors to
the forest?
Secretary Bernhardt. I would say the outcry is rather
localized. It is where potholes are so bad you cannot drive a
car or those types of things.
Senator Capito. How does that compare to other backlog
maintenance, like shelters and restrooms and facilities of that
nature?
Secretary Bernhardt. In terms of prioritization?
Senator Capito. Yes.
Secretary Bernhardt. I think they are in separate buckets,
but in terms of road construction versus visitor centers or
things like that.
Senator Capito. Okay. So, globally, in terms of your
budget, if you could just--have you reprioritized over last
year, certain areas of your budget that maybe you felt lacking?
Secretary Bernhardt. In terms of the----
Senator Capito. Yes. In terms of anything.
Secretary Bernhardt [continuing]. Backlog, the backlog
itself?
Senator Capito. No. Well, I am talking about globally, your
whole Department.
Secretary Bernhardt. Well, I think what you see is we are
trying very hard to focus on those core operational issues in
this budget and then, at the same time, maintain some of the
priorities that we had in terms of expanded access
opportunities, things like that.
Senator Capito. Well, I would like to say, too, in final
comment, I received some very bad news that John Schmidt, who
is our longtime Fish and Wildlife expert in the State of West
Virginia, is going to be retiring. But he will be hopefully
there when you are there in July with us to see a crowning
jewel of some of his achievements. But he has been an absolute
workhorse, understaffed, and there is a lot of permitting in
our State because of our terrain and our waters that he works
very diligently on. So I just want to kind of tip my hat to him
and to the Fish and Wildlife in and of itself to try to help us
meet the demands of all different kinds of agencies that are
always pulling Fish and Wildlife in.
Secretary Bernhardt. We have some great employees in the
Department of the Interior.
Senator Capito. You do. You do.
Thank you so much.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Capito.
WELL REMEDIATION
Mr. Secretary, one of the issues that we have been working
on for a period of years in the State is the proper remediation
of our legacy wells. I hate to use the term ``legacy'', because
usually you think legacy in a positive light, but this has
really been a blighted situation.
Historical wells, some decades old that were drilled by the
military and Federal interests, were not properly plugged. We
have said the double standard here is just wrong. It is awful.
It is a horrible precedent. If it was a private operator that
was up there and they had not properly remediated, they would
be fined so high that you cannot even count it and literally
run out of town.
We have tried to chip away at this over the years. I have
been working to increase funding for BLM to prioritize the
cleanup. We have made some headway.
We have been operating under an MOU between the BLM and the
State of Alaska, and working with the Alaska Oil and Gas
Conservation Commission that does the oversight. There have
been some recent reports in the past year with some
dissatisfaction about the status of those wells or some of
these wells that AOGCC does not feel have met the appropriate
standards. This is a concern to us because we do not want the
Federal Government to just be checking the box here saying,
``Yes, we took care of that one, took care of that one.'' They
need to be done. They need to be done right, and it is
expensive to do. We recognize that because of the location and
the condition.
Can you commit that the BLM will review this program to
make sure that they are properly preparing for the conditions
they are going to encounter in the field and that the BLM is
going to work with AOGCC in the State on these projects?
Secretary Bernhardt. Yes. It is my understanding that there
have been meetings with AOGCC--sorry. Yes, the----
Senator Murkowski. The AOGCC.
Secretary Bernhardt. The AOGCC. And those have been
productive.
I think we had a couple of contractor issues, and I think
that you have both my and Joe's undivided attention, and we are
going to do it right.
Senator Murkowski. Good. Well, we need to do it right. We
would expect it done right, again, with anybody else. So we
certainly expect the Federal Government to as well.
SMALL AND NEEDY TRIBE FUNDING
You have articulated here this morning that the Department
had to make some difficult choices. The President's budget
recognizes that, but there are some things that I want to bring
to your attention that we will continue to fight for here. I
certainly am.
One of those is pretty small in terms of budget accounts,
and this is the small and needy tribe funding. It is so
important to these very small Tribes that service populations
of less than 1,600 people. That is not very many people. There
are only 62 small Tribes that qualify for this in the Country,
and 50 of those are communities in the State of Alaska.
To them, this funding, about $4.4 million for the total
program, provides for maximum base level funding allowed under
the law.
We have had some issues in the past with matters of
distribution and delay, but now we are hearing that the Tribes
are not receiving the maximum base amount.
So right now, the budget recommends this program for
complete elimination. We work to provide funding for the
program. I am going to do so again for 2020. I need to know
whether or not the $4.4 million, which we have historically
provided, is the correct amount to appropriate in order to
allow these small Tribes to receive the maximum base.
If it is the right amount, why have some of these Tribes
not received the maximum?
Secretary Bernhardt. That is a very fair question.
Indian Affairs is looking at this today and yesterday.
Senator Murkowski. Okay.
Secretary Bernhardt. The first question is, for some
reason, a certain payment does not proceed.
Senator Murkowski. Right.
Secretary Bernhardt. We will figure that out, and the
answer is either yes or no, right?
Then I think that we will find that it is the right amount
and that they should be paid, and then they should be paid in a
timely way. But, if not, we will have that discussion with you.
But I think that we will get to the bottom of it, and we
will make sure that the payments are processed, or if it is
deficient, we will tell you that.
Senator Murkowski. Okay. Well, I appreciate you looking
into that. Again, that is one of the priorities that we have
maintained around here for a while and we look forward to doing
that.
Let me turn to Senator Udall.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Madam Chair.
CHACO NATIONAL HISTORIC PARK
Mr. Secretary, you and I have discussed in the past the
Chaco National Historic Park sits in a sacred, incredibly
fragile region, and I am glad that you will have an opportunity
to see this for yourself when you visit next week.
Chaco is known around the world as the heart of a culture
that inhabited the Four Corners area for hundreds of years, but
the park covers only a fraction of the archeologically and
culturally significant sites and artifacts.
This year, this area is at real and continued risk. Over
the last 3 years, the Bureau of Land Management has proposed
new oil and gas leasing in the Greater Chaco Canyon landscape
area. Protection of the area surrounding the national park is
therefore of vital importance. That is why I recently
introduced legislation to formally codify the informal
assurances I and the Tribes receive for the past 10 years to
establish a 10-mile buffer around the park.
As you know, last year's fiscal year 2019 Appropriations
Act included report language that directed the BLM to, quote,
``refrain from leasing within a 10-mile radius of the Chaco
Culture National Historic Park.'' Notwithstanding this
prohibition, the BLM subsequently offered dozens of leases,
including 9 leases within the 10-mile buffer area that protects
Chaco. Does Interior's decision to offer these nine leases
within the 10-mile buffer violate the appropriations report
language?
Secretary Bernhardt. I would have to look at the language,
but generally, appropriation reports are not binding as a
matter of law. It may have violated the spirit, if that is what
you are----
Senator Udall. Yes. Well, the report--so you are basically
saying anything that is in there, you are going to----
Secretary Bernhardt. I do not know. I would have to look.
Senator Udall. No, no. But you are correct. It is not
binding. But it is put in there for a specific purpose. So,
basically, when you see that kind of language, you are just
going to ignore it?
Secretary Bernhardt. No. That is not what I am saying. You
just asked me as a matter of law if it was prohibited, and I
said I do not--that does not mean it is not very important and
needs to be thought through.
Frankly, before the last lease sale, the Navajo Tribe sent
a letter, and I pulled those parcels as soon as I saw the
letter.
So we will work with you on it. I am going out there on
Monday to see it myself, and I will work with you and Senator
Heinrich on it.
Senator Udall. Thank you.
CLIMATE CHANGE MITIGATION
Secretary Bernhardt, I mentioned my concerns with your
recent testimony before the House committees regarding your
Department's obligations with respect to climate change. You
have testified previously that Congress has not explicitly
required you to take specific actions to mitigate climate
change.
I would disagree with you there. If you look at the
Endangered Species Act, for example, very, very specific
language, and I would just note on the Endangered Species Act,
the Secretary shall--shall determine any species is endangered
from manmade factors affecting its continued existence, and
then it says you have a duty to use the best science to
administer DOI programs to protect species, duty to avoid
jeopardy, and a duty to avoid taking of a species.
Secretary Bernhardt. So----
Senator Udall. I have not asked a question yet.
That is the strongest Endangered Species Act in the entire
world. Everybody in the world looks up to us as a country with
an Endangered Species Act. They try to pass laws like it. Many
times, they do not enforce them. But with that kind of language
and when you have a U.N. report that is talking about $1
million species endangered as a result of climate, I would
really, really hope that you would reconsider the idea that you
are not going to do anything about this.
And this is my question, and that is just one example, I
think. The last in your Department that give you instruction
are very specific, but--and we hope you will not--we hope you
will not ignore them. But instead of meeting these challenges,
your administration has consistently taken actions that
disregard the need to address climate change, like gutting the
Bureau of Land Management's methane waste rule, a rule which
would have stopped nearly 2 million tons of methane from being
released.
So I am curious what your position would be if Congress
stepped in and did exactly as you suggested. Mr. Secretary,
would you support or oppose additional congressional guidance
directing you to act more clearly to protect public lands in
the context of climate change and manage our public lands to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions?
Secretary Bernhardt. So my view is if Congress wants to do
that to the public lands, they should make that decision. Our
role----
Senator Udall. Would you support that? That is what the
question was. Would you support it or oppose?
Secretary Bernhardt. I would certainly work with you on it,
and in the abstract----
Senator Udall. Does that mean you would support it?
Secretary Bernhardt. Well, we have not written anything,
but if you want to do something, depending on what you want to
do, we are happy to work with you on it.
It is my belief--and I do not want to leave you with a
misimpression because this is what we actually do. Actually at
10:45 last night, I was reading an environmental assessment
that had extensive discussion about climate change. We already
incorporate climate change factors into our ESA listing
process.
Our role is to assure that the decisions we make are fully
informed by science, and we rely on the very best science.
So I am not suggesting that we should not do that. We
absolutely have to do that. Reclamation uses thoughts about
future climate change to deal with water scarcity issues in the
future. We have hundreds, literally, of studies at USGS right
now about different things related to climate change. So we
completely respect that climate is changing and the need to
study it and address it.
What my point was is if you want us to say we are going to
stop all oil and gas development on Federal lands because of
climate change, you need to tell us that in a law because
otherwise we simply are not required to do that, and it is not
appropriate to----
Senator Udall. I do not think the Congress has been
considering that.
Secretary Bernhardt. Absolutely, they have. That is exactly
what we were talking about on the other side of the aisle.
Senator Udall. Let me ask you another question here because
you will not say whether you will support or oppose
legislation. It is very simple, support or oppose giving your
direction.
Secretary Bernhardt. I would absolutely work with you on
coming up with issues to address climate change on Federal
lands to the extent we can figure out what those would be.
WILDLIFE CORRIDORS
Senator Udall. Okay. I would just mentioned the U.N. report
with the species being threatened. Since 2017, BLM has offered
450 percent more western acres to oil and gas industry than
offered in 2016, and nearly one-quarter of these leases were
within a wildlife corridor or State wildlife priority area for
big game.
In my home State of New Mexico, more than 80 percent of BLM
leases were on State wildlife priority areas, yet Interior has
done little on the conservation side when it comes to wildlife
corridors. That is one reason why last week I introduced the
Wildlife Corridors Conservation Act to improve wildlife
connectivity by creating more tools to protect these corridors.
We need to be working on a landscape scale to protect species
and their habitats. A piecemeal strategy is too little, too
late.
I am disappointed, then, that the administration once again
proposed eliminating Landscape Conservation Cooperatives, a
program that brings together the best and the brightest across
Federal, State, Tribal, local, and NGO communities to tackle
thorny landscape issues like migration corridors. For many
years running, we have included report language directing the
agency to continue the program, but for the last 2 years, the
Department ignored our directives. Most of the LCCs have shut
down. I believe this is a real step backwards.
Mr. Secretary, in 2018, Interior issued a secretarial order
to preserve big game habitats, and a couple of weeks ago,
Interior set aside $2.1 million in Federal grants for State and
local partner projects that would protect big game migration
corridors.
So, in theory, Interior does at least support the concept
of preserving wildlife corridors, correct?
Secretary Bernhardt. It is not in theory; it is in reality.
I have said----
Senator Udall. So your answer is yes?
Secretary Bernhardt [continuing]. To every Governor and had
a conversation that says the following: ``Governor, if you will
work with me to develop a migration corridor, whatever it is,
and identify it''--the Governor does that--``then I will do
everything in our legal power to protect that corridor within
our own legal authorities.'' And I have said that to the
Wyoming Governor, the Arizona Governor, and the Utah Governor.
I want to work with Governors to do that, and if you have
legislation that you think does that, I think that we have to
allow the Governors to identify the corridors because they have
the scientific expertise with their Fish and Wildlife agencies.
But to the extent that they can, we want to work with them
on it, and we have actually invested--some of the States did
not have the sophistication of studies and research to support
where the corridors were. So we have invested with them to do
that.
I would very much like to do that. I think it is critical
for American wildlife.
Senator Udall. I am very happy to hear that you are willing
to protect corridors. I am going to go right from here, get
with my Governor, and we are going to get a proposal to you on
corridors, so we can move forward in----
Secretary Bernhardt. I am very open to that.
Senator Udall. Sounds great.
I just have one more question. I do not know if we are
doing another round or if you want me to ask this one now,
Madam----
Senator Murkowski. If you just have one more. I have about
5 more minutes.
Senator Udall. Go ahead. Yes. I want to listen to them. I
am sure they are going to be insightful.
Senator Murkowski. Well, I am sure they will be.
MISSING AND MURDERED INDIGENOUS WOMEN
Mr. Secretary, we have been working on some initiatives
here, as you know, related to murdered and missing indigenous
women. These are issues that are very discouraging, given the
statistics that we face in our Tribal communities on our
reservations in Alaska's remote villages.
One of the challenges that we face is lack of data, data
collection, and reporting in the Tribal communities.
Can you give me an update here today with regards to what
the Bureau of Indian Affairs, working with Department of
Justice, is doing to get better data, better reporting, and how
we are working with Tribes to provide law enforcement
activities?
We have had some truly troubling and disturbing incidents
in Alaska recently in some of our small villages where law
enforcement is lacking facilities to house those who need to be
temporarily restrained or incarcerated. We have seen three
people perish in the past couple months. So there is a big
focus and spotlight in my State right now on this bigger
picture, which is a very troubling picture.
Can you just give me some update as to where your
priorities and your focus are?
Secretary Bernhardt. First off, the situation is exactly as
you describe, and it is horrific. But we are having very good
and significant discussions with the Department of Justice and
with the White House itself. I think we are going to have a
very significant effort here within the next month or so that
will be rolled out.
But we are already partnering with Justice to add Tribal
affiliation information to their missing and unidentified
persons databases. We are trying to help track the
investigations.
Where I think we have an opportunity is to partner with
Justice, which has a lot of resources and a lot of economic
resources. BIA and our team have a lot of relationship
resources and knowledge on the ground. We are trying to bring
those together to be more successful in investigating, more
successful in deterring, and we have launched human trafficking
courses in several Indian Country law enforcement officer
training programs.
We have three pilot training programs going on long-term
investigations and missing cases. There are a ton of missing
cases that I would like to have our investigators be able to
work with Justice on because they are a low priority for
Justice, not because it is bad, but they have a whole list of
things.
So I think that if we can bring our resources together, we
really have a chance of making good headway here, and we are
working to coordinate that through a higher administrative
function, and I think that is going to happen.
Senator Murkowski. Attorney General Barr is coming to the
State soon. He is going to have an opportunity to see the
situation in a remote community where you have no law
enforcement presence.
One of the reasons why we have such horrible statistics is
if you are a perpetrator, the chances or likelihood of you
getting caught, of any consequence----
Secretary Bernhardt. Are zero.
Senator Murkowski [continuing]. Of any penalty, are slim to
none.
Secretary Bernhardt. That is right.
Senator Murkowski. And so we see this over and over and
over again.
I appreciate the focus that you are providing this. I know
that Assistant Secretary Sweeney is working on it.
Secretary Bernhardt. It is a huge priority for her.
Senator Murkowski. But it has to be the whole-of-Government
approach.
Secretary Bernhardt. That is the whole thing. If we do not
have Justice, it will not work.
So we feel the same way. I am thrilled that you are taking
him up there.
Senator Murkowski. Well, know that it is not just me. We
are working with Senator Cortez-Masto, Senator Udall here,
Senator Tester, and Senator Daines. This is a bipartisan issue.
We are working with colleagues in the House as well, and so
know that we want to work with you and the administration on
this.
I do appreciate that you have kept the Tribal court funding
in this year's budget. A couple years ago, we were able to
include the Public Law 280 States, like Alaska, in that. That
has been important for us in terms of building capacity in this
State and in our Tribal communities.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN ACT FUNDING
We have also provided additional money in recently passed
omnibus bills for the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA), $2
million for VAWA there.
Can you provide an update on how DOI has been distributing
those dollars as they relate to VAWA? Do you feel that the
direction that we have taken with increased resourcing to
Tribal court funding is helping us out in these areas, like
Alaska, that had previously not had this kind of support?
Secretary Bernhardt. I think the answer to that question
is, absolutely, it is helping.
Look, the implementation of a better understanding of the
rule of law is very important, and it is absolutely helping.
Senator Murkowski. Okay. Well, again, that is another area
where we want to work with you.
Let me turn to you, Senator Udall, for your last----
Senator Udall. This is not my final and last because your
question was so good on murdered indigenous women.
Senator Murkowski. Well, I am not done with mine either, so
we will keep going.
We will not keep you too much longer, Secretary.
Senator Udall. I am not going to ask a question on this
one. I just want to totally, Mr. Secretary, support the
Chairman on this issue because I am the Ranking. She is with me
over on the Indian Affairs Committee, and we would love to have
you over there and talk specifically about Native American
issues.
But when it comes to these law enforcement issues,
broadening out, murdered and missing indigenous women, the law
enforcement situation on the reservation, on Tribal nations, is
pathetic. If you just take the figures which we unveiled last
week in the committee, if you are off reservation, you have 30
times more resources. If you are on reservation, it is a
pathetic amount, and that is using the normal numbers per
thousand comparing on reservation, off reservation.
So the best thing you could do is get the Justice
Department to ask for those resources for the FBI agents, for
the BIA investigators, all of those kinds of folks.
Secretary Bernhardt. I cannot say exactly what we are doing
there, but I get it.
One thing for you to really know is this is really a high
priority for the Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs, for us
as a group, this is really a very high priority, just like it
is with you, and we want to work with you and coordinate with
you and win on this issue and succeed because it is a terrible
story.
Senator Udall. Yes. Well, I could not agree more, and I am
glad you are really focusing on it.
I can tell you in the Indian Affairs Committee, we had a
very low-level Justice Department person that did not even know
the comparison and how bad this situation was, and they would
not commit to anything and doing anything.
So you working with the Attorney General, the Attorney
General coming to Alaska, I hope there is a big push here.
FOURTH OF JULY CELEBRATION
I do not mean to end up on a negative question, but I am
just deeply concerned that the President is planning to take a
nonpartisan celebration and turn it into some kind of de facto
political rally. As I hope you know, spending taxpayer dollars
on political activity violates appropriations law. The
longstanding Government-wide prohibition included annually in
the financial services appropriations bill makes it illegal for
agencies or contractors to spend taxpayer dollars on publicity
and propaganda activity.
The nonpartisan Government Accountability Office defines
those terms as--and I quote here--purely partisan activities
and self-aggrandizing activities.
Mr. Secretary, can you assure us that no funds appropriated
by this subcommittee will be spent on activities that are
partisan or that serve purely to aggrandize the President? I am
talking here about this 4th of July celebration.
Secretary Bernhardt. Absolutely, I can give you that
commitment. I think it is fantastic that the President might
take time to join folks on the National Mall to celebrate
America's Independence Day.
I think it is a value for us to be expanding the overall
access to the Mall.
I am hopeful that the President will speak, but it is a
celebration about America. And America has a great story to
tell, and we can have a great celebration. We can do it in a
way that will not conflict with the Capitol concert and things
like that.
So I think it is a good thing, and I think that, frankly,
if any President were celebrating the 4th of July, saluting
America, we all should be positive about that. And I will make
absolutely sure that every dollar we spend complies with the
law. I will promise you that.
Senator Udall. Good.
Secretary Bernhardt. But I think it is a good thing, and I
think getting more people--we have been able to move things in
a way that will allow more people to see the fireworks from the
Mall. In my opinion, that is fantastic.
I do not know if you have done it, but I have done it a
lot. And it is the best place in America to watch the
fireworks, and it should be.
Senator Udall. I think it is important to have a 4th of
July celebration. I hope you are totally transparent with us
and all Federal agencies are on how much money is going to be
spent, especially the traditional amount that is spent here on
the Hill for the celebration, and then how much more it is
going to cost for all the additional expenditures, because I
think people would be very interested in knowing what is
happening with the dollars.
Make sure your staff looks at Public Law 116-6, which is
in, as I said, annually inappropriately interpreted.
Secretary Bernhardt. I respect that. I respect that.
Senator Udall. Just be careful. We want you to be here for
a while.
Secretary Bernhardt. I completely respect that.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you. Agree, agree. Thank you,
Senator Udall.
Secretary Bernhardt, I appreciate you making that
commitment and providing that clarity.
You know that we had asked for numbers on that. This
celebration is a wonderful celebration and a great tribute to
our Nation, and we want to continue and to have the public
enjoy it.
You stated that you think it is the best fireworks display
in America. I am going to invite you to Wrangell, Alaska,
because, by gosh, for a community of 2,400 people, they do a
knockout job.
But I think every small town in America feels that way
about their celebration.
Secretary Bernhardt. That is very fair.
DENALI POLYCHROME PASS
Senator Murkowski. I need to ask one quick question about
Polychrome Pass out in Denali. This is something that we have
had discussion about. As you know, there is one way in and one
way out of Denali, and it is 90 miles. It is pretty tough road,
and you cannot take your own vehicle, except for a few weeks in
the fall, so you go in by bus. It is a beautiful trip, but that
road is a tough road over incredible terrain with a long, long,
long drop down to the bottom.
We have had some sloughage. We had the earthquake there in
November that did not help the situation, but this slippage and
the sediment assessments indicate that we have some serious
work to do.
Park Service has been working in coordination with Federal
Highways to monitor this, and to look at potential
stabilization and rerouting, but it is pretty tough to find a
reroute when you are on the side of a mountain.
I understand the report is coming soon. I am curious to
know whether you can give me any updates on when we might see
this report and what Park Service is doing in the meantime to
ensure that this is going to be a safe route until we are able
to address it.
Secretary Bernhardt. So it is a very serious issue. Anytime
you hear slow landslide, it is probably not a good term, and I
want to get back to you with a specific date. The briefing
material I got is not going to be helpful. So I will get back
with your staff this afternoon on it.
Senator Murkowski. Well, I appreciate that, and I know that
we are trying to set an opportunity for you to come to Alaska
and look at some of these issues.
Secretary Bernhardt. That is right.
Senator Murkowski. This is probably one that we would like
you to take----
Secretary Bernhardt. When I am there, wherever you take----
CRITICAL MINERALS
Senator Murkowski [continuing]. An eyeball on.
You mentioned in your opening statement the Department's
focus on critical minerals. I thank you for that. I think you
know I have been pounding the drum on this for a series of
years. I appreciate the executive order coming out of the
administration. We have introduced our critical minerals bill.
We have heard it before the Committee. There might be an
opportunity to move it in other areas, but this is to me as
significant as anything we can be doing from a national
security perspective.
You mentioned the Chinese and their lock on critical
minerals. I guess BOEM will establish this OCS critical mineral
inventory, and we have provided or the budget provides for
critical mineral mapping initiative.
Secretary Bernhardt. That is right, for USGS and BOEM.
Senator Murkowski. For USGS. So we have got two different
things going on.
Secretary Bernhardt. Well, that is right because, in
theory, they are two different areas, right?
Senator Murkowski. Right.
Secretary Bernhardt. The easiest way to think about it is
USGS is land and BOEM is water.
Senator Murkowski. But we are moving on both fronts is what
you are saying.
Secretary Bernhardt. That is the goal, absolutely, so that
we have a responsible assessment, which then hopefully will
facilitate future activity and development.
Senator Murkowski. Well, I have always maintained that
until we know what it is that we have, it is difficult to have
a conversation about what might move forward. If you do not
know, you do not know.
So I appreciate that within both USGS and BOEM, you are
taking steps as a Department to better understand that.
EARTHQUAKE AND VOLCANO MONITORING
Last of the last questions, Senator Udall, I promise this.
We are still coming out from underneath the 7.1 earthquake that
we had in November. In addition to taking lessons learned from
1964 and dealing with building codes and knowing where to
build, we feel like we are in a better position because of what
we have gained through the equipment that came to us from the
National Science Foundation to survey. Basically, it is the
earthquake monitoring.
We were able to complete this transition from NSF to USGS.
That was completed with funding in the fiscal year 2019
Omnibus, but now it is on your side of the ledger. And the
question is whether or not USGS knows the cost of the annual
appropriations and maintenance, and what that cost is going to
be going forward for these monitoring stations. Do we have to
start providing this funding in fiscal year 2020? We want to
make sure that we do not lose the data-gathering ability that
we have in place because we are not resourcing the operation
and maintenance.
Secretary Bernhardt. So let me talk to Director Reilly
about that specifically----
Senator Murkowski. Okay.
Secretary Bernhardt [continuing]. Because I thought we had
it covered, but I will talk to him to make sure.
Senator Murkowski. Well, if you can check, because if it is
in my list of questions for you, it probably means that we do
not see it in here.
Secretary Bernhardt. Okay. I am pretty sure. I will talk to
him because I was under the impression----
Senator Murkowski. Okay. And he is actually going to be up
in the State----
Secretary Bernhardt. That is what he told me. He is coming
up there next week.
Senator Murkowski [continuing]. This next week.
Secretary Bernhardt. That is right.
Senator Murkowski. I am sure he will have that answer. In
addition to earthquakes, I am going to give you a question for
the record on upgrading equipment for the volcano monitoring.
Secretary Bernhardt. He is on top of that too. I can tell
you.
Senator Murkowski. He has got all the hazards.
Secretary Bernhardt. That is exactly right.
Senator Murkowski. You have the political hazards; he has
the natural hazards.
That is the last of my last questions, Mr. Secretary. Thank
you. Thank you for being here this morning. Thank you for
fielding the questions as you have. You have promised to get
back with us on some of these details. We will look forward to
that. We have got some things that we are going to work
together on.
Senator Udall.
Senator Udall. Madam Chair, just on the issue of putting
questions on the record, this water settlement, I mentioned,
the Aamodt case.
Secretary Bernhardt. Yes.
Senator Udall. I am going to submit some questions for the
record. This case has been going on 51 years.
Secretary Bernhardt. I know. Before it was settled in
Congress, it was the longest water rights litigation in the
Country.
Senator Udall. Right.
Secretary Bernhardt. And I do not know a lot since that--I
will get on top of it.
Senator Udall. You were probably working as solicitor when
this case----
Secretary Bernhardt. That is right.
Senator Udall. My 30 years of public service went before
that. So this is a long time.
Senator Murkowski. This is why this subcommittee is so
fascinating, a 51-year litigation. I had no idea that the birds
were going after the catfish.
[Laughter.]
Senator Murkowski. Senator Alexander suggested something
about windmills. I suggest nets over the ponds. I had no idea.
We learn so much.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
Mr. Secretary, again, thank you for being here, for your
responses here today, and what you will provide going forward.
Your team is working with all of ours. We appreciate that as we
move through this budget process.
I also appreciate your leadership.
Secretary Bernhardt. Thank you.
[The following questions were not asked at the hearing, but
were submitted to the Department for response subsequent to the
hearing:]
Questions Submitted to Hon. David Bernhardt
Questions Submitted by Senator Lisa Murkowski
Question 1. The 2018 Omnibus included a provision directing the
Department to issue guidance for streamlining and approving vegetation
management plans regarding transmission line rights-of-way. This work
is particularly important given the wildfire risks posed by fuel build
up and hazard trees near these lines. What is the status of the
guidance? The law also directed the Interior Department to develop
categorical exclusions for implementing Vegetation Management Plans
developed by utility companies. What is the status of these categorical
exclusions?
Answer. The Bureau of Land Management (BLM) issued a new policy for
Powerline Rights-of-Way (ROW) and fire risk, including vegetation
management. This proposed policy details agency requirements,
introduced under the 2018 Omnibus Act, for reviewing and approving
vegetation management plans submitted by utilities. The Department' s
updated guidance for operations and maintenance was made available to
the public on December 12, 2019, and can be viewed at: https://
www.blm.gov/news.
Question 2. NPS Centennial Act Visitor Experience Improvement
Authority (VEIA).--The National Park Service Centennial Act was signed
into law in December of 2016. The legislation created a new authority
for the Secretary to award and administer commercial services and
related professional services contracts in park units, outside of the
existing concessions system. The law stated that the regulations should
be implemented as soon as practicable, but to date, it is my
understanding that we do not even have a proposed rule published yet.
Nearly 3 years later, this program, which represents a new opportunity
for the Department to partner with commercial services contractors to
provide exciting new recreational opportunities at park units, not to
mention the possibility of rehabbing park assets, remains stalled. Can
you please explain the current status of implementation of this
provision of the Centennial Act? And how the Department plans to
utilize this authority?
Answer. A draft proposed rule to implement the Act is currently
under review.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Tom Udall
Question 1. The Bureau of Reclamation requested $9 million for
fiscal year 2020 to continue oversight, management, coordination,
partnering, and construction on the Pojoaque Basin Regional Water
System source water intake system, water treatment plant and
transmission and distribution systems for Pueblo de San Ildefonso and
northern portions of the Pueblo of Pojoaque. If appropriated, that
would bring the total appropriations for the discretionary portion of
the settlement to approximately $55 million; $10 million short of the
authorization ceiling. Yet, the Department has recently decided to only
allow $10 million of the appropriated amounts to be used for
construction.
(a). Please outline how Reclamation arrived at the $10 million
figure and explain why Reclamation cannot use all appropriated funds to
commence construction.
Answer. The United States and the settlement parties have reached
an agreement that maps out a construction sequence in accordance with a
Consensus Design Concept agreed to by the United States and the
settlement parties; an amended Engineering Report based on and
consistent with the Consensus Design Concept; the total cost of such
construction; the allocation of the funding shortfall; the conditions
for commencing construction of the Project; and a revised definition of
``substantial completion'' pursuant to the authorizing statute. The
agreement provides ``[b]ecause Congress has yet to authorize additional
Federal funding for construction of the Project, the Parties agree to
proceed with limited construction . . .'' The United States and the
settlement parties have agreed to expend $18.6 million in Federal and
non-Federal funds on a series of agreed upon construction activities.
The Federal share of the $18.6 million is $13 million, of which $10
million will be expended on agreed upon construction activities and $3
million towards non-contract costs, including design and project
management.
(b). Does the Secretary, acting through the Commissioner of
Reclamation, have a statutory obligation to plan, design, and construct
a regional water system in accordance with the Settlement Agreement?
Answer. Yes.
Question 2. The Federal Records Act establishes that the Department
must make a permanent record of all copies of documents, including
itineraries and schedules, regardless of medium. That extends to tweets
on Twitter, Facebook posts, and Google calendars. The regulations and
Interior's agreement with the National Archives require that these
records be maintained ``from now until the end of the Republic.'' The
law also requires that the Department preserve originals and any
subsequent amendments or modifications, under threat of prosecution
under the criminal code.
(a). What steps does Interior take when it receives a FOIA request
to ensure all potentially responsive documents are preserved while the
request is pending, including schedules or calendars from the Secretary
and other senior level officials?
Answer. NARA has approved the Department-wide records schedule
specifically covering records for ``High Level Official''. This
disposition authority prescribes a permanent retention period for these
records. All High-Level Officials receive face-to-face records
management training as they are brought on board. During these training
sessions, these officials are informed of their senior role and
requirement for permanent records preservation, so these records,
including calendars and schedules, will be available for FOIA and other
document production requirements.
(b). Does Interior have a records schedule in place covering high-
level officials' calendars? If so, what is the retention period for
those calendars, and what steps has Interior taken to ensure compliance
with this records schedule?
Answer. The Department maintains a list of High-Level Officials who
must observe the NARA approved disposition authority, which prescribes
a permanent retention period. The Deputy Secretary, Acting Secretary,
and Secretary roles are all High-Level Official roles within DOI. As
such, the Department maintains all Federal records associated with
these roles on a permanent basis.
To ensure compliance with the Federal Records Act, the Department
has implemented a robust records training program, which includes
training for all new employees. This training includes briefing all
political officials on their legal requirements for managing Federal
records. The Department also requires annual records re-certification
training.
(c). Mr. Secretary, have you or your staff consulted with the
National Archives regarding how records need to be maintained as
governed by the Federal Records Act, especially in the context of
Google software or other applications that allow for constant revision
and overwriting? What specific policies and actions has the Department
taken to ensure it is adequately documenting the public record
consistent with legal obligations?
Answer. Yes. The Department has and continues to work with NARA on
an ongoing basis concerning its records management program and the
government-wide move to electronic records since the Federal Records
Management Directive (M-12-18) was released in late 2012.
(d). When and why did the Secretary begin using a Google calendar
application that overwrites information when new or corrected
information is added?
Answer. NARA's review concluded on June 13, 2019, and determined
that Congress's inquiry was ``unfounded.'' In closing its review, NARA
stated that ``we have found no basis to believe that there has been an
unauthorized destruction of federal records.'' A copy of NARA's letter
is attached (Attachment 1). For further details and information
regarding the Department's recordkeeping, please refer to the report
(Attachment 2) at the end of the ``Additional Committee Questions'',
prepared by the Committee on Oversight and Reform and titled
``Disproving Democrat Allegations of Recordkeeping Wrongdoing at the
Interior Department.''
(e). What, if any, backups does Interior perform of any data
created on Google's calendar function?
Answer. See the response to subparagraph (d).
(f). When and why did Interior change the way it publicly described
the Secretary's meetings with outside entities to omit information on
his calendars that identified with whom the Secretary was meeting? In
those instances, what other records did Interior create or maintain
that capture all of the Secretary's daily events?
Answer. See the response to subparagraph (d).
Question 3. The Fiscal Year 2020 Budget includes another $25
million to reorganize bureaus funded in the Interior Appropriations
bill with almost no detail of how the funds will be spent. This
subcommittee provided $14 million for this effort in Fiscal Year 2019,
and the spending plan you just submitted provides limited detail on
what you plan to do. As you know, any major relocation of staff falls
under the reprogramming requirements set forth by the Appropriations
Committees, and because the Department is required to submit plans for
approval by the Committees.
(a). When does Interior expect submit a plan that details the
personnel structure of the newly created regions, including any changes
to office locations or personnel?
Answer. On August 9, 2019, the Secretary announced the
establishment and appointment of 12 Field Special Assistants who are
dedicated to ensuring the long-term operational efficiency of the
unified regional structure.
(b). Does Interior intend to establish new regional directors for
its bureaus that align with the new map? If so, when will Congress see
such a plan?
Answer. The Department does not plan to establish new regional
directors.
(c). Is the Department contemplating any changes related to the new
regions that will affect the duty station of any personnel currently
based in New Mexico?
Answer. The Unified Regional structure became final on August 22,
2018, and information regarding that reorganization can be found here:
https://www.doi.gov/employees/reorg/unified-regional-boundaries.
(d). When does the Department expect to make public its proposal to
relocate bureau headquarters from the Washington, D.C., area?
Answer. The announcement of the BLM headquarters elements moving
West occurred on July 16, 2019.
(e). What specific criteria is the Department utilizing to decide
whether to move bureaus? How were the bureaus being evaluated for a
move selected?
Answer. The decision to move BLM Headquarters elements to Grand
Junction, Colorado, benefited from a thorough analysis of BLM
operations and workforce, using generally accepted forms of financial
analysis, including net present value, payback period, and rate of
return. Additional personnel from the Washington, DC, office will move
to State office locations throughout the Western States.
(f). What locations and/or geographic areas are under
consideration, and how were those areas selected?
Answer. Grand Junction was selected as the Western destination for
relocating elements of BLM' s headquarters. In selecting Grand
Junction, a variety of factors were considered.
(g). How is Interior planning to re-engage the public in the
Department's deliberations regarding (a) changes to newly created
regions; and (b) proposed bureau relocations?
Answer. Discussion with interested stakeholders took place since
the inception of the reorganization. We created a website, https://
www.doi.gov/employees/reorg and a Reorganization Communication Team to
assist Unified Region leadership with internal and external
communications.
With regard to the relocation of BLM to the Western U.S., we have
ensured appropriate communications to BLM employees, Members of
Congress, Governors of all of the affected States, and other key
partners and constituents.
(h). Given that Tribes regularly work with BLM and other affected
agencies-not just the BIA and BIE-how does Interior intend to consult
with Indian Tribes regarding the broader reorganization?
Answer. With regard to the broader Departmental reorganization
effort, the Department held 11 formal Tribal consultation sessions and
an additional 7 listening sessions with Tribal leaders around the
country. Transcripts of these sessions were made available online. In
addition, the Secretary held 2 additional Tribal leader roundtable
discussions specifically on the Department' s reorganization efforts.
Question 4. On March 29, 2019, the United States District Court for
the Northern District of California (Oakland Division) concluded that
the Department's decision to repeal regulations governing oil, gas, and
coal royalties on federal and Indian lands violated the Administrative
Procedure Act. The Court therefore reinstated the 2016 Oil and Gas
Valuation rule.
(a). The Royalty Policy Committee appeared to be tasked with
rewriting the Valuation Rule. Now that Interior has disbanded this
Committee, what is the status of Interior's efforts to rewrite the
rule?
Answer. The Royalty Policy Committee (RPC), which was reestablished
by then-Secretary Zinke in 2017, provided recommendations to the Office
of Natural Resources Revenue (ONRR).
(b). Does Interior intend to implement the prior 2016 Oil and Gas
Valuation Rule?
Answer. The effect of the Court's ruling was to reinstate the 2016
valuation rule, including its original effective date of January I,
2017. ONRR sent a ``Dear Reporter'' letter to industry to notify
industry of its obligation to comply with ONRR regulations as amended
by the 2016 valuation rule. ONRR issued a second ``Dear Reporter''
letter on November 20, 2019, extending the date on which compliance
activities would begin to July 1, 2020.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Patrick J. Leahy
Question 1. When I asked you about the Interior Department's
formalized ``awareness review process''--by which political appointees
outside of the traditional FOIA office are given the opportunity to
weigh in and potentially influence responses to FOIA request - you gave
an entirely conclusory Answer. ``It's completely legal.'' That is not a
sufficient response.
(a). Please provide any memoranda, guidance, protocols,
correspondence, and any other documents memorializing this formalized
``awareness review process'' within the Interior Department.
Answer. The Department' s updated awareness process is publicly
available at: https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/uploads /
awareness process memo 2.0.pdf.
(b). On what basis are you able to conclude that this awareness
review process is ``completely legal?'' Was there a review of the
legality of this ``awareness review process'' before it was instituted?
Answer. A link to the guidance document is provided in the response
to the previous question.
(c). If so, was that legal review memorialized in any memoranda,
guidance, correspondence or any other documents? Please provide all
such memoranda, guidance, correspondence, or any other documents that
memorialize any legal reviews of the ``awareness review process.'' If
not, why not?
Answer. A link to the guidance document is provided in the response
above. The process does not result in the withholding of information
that is subject to release under FOIA or cause undue delay in FOIA
processing and, thus, does not violate the FOIA or any other law.
Question 2. When I asked you to commit to reconsidering and
rewriting the Interior Department's proposed FOIA rule--which has
raised serious concerns among a bicameral, bipartisan group of Members
of Congress--you stated that you would consider whether to ``scrap it,
proceed with it, or significantly modify it.'' Those are three very
different outcomes.
(a). What is the status of your review of the proposed FOIA rule,
and whether you will ``scrap it, proceed with it, or significantly
modify it?''
Answer. The Department' s final rule was published on October 24,
2019. Your letter of appreciation to the Department for addressing your
concerns with the rule was received on October 25, 2019.
(b). Who in the Interior Department--in terms of both Department
bureaus and offices and relevant staff--is participating in your review
of the proposed FOIA rule?
Answer. See the response to the previous question.
(c). Will you commit now to ensuring that career officials who
traditionally handle the Department's FOIA policies and responses will
be involved in your review of the proposed FOIA rule? If not, why not?
Answer. See the response to subparagraph (a).
(d). What legal, policy, and other factors are you considering in
making a decision whether to scrap, proceed with, or significantly
modify the proposed rule? Please provide a list of legal, policy, and
other factors that are guiding your review of the proposed FOIA rule.
Answer. See the response to subparagraph (a).
(e). If you decide to significantly modify the proposed rule, will
you commit now to consulting with the congressional committees with
jurisdiction over FOIA to obtain their input about how to modify the
proposed rule?
Answer. See the response to subparagraph (a).
Question 3. There are numerous investigations into whether your
calendar entries are being deleted in violation of federal records
laws, and whether calendar entries provided to the public are scrubbed
of critical details, such as the attendees of meetings. This
obfuscation prevents the American public from understanding whether you
are meeting with--and potentially advocating on behalf of--special
interests that you previously represented as an oil and gas lobbyist.
(a). During your tenure in the Interior Department under President
Trump, have you ever met with organizations or associations
representing any of your former clients where the meetings' attendee
lists were subsequently not made available to the public?
Answer. During my confirmation to be Deputy Secretary of the
Department of the Interior, I committed to fully comply with my ethics
agreement and to actively seek and consult with the Department's
Designated Agency Ethics Official regarding any particular matters
involving specific parties of former clients or entities represented by
my former firm. I have continued this commitment in my role as
Secretary. Copies of my calendars and other related documents are
available to the public at: https://www.doi.gov/foia/os/secretarial-
calendars.
(b). Will you commit now to making and keeping public the list of
attendees at meetings you personally take, as well as the topics of
discussion at those meetings? If not, why not?
Answer. During my confirmation to be Deputy Secretary of the
Department of the Interior , I committed to fully comply with my ethics
agreement and to actively seek and consult with the Department' s
Designated Agency Ethics Official regarding any particular matters
involving specific parties of former clients or entities represented by
my former firm. I have continued this commitment in my role as
Secretary. Copies of my calendars and other related documents are
available to the public at: https://www.doi.gov/foia/os/secretarial-
calendars.
Question 4. During a House hearing on March 13, 2019, the
Department's Deputy Chief FOIA officer was asked whether your calendar
entries were being deleted or altered after they were created. She
responded that the Office of the Solicitor is working with the records
officers to ``determine what's occurred.''
(a). What is the status of that review, and what has the review
uncovered? Which components of the Department are involved in this
review? Please provide a detailed status update of that review and any
interim findings.
Answer. NARA's review concluded on June 13, 2019, and determined
that Congress' s inquiry was ``unfounded.'' In closing its review, NARA
stated that ``we have found no basis to believe that there has been an
unauthorized destruction of federal records.'' A copy of NARA' s letter
is attached. For further details and information regarding the
Department's recordkeeping, please refer to the attached report,
prepared by the Committee on Oversight and Reform and titled
``Disproving Democrat Allegations of Recordkeeping Wrongdoing at the
Interior Department.''
Question 5. I am concerned by the National Park Service's proposal
to modify long-standing procedures to nominate properties to the
National Register of Historic Places for the purposes of protecting and
preserving historic properties. Not only do I question the need for
this rule change, but the proposal also appears contrary to the
National Historic Preservation Act.
(a). What is the problem this proposed change seeks to fix and who
approached the Department or Park Service with this proposal?
Answer. The proposed changes seek to implement the amendments to
the National Historic Preservation Act enacted by Congress in 2016 and
emphasize the rights of private property owners by giving them more
control over whether their property is listed in the National Register
as part of a historic district. The changes would also extend the
timeline for the Keeper to respond to appeals, in order to give the
nominating authority sufficient time to provide their position and any
relevant information regarding the appeal, and for the Keeper to
consider any information provided by the State Historic Preservation
Officer. Finally, the rule includes additional minor changes to the
regulations that no longer reflect the current practice of how
properties are listed in the National Register.
(b). Which affected entities did you consult or coordinate with
when developing and publishing the rule? Did you consult with the
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, as required by the National
Historic Preservation Act?
Answer. The Department and NPS consulted with major stakeholders,
including the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation as well as the
National Conference of State Historic Preservation Officers, National
Association of Tribal Historic Preservation Officers, the National
Trust for Historic Preservation, Federal Preservation Officers, and
other historical/archeological associations during the 60-day comment
period. Officials from DOI and NPS also consulted with Tribes in person
and by telephone and extended the period for Tribes to comment on the
Rule to July 8, 2019.
(c). How many public comments in opposition to this proposed rule
have you received? How many public comments in support of this proposed
rule have you received? For those in opposition, what was the primary
concern cited?
Answer. The NPS received 3,304 comments during the public comment
period, which are available for viewing here: https://
www.regulations.gov/document?D=NPS-2019-0001-0001. Review and analysis
of the comments is continuing.
(d). Congress passed a minor, procedural amendment to the National
Historic Preservation Act in 2016. What specifically in the 2016
amendment do you believe authorizes the sweeping changes that this
rulemaking proposes to the National Register nomination process?
Answer. Detailed information regarding the proposal and the
National Park Service's actions is available here: https://
www.regulations.gov/document?D=NPS-2019-0001-0001.
(e). How would this change affect the Historic Revitalization
Program, or other historic preservation programs administered by the
National Park Service?
Answer. These changes are procedural to the nomination process and
would have no direct effect on NPS historic preservation programs,
including the Historic Revitalization Program.
Question 6. In each of Fiscal Years 2018 and 2019, Congress
provided $5 million for the Historic Revitalization Program, which I
created based on a highly successful Vermont initiative, to support the
rehabilitation of historic properties and to foster economic
development in small and rural communities across the country.
(a). The deadline for applications for the inaugural FY18 awards
was April 1, 2019. How many applications did the Park Service receive?
What was the total amount of funding requested in those applications?
When can we expect the release of the first round of grant awards for
fiscal year 2018 funds?
Answer. The NPS received 108 applications from 46 States, totaling
$59.3 million. The awards were announced August 27, 2019.
(b). When do you anticipate release of the fiscal year 2019 notice
of funding opportunity?
Answer. The NPS expects to release the notice of funding
opportunity for the fiscal year 2019 Historic Revitalization Subgrant
Program funds in early calendar year 2020 in order to incorporate
lessons learned from managing the fiscal year 2018 funds.
Question 7. It has been widely reported that the administration is
planning a second Fourth of July event, separate and apart from the
traditional Capitol concert featuring the National Symphony Orchestra
on the Capitol lawn. It is further reported that this event will
include an address from the President on the steps of the Lincoln
Memorial and a relocation of the launch of the iconic fireworks
display.
(a). What strains will both these events taking place on and around
the National Mall place on the National Park Service, the Park Police,
and the District of Columbia? What additional taxpayer costs will be
incurred?
Answer. The NPS regularly hosts large events on the National Mall
and in the District of Columbia that include concerts, parades, and
large crowds. While the July 4 celebration expanded public access to
the places we manage, the additional work required was comparable to
other past events.
(b). Please provide details of the Park Police's plans to provide
security for the administration's planned Lincoln Memorial event. How
will these competing events impact public access to the National Mall
in the days leading up to, and including, July 4th? What resources are
being provided to the District of Columbia to address additional
security concerns, street closures, and transportation disruptions?
Answer. The Park Police worked closely with the District of
Columbia, the U.S. Secret Service, other law enforcement agencies, and
participating branches of the U.S. Military to determine the
appropriate levels of security at the events. Public access to the
National Mall during the celebration significantly expanded because the
Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool, Constitution Gardens, and the World
War II memorial were opened for attendees. Like other large events on
the National Mall, public access was impacted in the days leading up to
and shortly after the celebration so that park maintenance staff and
volunteers could install and remove security barricades and ground/turf
protection.
(c). Does the Park Service typically consider permit requests for
public events on the National Mall to be held on July 4th?
Answer. Yes, the National Park Service receives applications for
and allows for public events on the National Mall on July 4th.
(d). If so, has the Park Service granted any permits for public
events on the National Mall on July 4, 2019? Please provide the
entities granted these permits.
Answer. Yes, there were 14 permits issued for public events on July
4th.
1. Santo Outreach Ministry/Freedom Fest DC
2. The Webben Group
3. Pocket Full of Change Ministries
4. Honor Flights Network
5. Celebration Concert Tours International
6. John Pylka
7. Executive Office of the President
8. Tim Hamaker
9. Irvin Raymond Brookstein
10. Tighe Barry
11. Gregory Lee ``Joey'' Johnson
12. Michael Francis Trochan
13. Immigrants Make America Great
14. ISKCON of Washington, DC
(e). Has the Park Service denied any permits for public events for
the days leading up to and including July 4, 2019? If so, please
provide a list of entities denied permits for events to be held between
June 24, 2019, and July 5, 2019.
Answer. No permits were denied for public events to be held during
that period.
Question 8. The Trump administration has spent the past 2 years
weakening, undermining, and unraveling environmental protection
policies and regulations. This month, the administration took an even
more aggressive step to attack the very science underlying the policies
it has sought to eliminate. The United States Geological Survey will no
longer produce scientific assessments using data that modeled climate
change impacts through the end of the century. Rather, they will now
use models that predict the consequences of climate change only through
2040. This change in precedent is a transparent effort to hide the most
severe consequences of climate change, most of which are predicted to
come starting in 2050 and beyond. This change in how the underlying
science is presented would help protect the Trump administration from
judicial challenges against its current energy policies that are
undermined by the National Climate Assessment released late last year.
(a). Why will the U.S. Geological Survey now be limiting its
climate change modeling projections to run through 2040 as opposed to
the previous models, which ran through the end of the century?
Answer. The USGS has not issued, nor does it plan to recommend, any
directive that restricts the development or use of climate models by
USGS researchers or limits projections of climate impacts past 2040.
The USGS will continue to use accepted models, scenarios, and studies
that contribute to the National Climate Assessment to project the
impacts of climate change for the next 25-100 years as required by the
Global Change Research Act of 1990. Also, the USGS will continue to
assess the entire range of reference scenarios from best-case to worst-
case in its scientific studies projecting impacts of future climate
change.
(b). Are there other changes to climate modeling being considered?
Answer. No changes to climate modeling are currently being
considered.
Question 9. Earlier this month, the United Nations released a
report on the impact of human activity has caused a ``mass extinction
event,'' with one million species facing extinction. That's one eighth
of the planet's known species. The report was written by 145 experts
from 50 nations over 3 years. You have proposed to weaken Endangered
Species Act regulations in ways long sought by oil, gas, and mining
interests, and at the expense of sound scientific-based decisions.
(a). Do you believe the results of this report?
Answer. I recognize the climate is changing and agree with the USGS
scientists that there is large uncertainty in projecting future
climatic conditions. Our role is to ensure that the decisions we make
are fully informed by science and we rely on that very best science.
(b). Do you believe your proposed changes are at odds with the
scientific consensus about a mass extinction event?
Answer. The proposed changes to the ESA regulations are intended to
simplify and clarify definitions and procedures and codify procedural
improvements that have evolved since the last revision. They are
intended to improve the effectiveness of conservation work under the
ESA, and they do not change the conservation standards of the law.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Dianne Feinstein
Question 1. On January 10, 2019, I sent a letter requesting
information regarding the costs and damages sustained by the national
parks during the partial government shutdown earlier this year. On
January 11, 2019, I received a letter that was not responsive to my
specific requests from National Park Service Deputy Director P. Daniel
Smith. I sent a follow up letter to your office on February 6, 2019,
which has remained unanswered. As you know, the decision to keep some
national parks open during the partial government shutdown resulted in
severe damage to our Nation's public lands, human health risks, and
several deaths.
National Parks, like Joshua Tree, were vandalized and severely
damaged. For example, in Joshua Tree a 100 year-old juniper tree was
used for firewood, Joshua trees were cut down to make way for cars
illegally driving in the desert, and an overflow of human waste in the
unattended park posed health risks to both people and sensitive
habitats. Parklands may take hundreds of years to fully recover, and in
some cases the damage is irreparable. It is important that Congress
fully understand the ramifications of this decision.
(a). Please provide an assessment of any damages to natural
resources and infrastructure and an estimate of necessary repair costs
for each national park that remained open during the shutdown.
Answer. The NPS has not done a comprehensive survey of the impact
that the lapse in funding had on national parks. However, an informal
assessment conducted with park superintendents revealed there were no
significant impacts to park resources.
Question 2. National Park Service permanent staffing levels have
decreased over the last several years, while more seasonal employees
have been hired in certain areas and seasons. However, seasonal
employees are not an adequate replacement for permanent staff that are
needed for a number of responsibilities throughout the Park Service.
(a). Please provide a list of staff positions over the last 5 years
that have been vacated but cannot be filled due to inadequate funds,
including the name of the parks, position titles, and GS levels.
Answer. The NPS does not maintain service-wide data that lists
specific position vacancies or their reason for being unfilled, either
temporarily or permanently. Variability in parks' mission and
responsibilities require staffing decisions be made at the local level
and which address the highest priority local needs.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jack Reed
Question 1. Secretary Bernhardt, I was proud to introduce the
legislation that created the John H. Chafee Blackstone River Valley
National Historical Park in 2014. The Blackstone Valley is a national
treasure, with thousands of acres of beautiful, undeveloped land and
waterways as well as historical sites that highlight Rhode Island's
role in the Industrial Revolution. As we near the 5 year anniversary of
its establishment, I am concerned by the overall lack of progress at
the Park.
(a). Can you provide an update on the status of the Park? What is
the Department's timeline for completing the required General
Management Plan?
Answer. Park management and Northeast Region leadership continue to
make progress toward establishing the boundary for Blackstone River
Valley National Historical Park:
--Negotiations between the National Park Service and the Old Slater
Mill Association to acquire the Slater Mill property through
donation continue.
--A Conservation and Preservation Easement between the National Park
Service and the Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management related to co-management of Blackstone River State
Park in Lincoln, RI is complete and must be submitted for
approval by the Rhode Island State Properties Committee before
signature by both parties.
--Of the four mill villages named in the park's legislation, both
Slatersville (North Smithfield, RI) and Ashton (Cumberland, RI)
have a General Agreement and a Local Historic District in
place, both are requirements to be included in the proposed
park boundary; the mill village of Whitinsville (Northbridge,
MA) has a General Agreement in place but has not approved a
Local Historic District (proposed Local Historic District will
go before the Northbridge fall town meeting for approval) and
the mill village of Hopedale (Hopedale, MA) has a Local
Historic District in place but not a General Agreement (General
Agreement is with the Town Administrator for signature then
will come to the park Superintendent for final signature).
(b). Does the Department expect to finalize the acquisition of
Slater Mill or other sites this year?
Answer. As noted in the response to the previous question, the NPS
continues its negotiations with the Old Slater Mill Association to
finalize the donation.
(c). Since April 2018, there hasn't been a permanent Superintendent
assigned to Blackstone. Why has this been the case and when will a
permanent Superintendent be in place?
Answer. Great care and deliberation is being taken in selecting the
next superintendent for the park. Following the vacancy, and after
conducting a rigorous vetting process, management made the decision to
re-advertise the position. This decision is supported by the confidence
in continuity of operations in having the former deputy superintendent
of the three parks act as the superintendent.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jeff Merkley
Question 1. Your predecessor canceled a study on the health impacts
of mountaintop mining. The Interior Department's Inspector General
investigated why that was, and was told that the decision was made
``largely as a result of the Department's changing budget situation''
at the time. One of your staffers, a policy advisor in the Office of
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement and former coal lobbyist,
Landon ``Tucker'' Davis, said of the reason for canceling the study:
``science was a Democrat thing.''
(a). Do you agree with this statement?
Answer. The statement does not reflect the policies or operations
of this Department. I believe that the decisions we make should be
informed by science and that we must rely on that very best science.
(b). Shouldn't science, not politics, and most certainly not the
interests of coal companies, guide the protection and use of our public
lands?
Answer. The decisions we make should be informed by science and we
must rely on that very best science.
(c). Will you now resume the scientific study on the environmental
impacts of mining, considering Congress has not made the budget cuts
you initially cited as justification?
Answer. As OSMRE staff has indicated, this grant was reconsidered
for reasons that ranged from imprudent use of resources to duplicative
research efforts and cited two other studies conducted by other federal
agencies.
Question 2. Secretary Bernhardt, in Interior's fiscal year 2020
proposed budget, you are asking for increased funding for offshore
energy development, while also cutting the budget for environmental
enforcement. You also proposed to revoke rules put in place after the
Deepwater Horizon spill, which were design to prevent another disaster.
We continue to see increasing damage from climate chaos, and
instead of investing in conservation and the deployment of clean
energy, we are trying to double down on infrastructure that will lock
in decades of carbon pollution. This is a reckless and shortsighted
approach for both communities and for our climate.
(a). Will you commit to considering both the climate impacts of
offshore oil development and the opposition of coastal communities
before moving forward with the administration's 5-year plan?
Answer. The Department carefully considers all feedback received
during the development of a National OCS Program, and will continue to
do so as this process moves forward. For more information please see
https://www.boem.gov/National-Program/
ATTACHMENT 1
National Archives and Records Administration Letter
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
ATTACHMENT 2
Disproving Democrat Allegations of Recordkeeping Wrongdoing at the
Interior Department
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
Senator Murkowski. Thank you very much, and the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:52 a.m., Wednesday, May 22, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene subject to the call of
the Chair.]