- PROMOTING ECONOMIC GROWTH: EXPLORING THE IMPACT OF RECENT TRADE POLICIES ON THE U.S. ECONOMY
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
PROMOTING ECONOMIC GROWTH: EXPLORING
THE IMPACT OF RECENT TRADE POLICIES
ON THE U.S. ECONOMY
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SECURITY,
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND
MONETARY POLICY
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
JUNE 19, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services
Serial No. 116-31
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-451 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES
MAXINE WATERS, California, Chairwoman
CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina,
NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
Ranking Member
BRAD SHERMAN, California
PETER T. KING, New York
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
BILL POSEY, Florida
DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
AL GREEN, Texas
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan
EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
BILL FOSTER, Illinois
ANDY BARR, Kentucky
JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
DENNY HECK, Washington
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
JUAN VARGAS, California
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
TOM EMMER, Minnesota
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
AL LAWSON, Florida
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
MICHAEL SAN NICOLAS, Guam
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia
RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
KATIE PORTER, California
TED BUDD, North Carolina
CINDY AXNE, Iowa
DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana
AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
BEN McADAMS, Utah
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee
ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ, New York
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin
JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
LANCE GOODEN, Texas
STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
DENVER RIGGLEMAN, Virginia
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
JESUS ``CHUY'' GARCIA, Illinois
SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
Charla Ouertatani, Staff Director
Subcommittee on National Security, International
Development and Monetary Policy
EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri, Chairman
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio, Ranking
JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
Member
DENNY HECK, Washington
PETER T. KING, New York
BRAD SHERMAN, California
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
JUAN VARGAS, California
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
MICHAEL SAN NICOLAS, Guam
TOM EMMER, Minnesota
BEN McADAMS, Utah
ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee
STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
DENVER RIGGLEMAN, Virginia, Vice
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
Ranking Member
JESUS ``CHUY'' GARCIA, Illinois
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on:
June 19, 2019................................................
1
Appendix:
June 19, 2019................................................
35
WITNESSES
Wednesday, June 19, 2019
Baughman, Laura M., President, The Trade Partnership/Trade
Partnership Worldwide..........................................
5
Bergsten, C. Fred, Senior Fellow and Director Emeritus, Peterson
Institute for International Economics..........................
7
Boyd, John, Founder and President, National Black Farmers
Association (NBFA).............................................
9
Gray, Gordon, Director, Fiscal Policy, American Action Forum.....
12
Russell, Ronnie, Missouri farmer, and member, Board of Directors,
American Soybean Association (ASA).............................
10
APPENDIX
Prepared statements:
Baughman, Laura M............................................
36
Bergsten, C. Fred............................................
73
Boyd, John...................................................
76
Gray, Gordon.................................................
80
Russell, Ronnie..............................................
90
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
Cleaver, Hon. Emanuel:
Discussion Draft.............................................
92
Politico article entitled, ``Lighthizer won't rush USMCA in
Congress...................................................
102
Stivers, Hon. Steve:
Peterson Institute for International Economics paper by C.
Fred Bergsten entitled, ``18-21 China and the United
States: Trade Conflict and Systemic Competition,'' dated
October 2018...............................................
103
PROMOTING ECONOMIC GROWTH:
EXPLORING THE IMPACT OF
RECENT TRADE POLICIES
ON THE U.S. ECONOMY
----------
Wednesday, June 19, 2019
U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on National Security,
International Development
and Monetary Policy,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Emanuel Cleaver
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Cleaver, Perlmutter,
Himes, Sherman, Vargas, Gottheimer, Wexton, Garcia of Illinois;
Stivers, Williams, Hill, Gonzalez of Ohio, Rose, and Riggleman.
Ex officio present: Representatives Waters and McHenry.
Also present: Representative Axne.
Chairman Cleaver. The Subcommittee on National Security,
International Development and Monetary Policy will come to
order. Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time. Also, without
objection, members of the full Financial Services Committee who
are not members of this subcommittee are authorized to
participate in today's hearing.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Promoting Economic Growth:
Exploring the Impact of Recent Trade Policies on the U.S.
Economy.''
I now recognize myself for a 5-minute opening statement.
Thank you for all being here today and for your shared
focus on the crisis in which we find ourselves. Our country has
entered day 512 of what can only be described as a trade war.
The opening salvo came when the President's tariff-targeting
solar panels and washing machines took place. As our witnesses
will attest, it has cascaded into nearly $400 billion worth of
traded goods and has triggered retaliation from countries
including China, India, Canada, Mexico, and even members of the
European Union.
The trade war has impacted nearly every facet of our
economy, from agriculture to manufacturing. While I know, and
have read, the works of many of you who are kind enough to lend
your time to us today, I have one person who is not only a
witness but a constituent. I have heard from Ronnie Russell and
a number of other farmers in my Fifth District of Missouri, and
I will ask him to explain the devastating toll this trade war
has had on the lives of those farmers trying to make a living
in Missouri.
I understand that in response to U.S. actions, American
agricultural and food exports to China declined precipitously,
largely due to a drop in exports from U.S. soybeans. China has
levied retaliatory tariffs of 25 percent on soybeans, raising
the total tariff rate to 27 percent, and effectively
restricting access to what was the largest U.S. export market
for that crop. About half of all soybeans produced in the
United States were exported prior to the application of the
tariffs.
As the farmers on this panel will attest, there was hardly
a place in the world that could compete with us in terms of the
exportation of soybeans. Many of the folks that Ronnie Russell
and John Boyd are representing here today don't have another
few months for the trade war to linger. Their farms are
literally on the line. The cost of this trade war is not
limited just to my rural communities. It traverses the length
of Missouri's I-70 and across all rural and urban divides
around this country.
Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell, in his testimony
before this committee earlier this year, told us that
uncertainty is being injected into manufacturing sentiment due
to the trade disputes adversely impacting the sector. This is
costing American jobs. Trade Partnership Worldwide finds that,
on net, my home State of Missouri stands to lose over 45,000
jobs as a result of the trade war and our country could lose
over 2 million. There is no American who is insulated from this
pain.
The Federal Reserve found that U.S. tariffs were almost
completely passed through into U.S. domestic prices, so that
the entire incidence of the tariffs fell on domestic consumers
and importers up to now, with no impact so far on the prices
received by foreign exporters. They said that, ``Producers
respond to reduced import competition by raising their
prices'', making it more expensive for Americans to buy the
necessities of life.
Americans are already struggling with low wages and long
hours. These tariffs are taxes that hamper American growth and
threaten our future. Projections indicate that these taxes
threaten to reduce U.S. GDP by nearly a percentage point, and
as we have this morning's hearing, down the hall my colleagues
in the Ways and Means Committee are receiving testimony from
the President's leading lieutenant in this war, the U.S. Trade
Representative. Down the street, the Commerce Department is
entering their third day of testimony from industry groups
suffering and crying out for an end to this war.
My time is running down.
The consequences of inaction compel us to have this
important conversation and derive solutions to protect our
economy and the country. I would ask my colleagues for
unanimous consent to enter into the record a discussion draft
of a bill that I am working on, and this bill would require the
President to conduct thoughtful analysis of the cost to the
very segments of the American economy and public before
imposing any new tariffs. It would require him to seek advice
from a council comprised of Cabinet officials to ensure that a
decision that could impact every American is more thoughtful
than a tweet.
With that, I would like to, again, thank you for lending
your voices here this morning--we appreciate it very much--to
this conversation.
I now yield to the ranking member of this subcommittee, the
gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Stivers.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
holding this hearing. It is a very important topic, and I look
forward to hearing from our panelists today. Every member of
this committee hears back home about how the trade disputes
with China, the European Union, and our North American
colleagues are affecting our constituents. We have all heard
from constituents and businesses located in our districts about
the impact of the trade war.
Just last week, I spoke to a gentleman who works for a
company called Linden Lumber, and this company sells lumber
products into China, which helps reduce our trade deficit with
China and employs Americans. But the retaliatory tariffs now
threaten the survival of their business and it is an example
that demonstrates the seriousness of the topic that we are
discussing today and our importance of finding solutions.
Like Mr. Russell, I have a lot of farmers in my district.
They are watching their incomes decline. Their businesses have
an impact on supply chains, and that further demonstrates the
urgent need to solve these problems. But we also shouldn't
oversimplify the issue.
I have another constituent company, RG Barry, which makes
slippers, and their slippers can be found all throughout China.
The problem is that they are not their slippers. They are
stolen intellectual property. They steal the slipper, the
design, the box, the logo. You wouldn't know it wasn't an RG
Barry slipper if you bought it, but it is not. They see none of
the profits.
The intellectual property is stolen from them, and other
American companies who operate in China have to agree to share
their technology, which potentially seeds their future Chinese
competition, and that future Chinese competition can get
unlimited backing from the Chinese government, giving it the
ability to undercut the pricing of U.S. firms, steal market
share, and destroy American jobs and industrial capacity. And,
in particular, in the area of emerging technology, this lost
industrial capacity can have significant implications on our
military's edge over foreign adversaries. Both sides of the
aisle have long recognized these problems with China, yet still
they continue.
And I am a free-trade Republican. I believe tariffs hurt
consumers and they stunt economic growth. So, that is why I
think it is important we get to a negotiated agreement that
puts an end to China's currency manipulation, forced technology
transfers, subsidies by state enterprises, and other trade
abuses. I also believe that it is in America's long-term
national security interest that any trade debate highlights
these issues now, because the longer we wait, the worse deal we
are going to get.
My question I am looking forward to asking the panel is, if
you think these abuses of currency manipulation, forced
technology transfer, subsidized industry, and cyber theft are
real problems, what are your proposed solutions, because I do
believe we need to get to a negotiated settlement.
I look forward to the panel's testimony, particularly your
thoughts on China and the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement
(USMCA).
With that, I would like to yield my remaining time to the
ranking member of the full Financial Services Committee, the
gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. McHenry.
Mr. McHenry. I thank my colleague, and I thank you for your
leadership on trade and promoting American economic activity
globally, and I want to thank Chairman Cleaver for organizing
today's hearing.
When this hearing was first announced, committee
Republicans were puzzled at the title. It was originally
called, ``Slowing Economic Growth: The Impact of Recent Trade
and Tax Policies on the U.S. Economy.'' Well, they dropped the
word ``slowing'' because that is actually inaccurate--we have
quite robust growth, especially under this Administration--and
they dropped the word ``tax.'' Well, if you are going to talk
about growth, I think we should talk about the tax bill that we
passed and are now bearing the fruits of in the economy, and I
think we have greater growth because of the regulatory relief
of this Administration and the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
Nonetheless, I am encouraged that my Democratic colleagues
are interested in trade. I would also encourage them to talk to
the Speaker of the House, Nancy Pelosi, to expedite the
consideration of the U.S.-Mexico-Canada Act so that NAFTA can
be updated and improved for the 21st century.
I also think it is important to talk more broadly about the
prosperity that the American people are feeling and how every
sector in the economy is benefitting from the broad growth that
we have, and, long-term, we will benefit from a renewed
understanding between us and China in our trading relationship.
Their economy has changed dramatically and I think it is really
important that we update our relationship with global trading
partners, and now is the time.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Stivers. I yield back.
Chairman Cleaver. I thank the ranking member.
Without objection, I now yield to the Chair of the Full
Committee, Chairwoman Waters, for such time as she may consume.
Chairwoman Waters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Federal
Reserve, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank
all have forecasted an economic slowdown, due primarily to the
risk of the President's trade war. The Federal Reserve Bank of
New York estimates that tariffs could cost the average
household up to $831 this year, and the Trade Partnership
estimates net job losses of 248,399 in California alone.
There are legitimate grievances regarding the employment
practices in many foreign countries like China, but the
President's tactics of provoking a global trade war on
unrelated political issues such as immigration is reckless. The
Congress needs to act to stop the President from further
damaging our economy and harming our international
relationships.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Cleaver. The Chair of the Full Committee yields
back the balance of her time.
Let me take this opportunity to welcome the testimony of
our five witnesses. Our first witness is Laura Baughman. Ms.
Baughman currently serves as the president of The Trade
Partnership and Trade Partnership Worldwide.
Ms. Baughman, you have 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF LAURA M. BAUGHMAN, PRESIDENT, THE TRADE
PARTNERSHIP AND TRADE PARTNERSHIP WORLDWIDE
Ms. Baughman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning. My
name is Laura Baughman and I am the president of The Trade
Partnership and Trade Partnership Worldwide. We prepare studies
that assess the economic impacts of trade on U.S. and
international economies. I have been asked to talk to you today
about some of our research and about the economic impacts of
the tariffs that we have been experiencing.
I will briefly summarize our research and then describe
some ways in which the implementation of the current spate of
tariffs and quotas has been affecting companies in the hope
that that information will be helpful to the subcommittee's
deliberations on the role that Congress could play in the
process.
The briefing memo prepared for the subcommittee for this
hearing did an excellent job of summarizing the various import
restraints that have been imposed since 2018, or contemplated,
and how they impact consumers and producers. As the memo notes,
the impacts affect nearly every gear in the economic machine.
We took a comprehensive look at the potential impacts of
various tariff and quota scenarios, assuming those tariffs have
been in effect from 1 to 3 years. We used the same model the
U.S. International Trade Commission uses to assess the impacts
of trade agreements. We found that steel and aluminum Section
232 tariffs plus quotas, tariffs on imports from China on Lists
1, 2, and 3, and related retaliation will reduce U.S. GDP
annually by 0.3 percent, raise costs to consumers such that the
average family of 4 must shell out $767 more to buy goods, and
result in a net loss of nearly 935,000 jobs.
Adding in tariffs on imports from China of products on List
4, plus retaliation, amplifies the costs. The steel and
aluminum restraints and tariffs on all imports from China, plus
retaliation, will reduce U.S. GDP annual by 1 percent, raise
costs to consumers such that the average family of 4 must shell
out $2,294 more to buy goods, and result in a net loss of
nearly 2,160,000 jobs.
In each scenario, while some sectors gain jobs, more lose,
so that on balance, the impact is a net negative for U.S.
workers, nationally and in every State.
You have a copy of our study which was attached to my
written testimony.
Our results are consistent with those of other researchers.
While scenarios examined and modeling details differ, everyone,
including the Administration, has concluded that the various
tariffs will have a net negative impact on trade, economic
growth, and employment.
I also thought it would be helpful to summarize some of the
principles that have heretofore undergirded trade policymaking
in the United States and complaints we are hearing, and likely
you as well, about the ways the current tariffs are being
rolled out in a manner that is inconsistent with those
principles. I mentioned four in my written statement. I will
focus on three, two if I run out of time.
Principle 1. Businesses and financial markets hate
uncertainty. Companies universally tell me they can deal with
the higher costs of tariffs or other U.S. Government actions if
they just know about them well enough in advance and know how
long those costs will be a problem for them. They will then
take the steps needed to minimize the disruption to their
businesses.
Yet, hovering over companies are the following
uncertainties that have all of them in a state of limbo: Will
the President impose tariffs of as much as 25 percent on
imports from Mexico? Will the President impose tariffs on $300
billion in imports from China, and when? Will the President
impose tariffs on imports of cars and parts from Europe and
Japan? Will Congress pass the United States-Mexico-Canada
Agreement (USMCA)? Will the President terminate NAFTA to
motivate Congress to pass the USMCA? Will a company give an
exemption from the tariffs for products it cares about, and
when will it hear one way or the other?
Companies must guess on the answer to each of these
questions to plan sourcing. A wrong guess will be expensive.
Principle 2. Informed policymaking should be the foundation
of all government actions. This typically entails public notice
and comment periods that are realistic and provide the
opportunity for a full vetting of the various pros and cons of
a proposed action or policy. It means that policymakers weigh
the input and address concerns. It means an opportunity for
independent assessments of the economic impacts of the tariffs
by the U.S. International Trade Commission, for example, before
the tariffs are imposed, not after.
This did not happen in the case of the steel and aluminum
quotas and tariffs. Section 301 process has been deemed by many
as pro forma, with the expectation that the President will
impose tariffs notwithstanding the comments submitted.
Principle 3 is that companies need time to adjust to
changes. It can take 6 months to 2 years to change suppliers.
Sufficient advance notice is needed to preclude high costs, and
that has not been the practice of the tariff implementation
since 2018. They are announced and imposed less than a month
later. The potential tariffs of 5 percent on imports from
Mexico were threatened with an implementation date just 11 days
later.
In conclusion, there is a role for Congress to play in
helping to lessen some of the costs of import restraints on
American companies, their workers, and the economy generally.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Baughman can be found on
page 36 of the appendix.]
Chairman Cleaver. Thank you very much. The next witness is
Dr. Fred Bergsten, the director emeritus at the Peterson
Institute for International Economics, who has previously
served as Assistant Secretary for International Affairs at the
Treasury, Under Secretary of Monetary Affairs, Assistant for
International Economic Affairs at the National Security
Council, and on the Advisory Committee for Trade Policy and
Negotiation.
Having done all of that, here is the highlight. You are
serving as a witness before this committee today.
Welcome. You have 5 minutes, Dr. Bergsten.
STATEMENT OF C. FRED BERGSTEN, SENIOR FELLOW AND DIRECTOR
EMERITUS, PETERSON INSTITUTE FOR INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS
Mr. Bergsten. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. As you
know, I am also a native of Kansas City. My parents lived there
for a long time, so we have a particularly close relationship.
Mr. Chairman, I want to support the economic analysis that
Laura Baughman just gave you. I will refer to some similar
numbers, but she has basically gotten it right. I have even
bigger numbers.
But I want to stress, in addition to the economic effect,
how the Trump Administration has clearly abused congressional
intent and probably some of its legislative authorities in
implementing his current trade policies. Those policies are
levying heavy costs on the economy and foreign policy, and
Congress should therefore take a series of urgent measures to
rein in the excesses of the Executive Branch.
I want to support what Chairwoman Waters just said, and
what you said a moment ago, Mr. Chairman, in your introductory
comments. I believe Congress needs to act urgently to rein in
the excesses of the Executive Branch.
Let me tick off the difficulties in terms of these abuses,
as I term them.
First, there is no evidence that imports of steel and
aluminum from some of our closest allies have damaged the
national security of the United States. Hence, there is no
justification for invoking the national security authorities of
the Trade Expansion Act.
Second, there would be even less justification for invoking
the national security provision to impose import restrictions
on motor vehicles and auto parts. It is ludicrous to argue, as
the Secretary of Commerce did in February, that research and
development by American auto companies--there are only three of
them, as he defines it--is essential for U.S. national
security. It is also ludicrous to argue that R&D investment
would be encouraged by restricting investment, by restricting
competition in the U.S. auto market. Economics just don't work
that way.
Third, an even more egregious stretch is the President's
threat, clearly still in place, to apply tariffs against all
imports from Mexico unless that country takes far-reaching
steps to restrict immigration. The legal justification would be
a declaration of national emergency under the International
Economic Emergency Powers Act, a highly dubious proposition.
And even if there were such an emergency, tariffs have never
been used to pursue such a non-trade objective, and the Act has
never been used to impose tariffs.
Fourth, the President has threatened to withdraw from
NAFTA, including as a tactic to force Congress to support his
renegotiated U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement. Withdrawal from
NAFTA would disastrously disrupt supply chains in many sectors,
including autos. The U.S. has never withdrawn from a free trade
agreement and it is unclear whether the President has the legal
authority to do so without congressional approval.
On a whole variety of counts, the President is abusing or
threatening to abuse authority. This pattern, along with his
extensive tariffs on China, this pattern of protectionism
represents an unprecedented and massive reversal of U.S. trade
policy. If fully implemented, all of these mooted tariffs would
essentially apply a tax of 25 percent to over $1 trillion of
U.S. imports. This would amount to a tax increase of more than
$250 billion on the American public, which ultimately pays
most, it not all of the cost of the tariffs, without
congressional approval--massive tax increase without
congressional approval, which more than offset the tax cuts of
a year ago.
As Laura said, the uncertainty surrounding all of these
actions and threats dampens confidence in the economic outlook
and will deter investment, as indicated in many business
surveys of late and by the Blue Chip Business Council just last
week, including when they met at the White House. These three
economic effects--the massive tax cuts, the foreign retaliation
against them, that hits our exports, and doubles the cost of
the tariffs, plus the uncertainty--
Chairman Cleaver. I am going to give the gentleman another
minute, because of the malfunction in the microphone.
Mr. Bergsten. --that could take a full percentage point or
more, probably 2 percentage points on Laura Baughman's
analysis, off U.S. growth, and even tilt the country into
recession. The uncertainty also has a profound impact, around
the world, on the credibility of the United States as a
potential negotiating partner and as a faithful proponent of
the rule of law.
So, in conclusion, the Administration is clearly violating
congressional intent, and arguably, at least some of the laws
that it is invoking. I believe that Congress, or what
Chairwoman Waters was saying just a moment ago, I believe
Congress should now take action to require the President to
seek its approval, to seek congressional approval, or at least
consult with us, regarding any proposed new tariffs on the
basis of an analysis of their potential benefits and costs in
both economic and foreign policy terms.
Congress should specify--just as the Congress must approve
any new trade agreement, it must approve withdrawal from any
trade agreement that it had previously adopted. The upcoming
USMCA legislation might provide an opportunity to make such
changes in U.S. trade law, and I hope you will take it.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Bergsten can be found on
page 73 of the appendix.]
Chairman Cleaver. Thank you. The next witness is Mr. John
Boyd. Mr. Boyd is a Virginia farmer who produces soybeans,
corn, and wheat, in addition to raising cattle, hogs, and other
animals. He is president and founder of the National Black
Farmers Association, and has served on the Clinton
Administration's Tobacco Commission.
Mr. Boyd, you now have 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF JOHN BOYD, FOUNDER AND PRESIDENT, NATIONAL BLACK
FARMERS ASSOCIATION (NBFA)
Mr. Boyd. Thank you very much. I would like to thank the
subcommittee and the chairman for inviting me, and for having
the opportunity to speak to the subcommittee today. I would
also like to recognize Chairwoman Waters. Thank you very much,
Chairwoman Waters.
My name is John Boyd, and I am founder and president of the
National Black Farmers Association. I am a fourth-generation
grain farmer and beef farmer from South Hill, Virginia, and,
quite frankly, Mr. Chairman, we are struggling. Because of the
President's tariffs, farmers are in a national crisis. I want
to say it again: a national crisis. And it seems as though many
have turned a deaf ear to America's small farmers and black
farmers alike.
I have been farming since 1983, and I can tell you, Mr.
Chairman, I wouldn't be farming since 1983 if I was not a good
farmer. We are faced with acts of Mother Nature. We have to
have a great relationship with Mother Nature and the weather,
and my heart goes out to those Midwestern farmers today who are
facing all of the rain that we can't control.
But we should not be forced with a tariff. A tariff should
come as a last-ditch effort. We need more diplomacy.
A few years ago I was selling soybeans, my major crop, for
$16.80 a bushel. This past season was a disaster for my family
farm, where I sold soybeans at $8 a bushel. And for those who
don't understand the math, if you make $100,000, you are now
making $50,000. And I have the same debts that I had last year.
I have the high cost of seed per bag for these soybeans, $60 a
bag, Mr. Chairman, that I am paying for Roundup Ready soybeans,
that I really don't want to use anyway. That is another
hearing. Sixty dollars a bag for soybeans.
I am faced now, with the President's tariffs, with the high
cost of machinery, and my family was recently featured on a
reality series called ``American Farm'', and you could see some
of the conditions of my equipment. I need a new combine but I
can't pay $400,000. And now, because of these tariffs, prices
for that equipment are steadily rising.
Something needs to be done to help small-scale farmers and
black farmers like myself. The President recently had a meeting
with farmers and invited them to the White House. I have asked
the President and the Agriculture Secretary for a meeting for a
very long time, in a public way--on CNN, on MSNBC, even on Fox
News. I have requested to meet with the Agriculture Secretary.
That request has fallen upon deaf ears. We are shuffled around
from person to person. I have asked to meet with the President
about this. We have 109,000 members in 42 States. We have some
real issues that we would like to speak to this Administration
about. We reached out to the Trade Representative and asked for
a meeting there.
How can you close the largest market for soybeans in
America, which is China, and not open up other avenues for
farmers? That is the reason why you have $8 a bushel. These
things should have been thought about before you imposed the
tariffs.
And, quite frankly, the President is affecting his base.
The people who elected him, the people who elected the
President are the American farmers out in the red States. Quite
frankly, I didn't vote for this President. I didn't vote for
him. But I believe in treating every person, regardless of
party, with dignity and respect. And I can tell you right now,
my financial situation on my farm isn't Republican. My
financial situation on the farm isn't Democratic. My financial
situation on the farm is real. We are facing a financial
crisis.
And this thing with the payout to the farmers, the
President announced a swift payout to farmers, said, oh, it
will come quickly. I am just now getting a $5,000 or $6,000
payment on the first of June. How can a farmer expect to make
it on that? And then, we are helping companies that are in
Brazil, and Smithfield Foods. Smithfield Foods was the company
that, when I rolled my truck up, Mr. Chairman, they said, ``We
are not taking any grain right now because of the President's
tariffs.''
My testimony here today is we need to set aside some of
this $16 billion that the President is proposing to help
America's farmers and make sure that farmers like myself, who
look like me, can get a check too. Any time the government gets
involved, when they say there is going to be a speedy payout to
farmers, it is always last for African American farmers. It is
also last for Latino farmers, and small-scale farmers, and
women farmers. And it is just a call. All you do is call and
call and call.
So, Mr. Chairman, I am requesting that this committee come
up with some bipartisan legislation to help farmers like us and
set aside at least $5 billion of this $16 billion that the
President is proposing to help farmers.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Boyd can be found on page 76
of the appendix.]
Chairman Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Boyd.
Our next witness is Mr. Ronnie Russell. Mr. Russell is a
Missouri farmer and a constituent of mine. He produces corn,
soybeans, wheat, hay, and alfalfa, and he serves on the
American Soybean Association Governing Committee, the Missouri
Soybean Association Board of Directors, and as chairman of the
Missouri Fertilizer Control Board.
Mr. Russell, you now have 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF RONNIE RUSSELL, MISSOURI FARMER, AND MEMBER, BOARD
OF DIRECTORS, AMERICAN SOYBEAN ASSOCIATION (ASA)
Mr. Russell. Good morning, Chairman Cleaver, Ranking Member
Stivers, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me to testify.
I am Ronnie Russell, a soybean farmer from Missouri, where
I farm in Ray County. I am a member of the American Soybean
Association Board of Directors and serve on the ASA Governing
Committee. My written testimony has been submitted on behalf of
ASA. However, I would like to give you a first-hand account of
how the current trade and tariff uncertainties have impacted my
family and the long-term health of our farm.
Things are bad in farm country right now, Mr. Chairman. If
I were back on my farm in Missouri today, I would be planting
my spring crops. However, the concerning reality of the farm
economy and our rural communities has led me to speak today to
give you an idea of what farmers in my rural community, and
many other communities across the heartland of America are
experiencing.
As a farmer producing soybeans, corn, wheat, hay, and
alfalfa, I am no stranger to the perils and unpredictability of
farming. I have been farming for 43 years and have seen my
share of low prices and crop losses due to weather. This season
has been one of the most challenging I have ever experienced,
but as a farmer who has always had to deal with the possibility
of inclement weather, I have tools at my disposal to mitigate a
year with poor planting, flooding, or even drought.
However, over the past year I have endured threats to my
farm that I cannot control or predict. The use of tariffs by
the U.S. Government has resulted in punitive retaliatory
tariffs on U.S. exports, particularly agriculture products. The
most detrimental of these is the 25 percent retaliatory tariff
on U.S. soybeans imposed by China on July 6, 2018. These
retaliatory tariffs have all but halted the shipment of U.S.
soybeans to China, which up until last year was by far our
largest export destination. In 2017, China purchased $14
billion worth of soybeans. This is no drop in the bucket. It
represented 31 percent of our total soybean production that
year and 60 percent of our annual exports.
The imposition of retaliatory tariffs by China has caused
immediate and severe damage to the prices of U.S. soybeans,
which fell from $10.89 cents a bushel to $8.68 a bushel last
summer. These low prices have continued, and, in some cases,
have dropped even further. Farmers are losing money on every
acre of beans that we plant.
The impact on my farm has been significant, and because
this drop was driven not by weather or increased competition
but instead as a result of the government's use of tariffs, it
is hard to determine the exact damage to my business.
Soy farmers like me feel the impacts of the tariff war and
they are not sure if they will be able to make it through
another growing season. Older farmers are considering retiring
early to protect the equity that they have built up in their
farms, while younger producers are looking at finding other
employment. We may also see the shuttering of more businesses
in our rural communities whose livelihoods depend on the health
of the farm economy.
As late as April of this year, U.S. farmers were hopeful
that an end to the ongoing tariff war with China was at hand.
However, the recent increase in tariffs and the potential for
future escalation is unacceptable. Our finances are suffering,
and stress from months of living with the consequences of
tariffs is mounting.
Soybean growers need Chinese tariffs removed now. Long-
term, what farmers and rural communities need is predictability
and certainty, which only comes through maintaining and opening
new markets where we can sell our products. For decades, the
U.S. soybean farmer check-off dollars went into developing
Chinese markets for soybeans. Our investments grew the Chinese
market from $414 million in 1996 to $14 billion in 2017. While
we are working hard to diversify and expand other market
opportunities, the loss of the Chinese market cannot be fully
replaced.
I ask Congress and urge the Administration to conclude
negotiations with China that immediately lift the Section 301
tariffs by the U.S. in exchange for China removing its 25
percent tariffs on U.S. soybeans.
Thank you for inviting me to testify, and I am happy to
answer any questions from the committee. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Russell can be found on page
90 of the appendix.]
Chairman Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Russell.
Our final witness is Mr. Gordon Gray. Mr. Gray is director
of fiscal policy for the American Action Forum. Mr. Gray
previously served in a series of congressional and campaign
positions, most recently as Senior Policy Advisor to Senator
Rob Portman, and he was also Deputy Director of Domestic and
Economic Policy for Senator John McCain's presidential
campaign.
Welcome, Mr. Gray. You have 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF GORDON GRAY, DIRECTOR OF FISCAL POLICY, AMERICAN
ACTION FORUM
Mr. Gray. Thank you. Chairman Cleaver, Chairwoman Waters,
Ranking Member Stivers, and members of the subcommittee, I am
honored to be here before you and among my fellow witnesses
today to discuss the outlook for the U.S. economy, and to
discuss that outlook in the context of developments in trade
policy.
In my testimony, I wish to make three basic observations.
First, recent economic growth outperformed the trend that
prevailed throughout the recovery, underscoring the
significance of pro-growth policy. Second, public policy has a
meaningful effect on this outlook and can be instrumental in
sustaining the recovery. Third, in the context of trade,
reducing global trade barriers in expanding markets are pro-
growth trade policies and should be pursued, where possible.
Let me discuss each of these in turn.
According to the National Bureau of Economic Research, the
U.S. economy began to recover from the Great Recession in June
of 2009. Ten years on, the recovery continues. But the pace and
character of the recovery matters deeply for American workers
and households. For 7 years after the start of the recovery,
the pace of national income, employment, and wage growth was
positive but disappointing. Real GDP growth averaged 1.9
percent per year. That sluggish pace of growth equates to an
average 1 percent per capita income growth. At that rate, it
would take 70 years for an individual to double their standard
of living, an achievement that used to take just 35 years, or
about one working career.
But more recently, the pace of growth has accelerated, and
has averaged somewhat above the sub-2-percent pace that
prevailed during the most recent recovery. Indeed, over the
past 9 quarters, GDP growth has averaged 2.7 percent.
Reflecting this acceleration in growth, productivity has
also strengthened. The most recent productivity data reflects
the strongest annual growth since 2010. With higher growth and
productivity, unemployment has continued to fall as payroll and
wage growth have accelerated. Wage growth has improved overall,
including for non-supervisory workers.
The upshot of recent economic performance is that past need
not be prologue--moribund economic growth is not preordained.
Ascribing the recent improvement in economic policy to any
single policy would be dubious, but certainly public policy has
had an effect on economic output. To the extent that the
economy has improved, one could reasonably conclude that recent
policy developments have contributed to more robust economic
growth.
The combined effects of the regulatory policy changes of
the TCJA and recent spending measures contributed to the recent
improvement in economic growth and the related uptick in hiring
and wage growth. These measures do not present unalloyed growth
opportunities, however. Tradeoffs and future risks attend to
each of these and other policy changes, particularly with
respect to trade, that have been pursued by the current
Administration.
The current trade policy outlook is challenging. The United
States is the most robust trading partner in the world, with
combined trade volume in 2017 of goods and services valued at
over $5.2 trillion. Among nations, the United States was the
second-largest exporter of goods and the largest exporter of
commercial services. Trade is vital to the United States, the
largest economy in the world, and the trade policy landscape is
unsettled.
Congress has an opportunity to contribute to improving the
trade outlook by considering the USMCA. The USMCA modernizes
the existing NAFTA by adding protections for intellectual
property and updating rules on digital trade. The agreement
also updates prevailing trade rules related to the agriculture,
manufacturing, and automotive industries. While the economic
implications for the USMCA should not be overstated,
demonstrating the capacity to ratify trade agreements would
send a meaningful signal to global trading partners and remove
some policy uncertainty from the economic horizon.
The Executive Branch's approach to trade is also uncertain.
The tariffs threatened and imposed by the President and related
retaliatory actions by U.S. trading partners is irreducibly
costly. According to estimates by my colleague, Jackie Varas,
the Administration has imposed tariffs costing $69.3 billion on
a combined $283.1 billion worth of imports. In response, the
EU, China, Russia, Turkey, and India have imposed tariffs on
$110 billion of U.S. goods. The Administration has threatened
additional tariff actions that could substantially raise costs
to U.S. consumers.
Ultimately, the cost of these tariffs must be weighed
against the degree to which they are successful in achieving
other beneficial trade policy aims. To the extent that the
Administration can use tariffs as a negotiating tool that
secures more beneficial trade terms, particularly with respect
to China's practices, the tariffs could be justified. If the
tariffs do not produce an improvement in trading terms,
however, they will simply remain a new tax on U.S. households.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to this important
topic, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gray can be found on page 80
of the appendix.]
Chairman Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Gray. I would like to
express appreciation on behalf of the committee to all of the
witnesses. Thank you very much.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
And without objection, the written statements of all of the
witnesses will be made a part of the record.
I am trying to get something straight. The Treasury
Secretary has appeared before our committee twice this year,
the Full Committee, and at both appearances I focused my
questions on the impact of the trade war on our country, but in
particular the agricultural component of our economy. And
during his first appearance the Secretary, in response to my
question, said that the Chinese, ``have committed to
significant orders in the soybean markets.''
So, I go home, and I meet with the Missouri Governor, and a
number of farmers, including Mr. Russell. We met with farmers,
and I am talking with people who are soybean farmers, and they
know nothing about this significant order. And so he said that
they are in the markets executing those orders.
Then, he returned. I was a little frustrated but I always
try to control my emotions, and so I did explain to him that he
answered the question but I had no evidence that what he said
was accurate. And so he sent a letter, on May 28th, after the
committee had that hearing, and in this letter he highlights
that when looking at a snapshot of orders in a band of time,
more orders were made. But it overlooks the point of where
those orders were executed and whether they provided any real
relief to farmers.
I need for at least those of you, the two farmers, to help
me understand if you are feeling or seeing or know of any
farmers who have been uplifted as a result of the Chinese
issuing new purchasing orders?
Mr. Russell or Mr. Boyd, or both of you?
Mr. Russell. Mr. Chairman, I would be happy to address that
question. In my particular area, which is your district, we
have seen no benefits from that. There maybe had been a little
bit of movement within the price of soybeans from the Chicago
Board of Trade, based upon rumors. It is my understanding that
the Chinese have verbally committed up to 20 million metric
tons in purchases. However, the information that the American
Soybean Association, through our partner and soy family member,
the United States Soybean Export Council, the information that
we have is that they only really have imported 6.5 million
metric tons, from those commitments.
Chairman Cleaver. Mr. Boyd?
Mr. Boyd. Mr. Chairman, we haven't seen any results from
that, and the farmers, especially the African-American farmers,
mostly in the southeastern corridor of the United States and
also in your district as well, the Bootheel, we are hurting. We
are hurting. We have lost our largest market, which is our
soybeans, and like I said earlier, we are selling our soybeans
for $8 a bushel. And there is no way that--I have heard some
experts say, ``Well, why don't you guys just sit it out?'' We
are not in the financial condition to sit it out, because we
have equipment loans, we have mortgages.
And for the first time in a very long time, I don't have a
farm operating loan. I am at home planting right now on our
grain operation off of credit cards and things of this nature.
The top 10 banks, Mr. Chairman, haven't been favorable to
African-American farmers. They greet us with a sense of
arrogance.
Chairman Cleaver. I have heard my farmers say--because I
had a century farmer at our meeting complain that his son may
not be able to carry on and that they are having difficulty
borrowing.
Mr. Boyd. Can I say something about that?
Chairman Cleaver. Sure. Absolutely.
Mr. Boyd. My son, who, for the first time, was involved--
our sons, excuse me--were involved in our farming operation,
and because of what they experienced after these tariffs, I
don't believe I am going to have a son who is going to be
interested in farming, because we are selling soybeans at $8 a
bushel. It is a hard sell to sell to the next generation of
farmers.
Chairman Cleaver. My time has expired. I now yield to the
ranking member of the subcommitte, Mr. Stivers, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, I want to
thank you for holding this hearing. I think it is really
important.
My first question is for Mr. Gray. Mr. Gray, many of us are
concerned that the House is kind of dragging its feet with
consideration of the USMCA, and I am curious if you could talk
about the importance of the need for expedited approval so we
can reduce some of the uncertainty that was talked about by
these colleagues, witnesses.
Mr. Gray. I would be happy to address that, and I believe
my fellow witnesses have also spoken to this.
The uncertainty relating to trade, in general, has a
chilling effect on business investment, which is one of the key
channels through which we expect to see productivity growth,
wage improvement from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. That law was
structured to improve the incentives to invest. The uncertainty
relating to trade policy acts as a counterweight to that
policy. So we have sort of two conflicting policy aims here
that should be reconciled, in my view.
And so I believe that consideration of the UCMCA--and as I
said in my statement, I don't believe that the economic effects
of that agreement should be overstated. There is quite a bit to
like in there but there are also some downsides as well. And so
I would just encourage the Congress to consider that, and also
consider it in the context of removing that policy uncertainty.
Mr. Stivers. Mr. Russell and Mr. Boyd, as farmers, do you
want to speak to what you think USMCA would mean to the
American farmer, either one of you, or both?
Mr. Russell?
Mr. Russell. Obviously, for American agriculture, and, in
particular, soybeans, having a working agreement and adopting
the USMCA is extremely important for the American soybean
farmers. Mexico is the number two importer of American
soybeans, so obviously it is very important. Canada and Mexico
represent our two largest trade partners in agriculture
products as a whole. And I know that I, personally, and also
speaking on behalf of the American Soybean Association, we
would certainly encourage the passage of the USMCA.
Mr. Stivers. Mr. Boyd?
Mr. Boyd. I would like to say this: Farmers want free
trade. We want free trade. I would much rather have a good fair
market price for my commodity than have anything to do with
getting in line, signing up for a program, and do the waiting
game and the paper shuffle. Any time those two things are in
combination it is always bad for farmers like me. So, any way
that this committee could work with the Administration and lean
into their ear, and let the Administration know that farmers--I
am really not interested in a $16 billion bailout. We need
creative ways to open up new markets so that we can get the
prices back up, so that I could go on and farm. Because I am
what is called a cash-and-carry farmer. I am not storing any
grain or my farming operations, and we farm on numerous tracts
of land.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you. And you stated it earlier very well
when you said your farm is not a Republican farm or a
Democratic farm. It is a farm.
Mr. Boyd. It is a farm.
Mr. Stivers. And you have to open markets to make money.
Mr. Boyd. Yes, sir.
Mr. Stivers. I appreciate that, and I hope all of my
colleagues will take note of that.
I would like to switch to China and I would like to enter,
for the record, a paper that Dr. Bergsten produced in October
of 2018, entitled, ``China and the United States: Trade
Conflict and Systematic Competition.''
Chairman Cleaver. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you. Dr. Bergsten, I think this paper
provides a really insightful context of some of the issues that
we are discussing today. In your testimony today you stated
that there is widespread agreement that China's trade and
industrial policies have to be reformed. How do you think we
can convince China to come to the negotiating table and make
changes, and are there ways to do that, either without
inflicting pain on the United States economy through tariffs or
with inflicting as little pain as possible on the United States
economy? And I know that I am only giving you 36 seconds.
Mr. Bergsten. I appreciate your kind comments on my paper.
I think the main thing we need to do to get those needed
reforms in China--and they are needed--is to forge an
effective, multilateral coalition of all the world's major
trading countries, which I think would join us in that effort,
to focus on the main issue.
The problem is, the Administration, I think, has correct
goals in its effort with China, but its methods have been
wrong, and it has compounded that error by waging war against
its own allies with the steel tariffs, the aluminum tariffs,
and other trade actions, disrupting the World Trade
Organization. We need to rally around the traditional U.S.
coalition of free-trading countries who want to get rid of
barriers, to approach China to do it. China never wants to be
isolated internationally.
Mr. Stivers. Dr. Bergsten, I am out of time.
Mr. Bergsten. But we have isolated ourselves
internationally, and we need to reverse that.
Mr. Stivers. Would you be willing to submit, for the
record, a fuller explanation? You did a great job, but since I
am out of time I yield back, and if you could give that to us
in writing, that was a good start, but thank you for that.
Mr. Bergsten. I would be happy to do so.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Stivers. The gentlewoman
from California, Chairwoman Waters, the Chair of the Full
Committee, is now recognized for such time as she may consume.
Chairwoman Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
First, let me welcome all of our witnesses here today, and let
me say a special welcome to Mr. Boyd. He has been in this
struggle for so many years now. He was at the very first
hearing that was ever held about the plight of black farmers,
that I conducted as Chair of the Black Caucus, and I want you
to know he has been a strong advocate who helped us get rid of
discrimination in the USDA. And I want to tell you, I see him
here today, but I don't know if he brought his horse and buggy
with him, the way he used to do. He used to bring along a
parade of farmers advocating for justice, particularly for
minority farmers.
Having said that, I understand very thoroughly the negative
impact that these tariffs are having on all of our States, but
let me tell you, California stands to lose a lot. In terms of
sheer volume, California conducts more trade with China than
any other State in the country. Total trade with China tops
$175 billion. That, along with the flow of China's investment
into the State, can seriously impact California's GDP growth
and crush its $2.7 trillion economy. I am quoting from an
article by Mr. Scott Cohen, who wrote extensively about how the
trade war with China could crush California's $2.7 trillion
economy and hurt other States.
Having taken a look at what this President is doing--and I
am so pleased that I am hearing from this panel and other
panels about the fact that the President is creating harm to
his so-called base. And some of that base is saying, ``We don't
want charity. We don't want a bailout. We want to do
business,'' as you have described here, and I think others have
described.
But I want to know what the President is doing bailing out
plants that are operated by something called JBS. Is anybody
familiar with this, what JBS is, the largest meatpacker in the
world with a program designed to help domestic companies and
producers under economic stress? This is a Brazilian firm.
Would you please respond to that, Mr. Boyd?
Mr. Boyd. Yes. I would like to, and thank you very much for
your comments. And that hearing was September 22, 1997. I will
never forget that date--
Chairwoman Waters. Wow. Thank you for reminding me what
date it was.
Mr. Boyd. --in my life.
Farmers like myself receive a miniscule amount from the
President's relief package. Hopefully, when I was going to
receive some $40,000-plus, by the time they do the deductions
on the dollar, it is 67 cents per bushel, is what the
Administration said each farmer would be able to get per bushel
for their losses.
From that, Congresswoman, I actually received a little,
believe somewhere around $6,000, and I just received that this
month, and I applied way back in the last year.
But to answer your question, companies like that should not
be benefitting from America's tax dollars. And you have farmers
like myself out here struggling, who can't make ends meet. And
the Administration isn't acting swiftly enough to make sure
farmers like myself and other small-scale farmers around the
country receive their payments as well. And there seems to be
no accountability at the Department of Agriculture, and as you
heard me express in my testimony, I have reached out to meet
with Agriculture Secretary Sonny Perdue. Well, I don't think
that was the same gentleman who was lobbying years ago in
Georgia. Something has happened there, Congresswoman. But this
Administration has turned a deaf ear.
My point is, foreign-owned companies--
Chairwoman Waters. Brazilian companies--
Mr. Boyd. --should not be benefitting--
Chairwoman Waters. --this Brazilian company--
Mr. Boyd. --while farmers like me are suffering.
Chairwoman Waters. --has gotten part of the first bailout
money. USDA signed a contract to purchase $22.3 million of that
pork from JBS USA, and that is the American arm of this
gigantic Brazil-based meat company that owns massive shares of
U.S. beef, chicken, and pork markets. And I understand that
there is some fraud involved. We are looking at that in my
office. And we are hoping to unveil that.
But if I may just say that I wish we could get some money
back from him, of the $16 billion that he is getting from USDA.
We are not going to be able to do that. And he is going to keep
on with this tariff, this trade war that he has created. So you
are going to have to get back on the street again. We are going
to have to organize again. We are going to have to go up
against this President who does not care about the harm that he
is causing.
And having said that, the final answer is, we have to get
rid of the President. I know the other side of the aisle won't
like this, but he is a problem, and he is a problem in more
ways than one, and he is hurting the farmers of this country.
I yield back.
Chairman Cleaver. Hello. Thank you for bringing that up,
Madam Chairwoman.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Williams, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I might be somewhat
of a unique person here today as I am a car dealer and I am a
rancher, and we do have elections coming up in 2020, so you can
do what you want to do with that.
President Trump has made renegotiating NAFTA one of the top
priorities in his office. His Administration has come up with a
new free trade agreement, which we have been talking about,
with our two most reliable trade partners, Mexico and Canada,
called USMCA. After reviewing the specifics of the deal it
seems as if he has done a really good job of negotiating for
the American people.
Of all the partisan issues that we deal with on Capitol
Hill, I am hopeful this trade agreement will be something that
my colleagues on both sides of the aisle can rally behind to
show the American people that we can still get important things
accomplished in these polarized times.
And I would like to say to you, Mr. Russell and Mr. Boyd, I
want to thank you for expressing to us the importance of
Congress acting on this deal and I appreciate your support of
it. That is a big deal to have that happen.
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act is working. Businesses are
spending more money on inventories, employment, and capital
goods that are revitalizing Main Street America. Capitalism is
working and it is showing it more than ever, and we need to
continue this momentum.
Mr. Gray, my first question to you is, are you a capitalist
or are you a socialist?
Mr. Gray. I am a capitalist.
Mr. Williams. Thank you. We seem to be winning that battle.
Thank you very much.
In your testimony, you expressed a similar sentiment on the
benefits the tax bill is having on the economy. However, you
also state that major forecasters predict that the U.S. economy
will slow over the next few years. But this is not inevitable.
Sound pro-growth policy can meaningfully improve the economic
outlook.
My question is, what pro-growth policy would you recommend
we focus on in this committee so we can assure that there is no
economic slowdown in the next several years?
Mr. Gray. I think one of the key decisions that the
Congress can consider is, first, do no harm, and that includes
the very hard work of removing some risks from the economic
outlook. Those risks include long-understood risks. We know
that the society is aging, and so we can't count on a growing
labor force. That means that we have to really think about and
focus on sort of the other half of the long-term economic
growth equation, and that is productivity, and that is where
public policy can really matter. That is where business
investment can really matter. That is where sound tax policy
can really matter. That is why introducing more certainty in
the trade outlook can matter. That is also why removing the
risk of a future fiscal crisis can really matter.
I would encourage the Congress to turn to the structural
challenges that we have long understood and try to remove some
of those risks.
Mr. Williams. Thank you. I am not a fan of tariffs--I will
tell you that right now--and I have spoken with the White House
about our differences on this issue. As a small business owner,
I have seen how tariffs turn into indirect taxes on consumers
and increase the cost of doing business.
With that being said, many countries around the world levy
tariffs on our exports so we import goods with far fewer
restrictions. A study from the World Economic Forum states that
the average tariff the U.S. faces in foreign markets is 5.9
percent, which is 4 times higher than the average tariffs
imposed on goods coming into our country.
Now, I know these numbers have changed somewhat because of
the Administration's trade actions, but it leaves me with a
question. Ms. Baughman, what tools are at our disposal to
ensure that other countries are treating United States exports
fairly, other than retaliatory tariffs?
Ms. Baughman. We have a host of trade remedies in this
country that address unfair import competition--anti-dumping
rules, countervailing duty rules, Section 201 rules. We have
lots of ways to address unfairness in foreign markets.
With respect to our exports and retaliation against our
exports, the best thing we can do is adhere to our WTO
commitments and not do things that trigger retaliation, if I am
understanding your question correctly.
Mr. Williams. We want to be on a fair playing field. My
question is, what would you do?
Ms. Baughman. To get a fair playing field with China, for
example?
Mr. Williams. What would you do that would help the U.S.
exports be fairly treated, other than tariffs?
Ms. Baughman. Oh. Trade agreements, number one. Number one,
two, and three. Negotiate good, strong trade agreements,
bilateral, regional, and multilateral through the WTO.
Strengthen the rules of the WTO to apply to more trade
practices, including some of the trade practices that issue in
China. Strengthen those rules and make them enforceable in some
way. There are a number of things that we can do in that
regard.
Mr. Williams. Okay. Thank you. My time is up. Tax cuts
work.
Chairman Cleaver. The gentleman from Colorado, Mr.
Perlmutter, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Perlmutter. I thank the chairman and I thank the panel
for its testimony today. My friend, Mr. Williams, and I
disagree on the tax cuts and the benefits to everyday
Americans, and the fact that this year we are going to have a
$896 billion deficit because of those tax cuts that cost us a
couple trillion dollars.
But I don't want to talk about that. I want to talk about
tariffs, and I want to talk about the corrupting effect these
tariffs have on capitalism. And so, Dr. Bergsten, I was
interested in your testimony. I feel like we have an imperial
presidency. These tariffs that the President--one day we are
going to raise tariffs on China and the next day we are going
to lower them, and the next day we are going to raise them. The
stock market goes up and down and up and down. And if we can
find some insider trading based on that, it is going to be
interesting.
But you were talking about the fact--you know, this is the
National Security Subcommittee, and the President is using
national security to raise and lower and raise and lower and
jawboning on the tariffs. Talk to me a little bit about how you
think the Congress should be involved in establishing any kind
of protectionism that these tariffs might introduce into the
system.
Mr. Bergsten. I think there are at least two things the
Congress should do. One is to define national security much
more sharply than is the case in current statute. The phrase,
``national security'', is used broadly in the Trade Expansion
Act, and it is used broadly in the International Emergency
Economic Powers Act. Internationally, it is used very broadly
in the World Trade Organization. And it provides a gigantic
loophole for anybody who wants to abuse the concept, as I would
argue the President is now doing. So, point one.
Mr. Perlmutter. I would say when we challenge Canada, and
we claim we need to raise tariffs on Canada, one of our best
friends, if not our best friend in the world, in the name of
national security, is ridiculous. And that is what I am talking
about, an imperial presidency, that there are checks and
balances and responsibilities, and this President has run amok
in the name of national security.
So, your second point?
Mr. Bergsten. Just to amplify what you say, to think about
doing it for autos against NATO allies like Germany and France
and the UK and others would be equally ludicrous. But that has
also been put on the table and still is out there and could
happen. So, that is point one.
Point two, as I emphasized in my statement, is to require
that any future tariff increases be approved by the Congress.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you very much, and I agree with that.
And I want to say to Mr. Russell, Mr. Boyd, and to you, you all
are free traders, and, let's talk about capitalism, talk about
free trade. Let's win because of competition and the ability to
be a good farmer, or a good salesman, or produce a good
product.
Ms. Baughman, I want to turn my attention to you. In my
district, just outside of Denver, we have a major can company.
I have lots of craft breweries. I have Coors Brewing. I have
the outdoors industry. So when the President says we are
winning on these tariffs, how would you respond to that?
Ms. Baughman. Well, we are definitely not. Those companies
that you have mentioned are all facing, or are about to face,
in the Outdoor Industry Association, huge increases in their
costs. They are becoming less productive, less competitive in
producing goods here in the United States because their inputs
to production have gone up in price. Consumers and families in
your districts are going to start screaming pretty soon if the
tariffs go into effect on all of those products on List 4, many
of which are produced by the Outdoor Industry Association and
others, members of that association.
So, yes, we are going to start seeing, in the next year or
so, if not by this fall, some substantial increases in
inflation, and reductions. We are already starting now to see
reductions in manufacturing indexes.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you. I guess just to conclude my
tirade up here, Dr. Bergsten, you wanted to say something?
Mr. Bergsten. Just to add, some Americans do win from the
tariffs. They do protect some jobs and some firms, but at an
enormous price. The steel tariffs save about 12,000 U.S. Steel
jobs at a cost of almost $1 million per job.
Mr. Perlmutter. And the aluminum tariffs hurt my district
substantially, because of the craft brewers and the canning
companies that I have.
And with that I yield back to the Chair.
Chairman Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Perlmutter. The gentleman
from Arkansas, Mr. Hill, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hill. I thank the chairman, and thank the panel for
being here, and I want to echo my thanks to Mr. Russell and Mr.
Boyd for talking about USMCA and the importance of getting that
agreement through the Congress promptly. In fact, I think that
would be a much better use of our time today, is for our
panelists to all be over in the Capitol advocating for that, in
Mrs. Pelosi's office. I am pleased that she has continued her
due diligence on this, but this is the single most important
thing I think we can do for employment, sales in our
agriculture industry and in America, in the near term, is get
USMCA through the Congress successfully.
I share Dr. Bergsten's concerns about across-the-board use
of tariffs as a weapon and not a distinct targeted approach. I
certainly share that I have written the President many times
about Section 232 as not well used in this instance. I agree
with my friend from Colorado that applying it to Canada and
Mexico might be a good short-term negotiating tactic but it is
certainly not in keeping with the intent of the Act on national
security purposes.
And we do have other ways to deal with dumping, in terms
of--if we think China, which is the largest dumper of steel and
aluminum in the world, and impacting the EU and the United
States, and Canada, for that matter, then we ought to put those
penalties on China as a part of our negotiation and not do it
as we have done it across the board.
I will say, though, that all Presidents deal in trying to
protect American industry. Every Administration does that, and
I think we are here today because the majority control of this
panel, they don't support this President, so we are picking on
Donald Trump's trade policy. But we could have--I think the
Democratic House did the same thing during the Reagan
Administration, and I am sure the Republican House did the same
thing in the Clinton Administration. So, let's be clear that
this is, for the most part, a lot about politics.
On soybeans in Arkansas, we are obviously not in the top 10
producers but we produce a lot of soybeans. A third of my
career was lending money to people like Mr. Russell and Mr.
Boyd in agriculture, and I know what a bad 3 years it has been.
But I also recall that when I started that lending, soybeans
were $5 a bushel in 1999, and we always joked that a pack of
cigarettes cost more than a bushel of soybeans then, but
somehow we made it through those very, very low prices in 1999
and 2000, and yields are certainly somewhat improved over that
period.
My question, Mr. Gray, is this macro impact of tariffs.
People are projecting forward and using the most pessimistic
case about it. But in my review of the economic literature, it
looks like two-tenths to three-tenths of GDP growth is what is
being projected as the most GDP impact of fully implemented
tariffs that are contemplated with China. Do you agree with
something in that range?
Mr. Gray. That is broadly consistent with some of the
estimates I have seen, but there is certainly a range.
Mr. Hill. There is, and I just want to be on the record
that it could potentially be a fairly modest GDP hit if fully
implemented. I am not supportive of it. I am just simply
describing that not everybody agrees that it is a major, major
downturn in American business.
I am more concerned about the inflationary aspect of it, if
it were fully implemented, when we go from intermediate goods,
where I think producers are eating a lot of that cost
currently, versus directly on consumer goods. Do you share my
concern about inflation impacts?
Mr. Gray. Certainly to the extent that that translates into
general welfare loss, and that is one of the more pernicious
aspects. It is a risk.
Mr. Hill. And this is why I think it is also bizarre how
people are suggesting that the Federal Reserve and monetary
policy is supposed to have something to do with trade. I would
submit that if it doesn't have major macro-economic growth
factors and yet it is inflationary, then the Fed ought to be
concerned about raising rates, not cutting rates. What is your
view on that, Mr. Gray?
Mr. Gray. My own view is that the Federal Reserve has their
dual mandate and I think they are charged with exercising that
mandate with respect to sort of the circumstances in front of
them.
Mr. Hill. I thank you for that. This is a complex area. I
think we need to be targeting our work and focus on China and
get results from that. I know on behalf of the agriculture
community, we want a prompt success to that negotiation with
China, to benefit America and the EU in Japan. But the most
important thing we can do is get the USMCA promptly approved in
the Congress.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Cleaver. The gentlewoman from Virginia, Ms.
Wexton, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Wexton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses for appearing before us today and providing this
interesting testimony.
I represent a very economically diverse district in
northern Virginia. Mr. Boyd, I am proud to have you here as a
fellow Virginian, and while you are down all the way on the
south side, I represent the northernmost part of Virginia, from
just outside of Washington, D.C., out to the Shenandoah Valley.
And so it is very economically diverse. It includes a vibrant
tech sector in the eastern part of the district through to, as
it becomes more and more rural, we have wineries, distilleries,
and a whole lot of apple growers out in Frederick County. But
one thing that is happening is that the impacts of the tariffs
are being felt across economic sectors, even in places where
you wouldn't expect it.
Just yesterday, in fact, I received an email from a
constituent, which I want to read to you,--``HELP!!!--in all
caps with 3 exclamation points--We own a small, local, large-
format printing business, based in Sterling.--in my district--
``We are getting swamped by increases from our vendors since
many of our products use hardware made from aluminum, often
from China, i.e., banner stands. The Chinese trade war is bad
for our business. Today, I just received notice from my largest
hardware vendor that pricing on our most popular banner stand
base jumped 26 percent. I will have to pass this along to
customers but I can see that this may reduce demand for many of
our products. This could be super painful. It is already
difficult enough to run a small business.''
These are the things that we are hearing every day from
producers, from agricultural producers to small businesses to
high-tech businesses. And a couple of questions that I have for
some of the panelists, a recent report from the Peterson
Institute shows that while China is raising tariffs on U.S.
imports, they are actually lowering tariffs on other nations
that compete with the U.S., and they are trying to limit their
economic damage in that way.
I would ask Ms. Baughman and Dr. Bergsten, can you
elaborate on what we can expect to see, in terms of long-term
consequences, changing the supply chains, and are other
countries taking them up on this and filling the void left by
the lack of American imports?
Mr. Bergsten. On that specific analysis, you are absolutely
right. The U.S. has hit itself doubly with the trade war. It
has prompted retaliation against the U.S., like the high China
tariffs that we are all talking about, but it has also prompted
other countries to liberalize to their trading partners other
than the United States.
As you said, China actually--many people don't realize
this--reduces its barriers, its import tariffs across-the-board
in autos and many other sectors, except to the United States
because of the trade war. Now, the average Chinese tariff
against the United States is 20, and the average tariff against
the rest of the world is 6. That is against a base of 8, where
they started--8 to 20 against us, 8 down to 6 against everybody
else. So, that is a double whammy.
In addition, lots of other countries have been forming free
trade agreements among themselves. President Trump erroneously
dropped out of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which would have
been a huge boon to U.S. agriculture. But it didn't stop the
Trans-Pacific Partnership. It went ahead without us. So the
other countries, who represent a third of the world economy,
are now giving each other duty-free treatment into each other's
markets while maintaining their barriers against us. So, we now
are discriminated against in the markets of other countries
because of our own trade policy. It is exactly what you say, in
spades.
Ms. Wexton. Thank you. I am going to reclaim my time at
this point because I am running out.
Also, in my district, the tech industry supports more than
100,000 jobs. Mexico is the number one export market for our
U.S. consumer technology sector. The industry estimates that it
has lost about $1 billion per month since October. If the plan
to impose tariffs on Mexico goes forward, what should we expect
to see in this consumer technology sector, and what do you
think will happen? Ms. Baughman, do you have an estimate of
that?
Ms. Baughman. People are terrified about that. A lot of the
folks who have been moving out of China in response to the
tariffs on China have been moving to Mexico, among other
countries, but Mexico, of course, is at the top of their list
because of the potential for USMCA. So, they will get slammed
pretty badly, and they are very, very concerned about it.
Ms. Wexton. Okay. Thank you very much. I will yield back my
time at this point.
Chairman Cleaver. The gentlewoman yields back. The
gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Gonzalez, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you, everybody, for being here. My questions will be fairly
quick. I want to focus on USMCA and how critical its
consideration is for my home State of Ohio and the rest of our
country.
Ohio exports rely on trade with Canada and Mexico. They are
2 of our largest markets, with $28 billion exported to these
two countries from our State last year. Canada and Mexico buy
more U.S.-made goods than the United States' next 11 trading
partners combined. To me,this is a no-brainer. We should be
acting swiftly to kick-start the TPA process and begin
consideration of USMCA. The USITC report came back, and it
said, I believe, over a quarter of a percent in GDP, over
170,000 jobs added to the economy will lift all boats, in
particular, manufacturing and agriculture.
I have yet to hear a single argument, not one, anywhere,
from my colleagues on the other side of the aisle, as to why
they would not be willing to support this and why they do not
want to see it on the House Floor. I would love to hear
somebody argue that. I have heard a lot about how we don't like
President Trump from the other side. I understand that. But I
have not heard any economic case whatsoever that we shouldn't
be considering USMCA. It is a no-brainer and I would love to
hear somebody make that case.
Let me ask a quick question to everybody on the panel. Yes
or no, is USMCA an improvement of NAFTA? I'll start with Mr.
Gray.
Mr. Gray. I think all in on that incrementally. That would
be my judgement.
Mr. Russell. I would say yes, especially for the
agriculture sector, yes.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Mr. Boyd?
Mr. Boyd. I don't think so.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. You don't think so?
Mr. Boyd. I think it is a very modest improvement but it
should be voted, because the alternative could be a withdrawal
from USMCA, and, therefore, it should go ahead.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Thank you.
Ms. Baughman. Yes, because it really updates NAFTA in very
significant ways.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Thank you very much.
And sort of a second point, obviously it has been a brutal
year for farmers, absolutely brutal. In Ohio, we have had
horrible weather, as you highlighted earlier, and the tariffs
have hurt our farmers, absolutely. No argument from me on that.
It is my belief--again, back to USMCA--this makes us stronger
in the negotiation against China. This gives certainty to our
markets.
Mr. Gray, would you agree with that assessment?
Mr. Gray. Yes. I think in substance and in the overall, in
terms of processes, it is worthwhile.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Thank you. And in closing, I want to
go back to where I started. Somebody please, on the other side
of the aisle, make the argument against USMCA. This won't cost
us a thing to vote on this bill. It is a massively important
trade deal. Everybody on the panel, with the exception of Mr.
Boyd, has suggested that it is a good idea that we go forward
with it. I haven't met a single person in my district who is
against the USMCA--Republican, Democrat, Independent. This is
good for business. This is great for American jobs. It is great
for manufacturing. It is great for agriculture.
And I yield back.
Chairman Cleaver. The gentleman yields back. Just for the
record, I don't know of anybody who has made a statement that
they are opposed to the USMCA. So, just for the record.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Sherman, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Let me ask three of our witnesses to focus on
economic and trade issues, but I will also ask the whole panel.
Raise your hand if you were actively working against NAFTA
back in the 1990s? I see no hands going up. And raise your hand
if you were actively opposing permanent MFN for China, back
roughly around the year 2000? No hands go up.
If I lead an unworthy life and the Almighty decides to send
me somewhere where I would pay for my sins, I will be sent to a
place where I am surrounded by Wall Street Democrats and Wall
Street Republicans, and told that both sides are represented. I
will use my 5 minutes here not in defense of Donald Trump but
in defense of the traditional Democratic view.
Democrats voted no on NAFTA, CAFTA, and SHAFTA. Democrats,
by two-thirds, voted no on MFN for China, and yet we have a
panel where we don't have anybody who took those positions.
Someone has to speak for the traditional Democratic view, and
that is that trade deficits matter, that every billion dollars
of trade deficit is another 10,000 jobs lost, and that while
our unemployment rate is low, if we don't two or three more
million jobs we will not create the labor shortage necessary to
see the increase in wages that the working class of this
country has been denied for the last 2 decades. Unless we can
raise real wages by 10, 20, or 30 percent, we will not redeem
what has been over 2 lost decades.
People say, ``How can you oppose USMCA?'' It is obvious the
country has some questions or they would call it what it is. If
you support it, be honest enough to say it is NAFTA 2.0.
And so the question is, do we want NAFTA 2.0? Well, if the
choice is between NAFTA 2.0 and NAFTA 1.0, we can lay the two
agreements next to each other. They are incredibly similar. We
will notice a few changes and we can decide. But if the choice
is whether to pull out of NAFTA altogether or to go with NAFTA
2.0, that is a very complicated issue, especially when, over
the objections of the Democratic Party in this House, we have
knitted together these three economies in a way that would be
difficult to respond to.
I Chair the Asia Subcommittee. Trump didn't start the trade
war. China started the trade war 20 years ago, and the wreckage
of America exceeds anything done to us at Pearl Harbor. And
yet, for 20 years, we did nothing. For 20 years, we were told
tariffs are bad, so we will go through legal processes and
trade dumping disputes. How has that worked out for us? We have
the largest trade deficit in the history of a million life on
this planet and we keep saying, let's go back to giant trade
deficits. Let's go back to just checking the boxes and not
looking at the non-tariff barriers that China is able to put
up. Let's just say, well, if we can just get them to reduce
their tariffs--that is not a market economy. That is an economy
where any major corporation that imports any major American
product in contravention of the policies of the Communist Party
of China will be sent to a re-education camp. They know that,
and that is why they don't buy American planes, unless we move
the plane factories. That is why you can't make something in
the United States and sell it in China, until they force you to
make it in China and then transfer the technology. And we are
told, ``Let's go back to the good old days.'' Those days were
so bad that they elected Donald Trump as a scream of pain from
western Pennsylvania, from Michigan, and from Wisconsin, and
that pain has not been forgotten.
If the Democratic Party abandons the Democratic Party, we
will get, in 2020, what we got in 2016.
I yield back.
Chairman Cleaver. The gentleman does not yield back. Oh,
the gentleman is out of time.
Mr. Sherman. The gentleman is out of time.
Chairman Cleaver. Thank you. The gentleman from Tennessee,
Mr. Rose, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Chairman Cleaver. In simple terms,
economic growth is a function of an increase in the number of
hours worked times an increase in labor productivity of those
hours. It follows, then, that in order to increase economic
output the focus should be on increasing the amount of hours
worked and the productivity of those hours. Allowing capital to
flow where it is most productive should enable these two things
to occur.
Mr. Gray, can you talk a little bit about how the Tax Cut
and Jobs Act has helped increase labor productivity in our
country?
Mr. Gray. Certainly. I would be delighted. In particular,
the business portions of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, the
reduction in the statutory rate, the 5-year expensing provision
were designed to improve the incentive to invest in the United
States. That was to reverse what the previous Administration's
Economic Report to the President noted as a problem in terms of
productivity, which was the slowing of capital deepening,
essentially the accumulation of capital for workers, which is
central to productivity growth.
That was what the business elements of the Tax Cuts and
Jobs Act was designed to incentivize. The evidence is that
there has been an investment response. However, there are some
other risks in the economy that have possibly muted that, and
that is something that we are going to want to keep our eye on.
Mr. Rose. And what about on the employment side?
Mr. Gray. I think we have observed, particularly for this
late stage in the recovery--we are about to hit the 10-year
anniversary--we saw an acceleration in payroll growth. We saw
the labor market draw in workers who were not in the labor
force for the balance of the Great Recession. That was
remarkable, particularly in the 10th year of the recovery, to
see the pace of employment growth actually accelerate. I think
these are important accomplishments for the economy.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. We have a record-low unemployment rate
in this country. Unemployment incredibly low at 3.6 percent,
the lowest rate in my lifetime, and for those of you who can
see me, that has been quite a while. So I applaud the President
and I applaud the initiative of the prior Congress for helping
to extend and expand the current expansion.
In my home State of Tennessee, we have an incredibly low
unemployment rate, historically low there as well, of 3.2
percent, and I might add record low unemployment for minorities
and for women and for other typically or historically
disadvantaged groups. So, the great fruits of the economic
policies that President Trump and his Administration and the
prior Congress put in place.
But as a country, we can and must improve our labor
participation rate. The most recent numbers from the Bureau of
Labor and Statistics have the labor force participation rate at
62.8 percent. There are still a lot of potential workers
sitting on the sidelines, not actively seeking employment. Can
you talk, Mr. Gray, a little bit about how the TCJA will help
facilitate getting people off the sidelines and back in the
game?
Mr. Gray. I think you have kind of two primary channels
that we can sort of identify. One is just specific provisions.
The CBO mentioned this in their recent baseline, which is that
the reductions in labor taxes, all else being equal,
incentivize the supply of labor, so people will tend to work
more than they otherwise would, given the reduction in labor
taxes. So, that is one element.
The second is to the extent that the TCJA improves the
economy, then that improving economic environment will draw
workers into the labor force as they see wages grow. That
incentivizes them to work as well.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. While some of my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle may wish to denigrate the tax reform
passed into law last year, I do think it is in all Americans'
interest to be supportive of policies that help increase the
amount of workers and the productivity of their work. That is
where capital should flow, to the places it can be most
productive. We should avoid picking winners and losers here in
Washington, and, after all, we don't have to because a rising
tide truly does lift all boats.
A simpler Tax Code and lower effective rates will help
American businesses compete on merits, and I believe American
workers. Small business owners and shareholders under these new
conditions are only poised to succeed.
And with that, I yield back.
Chairman Cleaver. The gentleman yields back.
You know, this partisan polarization grows almost without
bounds, so I don't think we need to fight any fights that don't
exist. So I want to enter into the record, without objection,
where the Trade Representative is saying, ``We won't rush the
USMCA in Congress.'', And I will repeat again, I don't know of
anybody trying to fight against it from here. And this is
today, June 19, 2019, at 11:13 Eastern Standard Time. So, I
would like to enter this into the record. And without
objection, it is so ordered.
I now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Garcia,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garcia of Illinois. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
would like to thank all of the witnesses who have testified
this morning. I would like to begin with Dr. Bergsten. In an
online Peterson Institute post on March 11th of this year,
entitled, ``A Courtesy Deal With China?'' you stated that,
``Trump has long been upset about the U.S. bilateral trade
deficit with China, which actually rose to a record $419
billion in 2018, despite his imposing tariffs of $250 billion
worth of imports from China.''
According to economist Robert Scott, the IMF predicts that
the U.S. current account deficit will nearly double between
2016 and 2022. Scott writes that, ``Unless these trends are
offset by a rapid decline in the value of the U.S. dollar,
rapidly rising trade deficits could be devastating for U.S.
manufacturing, likely giving rise to massive job loss on the
scale experienced in the 2000-2007 period, when 3.5 million
U.S. manufacturing jobs were lost.''
In March, President Trump said, ``I want a strong dollar
but I want a dollar that does great for our country, not a
dollar that is too strong to make it prohibitive for us to do
business with other nations.''
Dr. Bergsten, can you talk about the impact of a strong
dollar on this trade deficit?
Mr. Bergsten. That is a crucial point, Congressman Garcia,
because the single most important price for U.S. international
competitiveness is the exchange rate of the dollar, because
that is what prices all of our products, in both export markets
and import competing markets, vis-a-vis the competition in the
rest of the world.
By most people's estimates, including those at the Peterson
Institute but also the IMF, the dollar is now overvalued by
probably 10 to 15 percent, and that does translate into a much
larger U.S. trade deficit than if the dollar was not
overvalued.
I have always been in favor of a competitive dollar.
Secretaries of the Treasury have talked over the years about a
strong dollar without ever defining it, but it implies a dollar
that maybe responds primarily to financial flows, capital
movements, and does not accurately reflect the underlying
competitive position of the United States and other countries.
But the trick is how to achieve an equilibrium exchange
rate for the dollar. Over the years, we have done it in
different ways. In the Reagan Administration, Secretary of the
Treasury Jim Baker negotiated the Plaza Agreement with our
major trading partners who cooperatively agreed to bring down
an overvalued dollar, cut the U.S. trade deficit at the time in
half. We saw an equilibrium.
Now the situation is very tricky, because, as various
Members, particularly on the Republican side have said today,
the U.S. economy is very strong, and that attracts capital from
around the world. It strengthens our investment, and that is a
good thing. But is also pushes up the exchange rate of the
dollar.
In the current environment, when we have full employment,
when we have rapid growth, when we have a strong economy, it is
hard to argue, as Scott does, that we need a better trade
balance or a weaker dollar. At the same time, he is right that
over time, if the dollar remained overvalued, it would weaken
our manufacturing sector and other tradable goods industries,
including, incidentally, agriculture.
So what the Administration should be doing is trying to
work toward a gradually depreciating dollar that will reduce
the U.S. trade deficit over time without disrupting the world
economy and adding more uncertainty to the current situation
which, because of the trade war, is already very uncertain.
Mr. Garcia of Illinois. So, ``gradual'' is the key word
there, I believe.
And finally, before my time runs out, how might tariffs
further impact the strengths of the dollar, and what policy
proposals are you aware of that might correct the strong
dollar's impact on our trade deficit?
Mr. Bergsten. The tariffs have a paradoxical effect. The
tariffs aim to reduce U.S. imports, and they do, and that would
strengthen our trade balance, but that would lead to a stronger
dollar in the exchange markets. And, in fact, empirical studies
show that countries that put on lots of trade barriers do not--
repeat, do not--improve their trade balances, in part, because
there is an offsetting effect in the exchange markets.
So anybody, including the current Administration, who
thinks that tariffs strengthen the trade balance are simply
incorrect, both theoretically and empirically.
Now, what to do about it. It's a big problem, and I
mentioned it in that article--
Chairman Cleaver. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Bergsten. --that other countries have manipulated the
currency. The answer to that, frankly, is for us to counter it
directly. I have supported, for many years, countervailing
currency intervention. If China buys a billion dollars' worth
of dollars to keep our currency overvalued, we buy a billion
dollar of their currency--
Chairman Cleaver. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Bergsten. --to offset it, neutralize its impact on the
currency markets, and believe me, if we commit to do that, they
won't do it--
Chairman Cleaver. Thank you very much.
Mr. Bergsten. --the manipulation will disappear, and that
part of the dollar overvaluation will be avoided.
Mr. Garcia of Illinois. Thank you.
Chairman Cleaver. I now recognize the gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Riggleman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Riggleman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate it. And Mr. Boyd, I am happy to be your Congressman.
I love Mecklenburg County, yes, sir, and I don't think people
realize the size of our district, before I get started. We go
from Fauquier County down to the North Carolina border, and if
you talk about Mecklenburg County, it actually borders four
counties and North Carolina, so it is huge.
Number two, I almost laughed when somebody said ``NAFTA
2.0'', because Mr. Boyd knows if we say ``NAFTA'' down in South
Hill, or we say ``NAFTA'' in Lunenburg County, or we say
``NAFTA'' in Pennsylvania County or Halifax County, or Franklin
County, or Bedford County, or Campbell County, you will get run
out of town. That is why I don't want to call it ``NAFTA 2.0'',
and you know that, sir. So, I am glad you are here.
I also have my aide here, and he is going to give you a
card, so if you have any issues getting a meeting with anybody
in the Administration or with me, I will go ahead and we will
try to make that happen, and I will come see you on your farm.
How does that sound?
As we get started, I find it a little bit interesting
because I know a little bit about farming in the Fifth District
of Virginia. After I was a CEO of a DoD company, as a lot of
people, know I ran a distillery. So, I deal with wheat, corn,
barley, rye. We deal with everything you could possibly imagine
when it comes to agricultural produce, spent mash. So, I have a
little bit of an interest in that, and plus I grow some of that
on my own farm.
I think the second thing that we have is that when I looked
at the comparison between NAFTA and USMCA, and I looked at what
it would create, I think it is pretty spectacular. And for me,
when you look at Southside, and I think where me and Mr. Boyd
probably are of like minds, we talk about a 3.6 percent sort of
unemployment rate in the United States.
The Fifth District is around 3 percent, but there is
actually a 2 to 2.5 percent delta between the northern part of
my district and the southern part of my district. Last year,
there was 2.4 percent unemployment in Fauquier County, which
you know is 4 hours from you, and down around--you are talking
about Danville and Brunswick County, it was as high as 4.7 to
5.2 percent. So, there is a huge delta. Why? Because we have
had problems with agriculture.
The reason the USMCA is so important to me--and I want to
go into something that I know a little bit about--number one,
here just are some of the USITC's stats on this. USMCA would
raise the US real GDP by $68 billion, would create
approximately 176,000 new jobs, directly related to 12 million
jobs in the United States, it would increase exports to Canada
and Mexico by $33.3 billion, and it would actually increase
total U.S. agriculture and food exports by $2.2 billion. And in
Denver, why is that so darn important? It is because my
district is 65 percent rural--65 percent. And, by the way, it
is over 10,000 square miles.
Some of the other issues--I had questions written out, and
as you can see, I am not looking at my questions too much right
now because I know a little bit about this. And that is why I
think right now, when we talk about this, the same questions
that everybody asks, they were going to ask you, I was going to
ask you--how do we level the playing field against China, and
how do we continue the economic boom that we have experienced
over the last 2\1/2\ years? Well, that is fantastic. It is
fantastic for the first part of my district. For the bottom
part of my district, it is not so fantastic. There isn't an
economic boom. And that is why the USMCA is so important to the
Fifth District.
I usually like to ask a lot of questions, as people know,
and I try to take a lot of time. But there is one thing I want
to talk about, and that is why I am so happy everybody is here.
We have talked about soybeans, which are big in my district,
right? We have talked about all kinds of issues. But in my
district, do you know what the big three are? Not soybeans, not
corn, not wheat, not rye. The big three are timber--believe it
or not--dairy, and tobacco. So, that is my issue.
Let's talk about dairy and what the USMCA does for dairy.
Fluid milk--50,000 metric tons by year 6 of the agreement. And
some of the other things, and I want to skip the 47 things I
have here, but there is something that is very, very important
to my dairy farmers and the USMCA and everything that we are
talking about, and it is actually Class 6 and Class 7, when you
are talking about the amount of milk and processed milk that we
can actually bring into Canada.
My question here is this, and it is probably a pretty
simple one. I don't want the perfect to be the enemy of the
good, and if we are looking at farmers in my district, not only
do we have to deal with China as soon as possible, we have to
get the USMCA passed. And a lot of that comes from me not being
in politics very long. See, I see the rising prices. And also,
when you talk about tariffs, you talk about steel and aluminum,
I have to get aluminum totes.
So, really, I don't even want to ask you yes or no, because
you have already answered the question, but if anybody wants
any of this last 30 seconds of their time to talk about the
importance of USMCA or the perfect for the good, I would like
to hear it. And if not, I am the last. As you can tell, I am
probably the last. Am I the last one? Is Cindy the last one? Am
I the last one?
I just wanted to end easy for you all. I want the USMCA. I
want it to pass. I think you guys--Mr. Boyd, I am going to be
in touch with you and we will make sure it happens, whatever
you need, because I represent you.
Thank you, sir, and I yield back the whole 4 seconds of my
time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Cleaver. The gentleman yields back. The
gentlewoman from Iowa, Mrs. Axne, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Axne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for saving the best for
last, I appreciate that, and I thank the witnesses for being
here, and a special thank you to Mr. Boyd and Mr. Russell. I am
Cindy Axne from Iowa's Third District, the flooded area, which
is, of course, filled with agriculture and farming, and I know
how difficult this is for all of you right now.
I appreciate everything you are doing for our country and
what you do to feed the world, and I appreciate all the hard
work. I come from 5 generations of Iowans. My mom grew up on a
farm in my district. I know how hard it is to stay viable in
these circumstances, so thank you.
But I did want to talk today about tariffs and the impact
on America's pocketbook. As you know, the President has
repeatedly said China is paying for these tariffs, and I
questioned Secretary Mnuchin here last month, and he seemed to
agree with that.
Mr. Bergsten, in your expertise, what research or theory
could the Secretary or the President be referring to, to
support these claims, because I am at a loss and I would like
to hear from an expert?
Mr. Bergsten. There is no theory that says that China can
pay the tariffs. One does have to make a distinction how you
break down the payments of the tariff. In the first instance
they are clearly paid by the importer, the American importer.
It is he or she who pays the tariff into the Treasury that the
President keeps talking about. That clearly comes 100 percent
from the American importer.
The economic analysis then says, how does that change in
the price of the product get disaggregated among the buyers and
the sellers? Most of the theories suggest, and most of the
empirical work suggests that the great bulk of the increased
tariff is paid by the consumers of the product. It will go
through several intermediate stages. It may be a direct
consumer product, but most of it is paid by the consumer.
That higher price reduces demand for the product, so the
exporter in China, or wherever, may, down the road, have to
take a somewhat lower price for his or her product, and may,
therefore, in that indirect sense, pay some of the cost.
Mrs. Axne. Okay.
Mr. Bergsten. The great bulk comes on the import side and
the consumer side.
Mrs. Axne. I appreciate that. But what you are saying is
that what we are experiencing right now is that the expectation
is that the tariffs are passed on through additional expenses
to the consumer for the price of goods.
Mr. Bergsten. Either higher prices for the consumer or
reduction in the profits of the importer, the retailer,
somebody on the import side, right.
Mrs. Axne. Thank you. And then I asked the Secretary about
the impact of tariffs on consumers and he told me that he
didn't believe American consumers would pay a significant
price. I would like to ask you, Ms. Baughman, and Dr. Bergsten,
both of your groups have estimated the impact of these tariffs
on American consumers, is that correct?
Ms. Baughman, you said the cost to the average family of 4
was around $750, is that correct?
Ms. Baughman. Yes, $767.
Mrs. Axne. $767? I personally think that that is a
significant price for people in my district, and for Iowans to
pay.
I was then told by Secretary Mnuchin that his research
about the cost consisted of speaking to executives of major
companies, and I find that to be completely insufficient. So I
sent him a letter to follow up and asked his Department if they
had done any analysis on the actual cost, the impact on the
existing tariffs on consumers. And although the deadline for
this response was now 12 days ago, we have not received an
answer, so I will be sending a letter today to follow up.
Since your group has modeled this, my question is, do you
believe the Treasury Department actually conducted analysis
focused on the impact of American consumers before imposing
these tariffs?
Ms. Baughman. No, I do not think that they looked at that.
Two-thirds of the products that are on List 1, 2, and 3, when
imported from China, those are things used to make things here
in the United States--raw material, parts, components. So, not
a lot of consumer goods. So, you are not going to actually see
too much impact on the price of something that you buy at
Walmart from Lists 1, 2, and 3. List 4, which is pending right
now, three-quarters of that is consumer goods. You are going to
see it when the 25 percent tariffs get put onto those goods.
We took a look, for the National Retail Federation, at what
the impact would be on apparel, footwear, household appliances,
and toys, and in every single case we found significant
increases in consumer prices and reductions in purchase.
Mrs. Axne. Thank you. I appreciate that. And so to confirm,
you believe that this Administration did not conduct an
analysis to see what the impact would be on the American
consumer.
Ms. Baughman. If they did, it is not evident.
Mrs. Axne. You haven't received it either?
Ms. Baughman. No.
Mrs. Axne. Okay. Thank you.
Chairman Cleaver. The Chair would like to thank all of our
witnesses today, and also thank Ranking Member Hill for sitting
in admirably and powerfully. He just really stood in today when
the ranking member had to leave.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
Unless there are any objections, this hearing is now
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:57 a.m. the hearing was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
June 19, 2019
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]