- DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
[Senate Hearing 116-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
----------
THURSDAY, APRIL 4, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 10:05 a.m. in room SD-124, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Roy Blunt (chairman) presiding.
Present: Senators Blunt, Alexander, Moran, Capito, Kennedy,
Hyde-Smith, Rubio, Murray, Durbin, Shaheen, Merkley, Schatz,
Baldwin, Murphy, and Manchin.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
Office of the Secretary
STATEMENT OF HON. ALEX AZAR, SECRETARY
opening statement of senator roy blunt
Senator Blunt. The Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor,
Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies will
come to order.
Secretary Azar, thank you for being here this morning and
for our efforts to work together. While they could always be
better, I think we are about to get you staffed up to a point
that will no longer be the excuse. So we will think of what
comes as the next reason that this is not working the way it
should. But I wanted to encourage you to continue to do that.
Obviously, this is a difficult budget for us to talk about,
and frankly, I think it is a difficult budget for you to
defend. And we will see what we have to do here.
The Budget Control Act has impact on this. In the case of
the budget that you have been asked to submit, there is a
reduction of 14 percent. The Budget Control Act would require
an overall reduction in the non-defense discretionary spending
of 9 percent. So this budget exceeds even that.
I would say for the 9 percent, as I mentioned last week
with the Education Secretary, President Trump did not sign the
Budget Control Act. President Obama did. And you did not vote
for it, and most of us who were here when we did the Budget
Control Act did. So there is some shared responsibility where
that decision has led us. But there will be a number of
concerns that I imagine you have to share about what this
budget asks for.
We made a top priority, in the years I have been Chairman
of this committee, to ensure that medical research has the
resources it needs at this particular time of real breakthrough
potential to do what it does in a way that saves lives,
improves lives, and frankly benefits taxpayers as we find more
solutions. As an example, if we could find a way to identify
Alzheimer's and delay onset by 5 years, we would cut the
projected cost for Alzheimer's by a third between now and 2050.
The cuts that you are proposing for NIH would be an overall cut
of 12.6 percent in research, or almost $5 billion. I am sure
that this is not going to happen. But for that not to happen,
we have to have a number to work with that you did not have to
work with yet. And I believe we will have that number.
You know, we are not going to eliminate LIHEAP (Low Income
Home Energy Assistance Program) funding that provides 6 million
households with heating and cooling assistance. This budget
cuts resources to train a lot of people for medical professions
and behavioral health and pediatric dentistry. And we are not
likely to do any of those things.
I understand you had to make difficult decisions here.
I do appreciate the two new initiatives that you proposed,
I will be supportive, and I believe the committee will be
supportive of those. One, to eliminate the transmission of HIV
in the United States by 2030. Phase one of the 10-year plan
would infuse the hardest hit States and communities--Missouri
is one of those--with additional resources, additional
expertise, additional diagnostic, and treatment options. And I
am pleased to see the new pediatric cancer program to provide
$50 million a year over the next decade to launch a major data
project on childhood cancer. Now, that runs pretty dramatically
in the face of cutting overall NIH funding. But I do think it
gives us the opportunity to look even closer at pediatric
cancer and factor that in as we continue to, hopefully, improve
NIH funding.
In addition to these new programs, I believe that mental
health treatment needs to be treated as any other health issue.
And the budget request includes level funding for the certified
community behavioral health clinics. Missouri is one of the
eight pilot States treating behavioral health like all other
health, and we need to do more to encourage that. The head of
Barnes-Jewish Hospital told me just last week--he said, ``I
cannot treat a person's diabetes until their schizophrenia is
under control.'' And I believe we are going to find that if you
do treat behavioral health like all other health, you actually
save more money on the other healthcare costs than you spend
doing the right thing in behavioral health.
Finally, the administration's commitment to ending the
opioid epidemic is well reflected in this request. According to
the Council of Economic Advisors, the total economic cost of
the opioid epidemic in 2017 was $684.6 billion. The cost to our
economy, the cost to families of the opioid epidemic was that.
According to the Missouri Hospital Association, this estimate
suggests the epidemic costs the U.S. nearly $1.6 billion every
day, $21,700 every second of every day through 2017. Over the
past 4 years, this subcommittee has increased funding to combat
the epidemic by more than $3.5 billion, and we have had great
bipartisan leadership on both sides of where I am sitting who
understand how this has impacted their States and have
forcefully made that case.
Mr. Secretary, I appreciate what you had to do to try to
prioritize limited resources. We will try to do things that
make those resources more realistic. I am glad you are here
today and glad you bring all the expertise and ability you
bring personally to this job.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Senator Roy Blunt
Good morning. Thank you, Secretary Azar, for appearing before the
Subcommittee today to discuss the Department of Health and Human
Services' fiscal year 2020 budget request. We look forward to your
testimony.
The Department's budget request is $77.6 billion, a reduction of
$12.8 billion or 14 percent. I understand that the President's budget
request adhered to the Budget Control Act. However, most of the
proposed reductions are simply not realistic.
My number one priority as Chairman is to ensure our medical
research community has the resources necessary to continue to make
breakthroughs that will save countless lives, improve the health of all
Americans, and ultimately save our Federal Government billions of
dollars in healthcare costs. For example, if budget cuts were applied,
Alzheimer's research would by cut by $326 million.
Further, this Subcommittee is not going to eliminate LIHEAP
(pronounced lie-heap) which provides 6 million households with heating
and cooling assistance; cut resources to train tens of thousands of
medical professionals in behavioral health and pediatric dentistry; or
diminish our investments to States for critical public health issues
such as heart disease, strokes, and diabetes.
I understand you had to make difficult decisions under a tight
budget. While there are many funding reductions I fundamentally
disagree with, there are two new initiatives you have proposed that I
think we should seriously consider this year.
First, there is a proposal to eliminate the transmission of HIV in
the United States by 2030. Phase one of the 10 year plan would infuse
the hardest-hit States and communities, Missouri being one, with
additional resources, expertise, and diagnostic and treatment options.
Second, there is a new pediatric cancer program to provide $500
million over the next decade to launch a major data project on
childhood cancer. While researchers have made remarkable gains in
improving the survival rate for childhood leukemia, survival rates for
some pediatric cancer types have not increased.
In addition to these new programs, as someone who believes mental
health should be treated like all other health concerns, I am pleased
that the budget request includes level funding for Certified Community
Behavioral Health Clinics. In Missouri, this renewed focus for mental
health has made a significant difference in reducing wait times and
getting people the help they need. However, CCBHCs are not the only
answer to treating mental and behavioral health issues and the budget
cuts other important programs focused on integrating mental healthcare
into primary care settings. As the head of Barnes-Jewish hospital told
me just last week, ``I can't treat a person's diabetes until their
schizophrenia is under control.'' Mental health is fundamental to a
person's overall well-being and we must recognize and treat it that
way.
Finally, the Administration's commitment to ending the opioid
epidemic is well reflected in the request. According to the Council of
Economic Advisors, the total economic cost of the opioid epidemic in
2017 was $684.6 billion. According to the Missouri Hospital
Association, this estimate suggests the epidemic costs the U.S. nearly
$1.9 billion every day, or $21,700 every second of every day during
2017. Over the past 4 years, the LHHS Subcommittee has increased
funding to combat the epidemic by more than $3.5 billion. I am
committed to continuing to ensure there is adequate funding and
flexibility for States and communities to respond.
While I appreciate the Department prioritizing limited resources,
this hearing is an opportunity for us to fully understand whether you
made many of these cuts because you believe these programs are
ineffective and not necessary or because your topline budget level
forced you to do so.
Mr. Secretary, I look forward to hearing your testimony today and
appreciate your dialogue with us about these important issues. Thank
you.
Senator Blunt. And I would like to turn to my partner here
in this effort, Senator Murray.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR PATTY MURRAY
Senator Murray. Well, thank you very much, Chairman Blunt.
Welcome, Secretary Azar.
People across the country made pretty clear last November
that they want us to fight for their healthcare and make sure
families get the care they need. That means fighting for
protections that allow people with preexisting conditions to
get quality, affordable health coverage. It means fighting to
bring down the skyrocketing healthcare costs. It means fighting
for public health investments that keep our communities safe
and address crises like the HIV and opioid epidemics. And it
means fighting for investments in research that can help
discover new treatments, save lives.
But instead of fighting to defend people's healthcare,
President Trump is fighting in court to take healthcare away
from millions of people who are covered through the exchanges,
covered through Medicaid, and are covered by their parents'
plan. Instead of fighting to bring those costs down and help
people get the care they need, he is fighting in court against
protections for over 130 million people with preexisting
conditions; for bringing back annual and lifetime caps on
benefits, even for people who get their insurance through their
own job; and for letting insurance companies offer plans that
do not cover essential services like maternity care or
prescription drugs.
And President Trump's budget before us is cut from that
same cloth. It bulldozes right over the concerns of families
with proposals that would make it harder for people to get care
and cuts that would undermine the well-being of families across
the nation.
Overall, this budget proposes a deep $12.7 billion cut to
the Department of Health and Human Services, slashing it by 14
percent. I always say a budget is a reflection of your values.
Well, like many of his actions, this budget tells a very
different story about President Trump's healthcare priorities
than his empty promises. Despite claiming time and time again
he would fight for people's healthcare and despite his recent
claim Republicans would be the party of healthcare, President
Trump is continuing to push for harmful policies that would
weaken patient protections, take coverage away from people, and
put needed healthcare further out of reach.
This budget includes Trump Care, which the Congressional
Budget Office estimates would kick tens of millions of people
off their health insurance. When it comes to curbing the HIV
and opioid epidemics, President Trump promised to fight the
fire, but his budget actually fans the flames. It would make
these crises far worse by cutting over $1 trillion from
Medicaid over the next decade and repealing Medicaid expansion.
Medicaid is the largest source of insurance coverage for people
with HIV, covering more than 40 percent of people with HIV and
care. And the 37 States that expanded Medicaid show how it can
play an important role in addressing the opioid crisis as well.
In some of these States, as many as four out of five people
receiving treatment for opioid addiction are insured by
Medicaid.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also plays a
very important role addressing these public health crises and
many others. Yet, the Trump administration proposes cutting its
budget by a tenth. This proposes cutting immunization efforts
by $78 million, even amid an alarming measles outbreak in my
home State and several others. It proposes cutting work on
birth defects and disabilities by $44 million and proposes
cutting efforts to combat antibiotic-resistant pathogens and
emerging infectious diseases by $103 million despite the World
Health Organization labeling AMR, ``one of the biggest threats
to global health.''
And when it comes to medical research, this budget is a
small step forward and a marathon sprint back. I do applaud the
administration's call for more pediatric cancer research. For
every new penny President Trump proposes for pediatric cancer
research, however, he proposes cutting a dollar from the
National Institutes of Health. Cutting medical research by 13
percent, as he proposed, would slow our efforts to advance our
understanding of Alzheimer's disease, develop vaccines for HIV
and flu, and treatments and cures for every other kind of
cancer.
And at a time when our Nation is facing a health
professional shortage, it is proposing to cut almost $800
million from healthcare workforce training programs that
support tuition assistance, loan forgiveness, and training for
several hundred thousand health professionals annually.
This budget also continues the Trump-Pence administration's
harmful trend of putting ideology over women's health and
reproductive freedoms. Its language specifically excluding
Planned Parenthood from Federal funding is just one of the many
alarming steps backwards for women's healthcare from this
administration.
Another is the recent announcement stripping Title X family
planning funds from several qualified Planned Parenthood
affiliates, despite their proven record helping millions of
people struggling to make ends meet, get birth control, cancer
screenings, and other basic health services.
Another example is the administration's gag rule, which
will push Planned Parenthood out of the program altogether,
interfere with patients' ability to learn about their full
range of reproductive care options and prevent people from
across the country from getting the care they need with the
providers that they trust.
Once again, the Trump administration proposes eliminating
safety net programs that provide critical assistance to
millions of vulnerable families, like the Low-Income Home
Energy Assistance Program, which helps families afford heating
and cooling, and the Community Services Block Grant, which
gives States resources to address the challenge of poverty, and
eliminating funding for preschool development grants, which
provide high-quality preschool to tens of thousands of
families. It is clear that we are facing a childcare crisis in
this country. Parents struggle every day to find and pay for
high-quality programs. We need more investments in that, not
cuts in early childhood education.
And this budget continues to show disregard for families
fleeing violence and extreme poverty in Central America. This
budget proposes a gimmicky $2 billion contingency fund on the
mandatory side for the unaccompanied children program, in
addition to the base discretionary appropriation. Let me be
clear. I want to make sure that every child in HHS custody is
well cared for, but I have been deeply disappointed in
President Trump's treatment of migrant children, from
heartlessly separating children from their parents to
attempting to undermine protections for migrant children. And I
have been frustrated with your Department for failing to sound
the alarm on the lasting damage that family separation would
cause, sharing information with the Department of Homeland
Security so they can target potential sponsors for deportation,
and relying heavily on unlicensed temporary facilities which
are three times as expensive as permanent beds in licensed
centers, to say nothing of my concern that the Office of
Refugee Resettlement was tracking young women's reproductive
health and that former Director Scott Lloyd was personally
interfering with young women's decisions about their bodies.
Finally, Mr. Secretary, I am concerned by a recent proposal
you outlined in a letter to my office to restructure the Office
of the Assistant Secretary for Health. That restructuring would
impact programs that serve adolescents, women, low-income
communities, and more, and I am very concerned that that
proposal, much like this budget proposal, would serve very
little purpose beyond prioritizing ideology over the health
needs of families in this country.
Mr. Secretary, finally, I just want to note it is
inaccurate to claim the Budget Control Act requires the
President to submit his budget at sequestration levels. In
fact, just 2 years ago, President Trump's budget proposed an
increase to the caps for defense spending. So I hope you do not
rely on that excuse for decisions in this budget.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator Murray.
So, Secretary, you and I have talked about the--oh, I am
sorry. I am so eager. I have so many questions I want to ask
here. Maybe you want to waive your opening statement.
[Laughter.]
Senator Blunt. Go ahead with your opening statement.
SUMMARY STATEMENT OF HON. ALEX AZAR
Secretary Azar. Well, thank you very much, Chairman Blunt
and Ranking Member Murray. Thank you for inviting me to discuss
the President's budget for fiscal year 2020.
It is an honor to have spent the year since I last appeared
before this committee leading the Department of Health and
Human Services. The men and women of HHS (Department of Health
and Human Services) have delivered remarkable results during
that time, including record new and generic drug approvals, new
affordable health insurance options, and signs that the trend
in drug overdose deaths is beginning to flatten and decline.
The budget proposes $87.1 billion in fiscal year 2020
discretionary spending for HHS while moving toward our vision
for a healthcare system that puts American patients first. It
is important to note that HHS had the largest discretionary
budget of any non-defense department in 2018, which means that
staying within the caps set by Congress has required difficult
choices that I am sure many will find quite hard to
countenance. I know that members of this committee have
delivered strong investments in HHS' discretionary budget in
the past, especially at the National Institutes of Health, and
I want to be clear that HHS appreciates this work over the
years.
Today I want to highlight how the President's budget
supports a number of important goals for HHS.
First, the budget proposes reforms to help deliver
Americans' truly patient-centered affordable care. The budget
would empower States to create personalized healthcare options
that put you as the American patient in control and ensure you
are treated like a human being and not like a number.
Flexibilities in the budget would make this possible while
promoting fiscal responsibility and maintaining protections for
people with preexisting conditions.
Second, the budget strengthens Medicare to help secure our
promise to America's seniors. The budget extends the solvency
of the Medicare trust fund for 8 years while the program's
budget will still grow at a 6.9 percent annual rate. In three
major ways, the budget lowers cost for seniors and tackles
special interests that are currently taking advantage of the
Medicare program.
First, we propose changes to discourage hospitals from
acquiring smaller practices just to charge Medicare more.
Second, we address overpayments to post-acute care
providers.
And third, we will take on drug companies that are
profiting off of seniors and Medicare. Through a historic
modernization of Medicare Part D, we will lower seniors' out-
of-pocket costs and create incentives for lower list prices. I
believe there are many areas of common ground on drug pricing
where we can work together to pass bipartisan legislation to
help people.
The efforts we proposed around taking on special interests
in the Medicare program are so sensible and bipartisan, in
fact, that even the ``New York Times'' editorial board praised
these ideas last week.
We also protect seniors by transferring funding for
graduate medical education and uncompensated care from Medicare
to the general Treasury fund so that all taxpayers, not just
our seniors, share these important costs.
Finally, the budget fully supports HHS' five point strategy
for the opioid epidemic: better access to prevention,
treatment, and recovery services; better targeting the
availability of overdose-reversing drugs; better data on the
epidemic; better research on pain and addiction; and better
pain management practices. The budget builds on appropriations
made by this committee and provides $4.8 billion towards these
efforts, including the $1 billion State Opioid Response
Program, which we have focused on access to medication-assisted
treatment, behavioral support, and recovery services.
The budget also invests in other public health priorities,
including fighting infectious disease at home and abroad. It
proposes $291 million in funding for the first year of
President Trump's plan to use the effective treatment and
prevention tools that we have today to end the HIV epidemic in
America by 2030.
HHS also remains vigilant on other public health
challenges, including the current epidemic of teen use of e-
cigarettes. In fact, I am pleased to announce that today the
FDA (Food and Drug Administration) is issuing warning letters
to companies for making, selling, or distributing liquids used
for e-cigarettes that have misleading labeling or advertising
that resembles prescription cough syrups. The Trump
administration supports a comprehensive balanced policy
approach to regulating e-cigarettes, closing the on-ramp for
kids to become addicted to nicotine, while allowing for the
promise of an off-ramp for adult smokers of combustible tobacco
products.
This year's budget will advance American healthcare and
help deliver on the promises we made to the American people,
and I look forward to working with this committee on our shared
priorities and I look forward to your questions today. Thank
you very much.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Alex Azar
The mission of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS) is to enhance and protect the health and well-being of all
Americans by providing for effective health and human services and by
fostering sound, sustained advances in the sciences underlying
medicine, public health, and social services. This work is organized
into five strategic goals, and is unified by a vision of our
healthcare, human services, and public health systems working better
for the Americans we serve. By undertaking these efforts in
partnerships with States, territories, Tribal governments, local
communities, and the private sector, we will succeed at putting
Americans' health first.
Since I testified before this committee in 2018, the HHS team has
delivered impressive results. This past year saw HHS, the Department of
Labor, and the Department of Treasury open up new affordable health
coverage options, at the same time the Affordable Care Act (ACA)
exchanges were stabilized, with the national average benchmark premium
on HealthCare.gov dropping for the first time ever. According to a
report by the Council of Economic Advisers, actions taken by the
Administration, along with the elimination of the individual mandate
penalty, are estimated to provide a net benefit to Americans of $453
billion over the next decade.
Congress worked with the Administration to deliver new resources
for fighting the opioid crisis, allowing HHS to make more than $2
billion in opioid-related grants to States, territories, Tribes, and
local communities in 2018. Prescriptions for medication-assisted
treatment options and naloxone are up, while legal opioid prescribing
is down. HHS also worked to bring down prescription drug prices,
including by setting another record for most generic drug approvals by
FDA in a fiscal year and working with Congress to ensure pharmacists
can inform Americans about the lowest-cost prescription drug options.
The President's Fiscal Year 2020 Budget supports HHS's continued
work on these important goals by prioritizing key investments that help
advance the Administration's commitments to improve American
healthcare, address the opioid crisis, lower the cost of drugs, and
streamline Federal programs, while reforming the Department's programs
to better serve the American people.
The Budget proposes $87.1 billion in discretionary budget authority
and $1.2 trillion in mandatory funding for HHS. It reflects HHS's
commitment to making the Federal Government more efficient and
effective by focusing spending in areas with the highest impact.
HHS's Fiscal Year 2020 Budget reflects decisions not just to be
prudent with taxpayer dollars, but also to stay within the budget caps
Congress created in the Budget Control Act. With the largest non-
defense discretionary appropriation of any cabinet agency in 2019, HHS
must make large reductions in spending in order to stay within
Congress's caps, set a prudent fiscal course, and provide for other
national priorities. This budget demonstrates that HHS can prioritize
its important work within these constraints, and proposes measures to
reform HHS programs while putting Americans' health first.
reform, strengthen, and modernize the nation's health care system
Reforming the Individual Market for Insurance
The Budget proposes bold reforms to empower States and consumers to
improve American healthcare. These reforms return the management of
healthcare to the States, which are more capable of tailoring programs
to their unique markets, increasing options for patients and providers,
and promoting financial stability and responsibility, while protecting
people with pre-existing conditions and high healthcare costs.
The Budget includes proposals to make it easier to open and use
Health Savings Accounts and reform the medical liability system to
allow providers to focus on patients instead of lawsuits.
Lowering the Cost of Prescription Drugs
Putting America's health first includes improving access to safe,
effective, and affordable prescription drugs. The Budget proposes to
expand the Administration's work to lower prescription drug prices and
reduce beneficiary out-of-pocket costs. The Administration has proposed
and, in many cases, made significant strides to implement bold
regulatory reforms to increase competition, improve negotiation, create
incentives to lower list prices, reduce out-of- pocket costs, improve
transparency, and address foreign free-riding. Congress has already
taken bipartisan action to end pharmacy gag clauses, so patients can
work with pharmacists to lower their out-of-pocket costs. The Budget
proposes to:
--Stop regulatory tactics used by brand manufacturers to impede
generic competition;
--Ensure Federal and State programs get their fair share of rebates,
and enact penalties to prevent the growth of prescription drug
prices beyond inflation;
--Improve the Medicare Part D program to lower seniors' out-of-pocket
costs, create an out-of-pocket cap for the first time, and end
the incentives that reward list price increases;
--Improve transparency and accuracy of payments under Medicare Part
B, including imposing payment penalties to discourage pay-for-
delay agreements; and
--Build on America's successful generic market with a robust
biosimilars agenda, by improving the efficient approval of safe
and effective biosimilars, ending anti- competitive practices
that delay or restrict biosimilar market entry, and harnessing
payment and cost-sharing incentives to increase biosimilar
adoption.
Reforming Medicare and Medicaid
Medicare and Medicaid represent important promises made to older
and vulnerable Americans, promises that President Trump and his
administration take seriously. The Budget supports reforms to make
these programs work better for the people they serve and deliver better
value for the investments we make. This includes a plan to modernize
Medicare Part D to lower drug costs for the Medicare program and for
Medicare beneficiaries, as well as proposals to drive Medicare toward a
value-based payment system that puts patients in control. The Budget
also provides additional flexibility to States for their Medicaid
program, putting Medicaid on a path to fiscal stability by
restructuring its financing, reducing waste, and focusing the program
on the low-income populations Medicaid was originally intended to
serve: the elderly, people with disabilities, children, and pregnant
women.
Paying for Value
The Administration is focused on ensuring Federal health programs
produce better care at the lowest possible cost for the American
people. We believe that consumers, working with providers, are in the
best position to determine value. The Budget supports an expansion of
value-based payments in Medicare with this strategy in mind. That
expansion, along with implementation of a package of other reforms,
will improve quality, promote competition, reduce the Federal burden on
providers and patients, and focus payments on value instead of volume
or site of service. Two of these reforms are: (1) a value-based
purchasing program for hospital outpatient departments and ambulatory
surgical centers; and (2) a consolidated hospital quality program in
Medicare to reduce duplicative requirements and create a focus on
driving improvements in patients' health outcomes. Advancing value in
Medicare along with the other reforms in the Budget will extend the
life of the Medicare Trust Fund by 8 years, while also helping to drive
value and innovation throughout America's entire health system.
Furthermore, in December the administration released a report entitled
Reforming America's Healthcare System Through Choice and Competition,
which contains a series of recommendations to improve the healthcare
system by better engaging consumers and unleashing competition across
providers.
protect the health of americans where they live, learn, work, and play
Combating the Opioid Crisis
The Administration has made historic investments to address opioid
misuse, abuse, and overdose, but significant work must still be done to
fully turn the tide of this public health crisis. The Budget supports
HHS's five-part strategy to:
--Improve access to prevention, treatment, and recovery services,
including the full range of medication-assisted treatments;
--Better target the availability of overdose-reversing drugs;
--Strengthen our understanding of the crisis through better public
health data and reporting;
--Provide support for cutting edge research on pain and addiction;
and
--Improve pain management practices.
The Budget provides $4.8 billion to combat the opioid overdose
epidemic. The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA) will continue all opioid activities at the same funding level
as fiscal year 2019, including the successful State Opioid Response
Program and grants, which had a special focus on increasing access to
medication-assisted treatment--the gold standard for treating opioid
addiction. At this level, the Budget also provides new funding for
grants to accredited medical schools and teaching hospitals to develop
substance use disorder treatment curricula.
In fiscal year 2020, the Health Resources and Services
Administration (HRSA) will continue to make investments to address
substance use disorder, including opioid use disorder, through the
Rural Communities Opioid Response Program, the National Health Service
Corps, behavioral health workforce programs, and the Health Centers
Program.
Medicare and Medicaid policies and funding will also play a
critical role in combating the opioid crisis. The Budget proposes
allowing States to provide full Medicaid benefits for 1 year postpartum
for pregnant women diagnosed with a substance use disorder. The Budget
also proposes to set minimum standards for Drug Utilization Review
programs, allowing for better oversight of opioid dispensing in
Medicaid. Additionally, it proposes a collaboration between the Centers
for Medicare & Medicaid Services and the Drug Enforcement
Administration to stop providers from inappropriate opioid prescribing.
the ending hiv epidemic initiative
Recent advances in HIV prevention and treatment create the
opportunity to not only control the spread of HIV, but to end this
epidemic in America. By accelerating proven public health strategies,
HHS will aim to reduce new infections by 90 percent within 10 years,
ending the epidemic in America. The Budget invests $291 million in
fiscal year 2020 for the first phase of this initiative, which will
target areas with the highest infection rates with the goal of reducing
the number of new diagnoses by 75 percent in 5 years.
This effort focuses on investing in existing, proven activities and
strategies and putting new public health resources on the ground. The
initiative includes a new $140 million investment in the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to test and diagnose new cases,
rapidly link newly infected individuals to treatment, connect at-risk
individuals to Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP), expand HIV
surveillance, and directly support States and localities in the fight
against HIV.
Clients receiving medical care through the Ryan White HIV/AIDS
Program (RWHAP) were virally suppressed at a record level of 85.9
percent in 2017. The Budget includes $70 million in new funds for RWHAP
within HRSA to increase direct healthcare and support services, further
increasing viral suppression among patients in the target areas. The
Budget includes $50 million in HRSA for expanded PrEP services,
outreach, and care coordination in community health centers.
Additionally, the Budget also prioritizes the reauthorization of RWHAP
to ensure Federal funds are allocated to address the changing landscape
of HIV across the United States.
For the Indian Health Service (IHS), the Budget includes $25
million in new funds to screen for HIV and prevent and treat Hepatitis
C, a significant burden among persons living with HIV/AIDS. The Budget
also includes $6 million for the National Institutes of Health's
regional Centers for AIDS Research to refine implementation strategies
to assure effectiveness of prevention and treatment interventions.
In addition to this effort, the Budget funds other activities that
address HIV/AIDS including $54 million for the Minority HIV/AIDS Fund
within the Office of the Secretary and $116 million for the Minority
AIDS program in SAMHSA. These funds allow HHS to target funding to
minority communities and individuals disproportionately impacted by HIV
infection.
Prioritizing Biodefense and Preparedness
The Administration prioritizes the Nation's safety, including its
ability to respond to acts of bioterrorism, natural disasters, and
emerging infectious diseases. HHS is at the forefront of the Nation's
defense against public health threats. The Budget provides
approximately $2.7 billion to the Public Health and Social Services
Emergency Fund within the Office of the Secretary to strengthen HHS's
biodefense and emergency preparedness capacity. The Budget also
proposes a new transfer authority that will allow HHS to enhance its
ability to respond more quickly to public health threats. Additionally,
the Budget supports the government-wide implementation of the
President's National Biodefense Strategy.
The Budget supports advanced research and development of medical
countermeasures against chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear,
and infectious disease threats, including pandemic influenza. The
Budget also funds late-stage development and procurement of medical
countermeasures for the Strategic National Stockpile and emergency
public health and medical assistance to State and local governments,
protecting America against threats such as anthrax, botulism, Ebola,
and chemical, radiological, and nuclear agents.
strengthen the economic and social well-being of americans across the
lifespan
Promoting Upward Mobility
The Budget promotes independence and personal responsibility,
supporting the proven notion that work empowers parents and lifts
families out of poverty. To ensure Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families (TANF) enables participants to work, the Budget includes a
proposal to ensure States will invest in creating opportunities for
low-income families, and to simplify and improve the work participation
rate States must meet under TANF. The Budget also proposes to create
Opportunity and Economic Mobility Demonstrations, allowing States to
streamline certain welfare programs and tailor them to meet the
specific needs of their populations.
The Budget supports Medicaid reforms to empower individuals to
reach self-sufficiency and financial independence, including a proposal
to permit states to include asset tests in identifying an individual's
economic need, allowing more targeted determinations than are possible
with the use of a Modified Adjusted Gross Income standard alone.
Improving Outcomes in Child Welfare
The Budget supports implementation of the Family First Prevention
Services Act of 2018 and includes policies to further improve child
welfare outcomes and prevent child maltreatment. The Budget also
expands the Regional Partnership Grants program, which addresses the
considerable impact of substance use, including opioids use, on child
welfare.
Strengthening the Indian Health Service
Reflecting HHS's commitment to the health and well-being of
American Indians and Alaska Natives, the Budget provides $5.9 billion
for IHS, which is an additional $392 million above the fiscal year 2019
Continuing Resolution. The increase supports direct healthcare services
across Indian Country, including hospitals and health clinics,
Purchased/Referred Care, dental health, mental health and alcohol and
substance abuse services. The Budget invests in new programs to improve
patient care, quality, and oversight. The Budget fully funds staffing
for new and replacement facilities, new Tribes, and Contract Support
Costs, ensuring Tribes have the necessary resources to successfully
manage self-governance programs.
foster sound, sustained advances in the sciences
Promoting Research and Prevention
NIH is the leading biomedical research agency in the world, and its
funding supports scientific breakthroughs that save lives. The Budget
supports strategic investments in biomedical research and activities
with significant national impact.
NIH launched the Helping to End Addiction Long-term (HEAL)
initiative in April 2018 to advance research on pain and addiction.
Toward this goal, NIH announced funding opportunities for the historic
HEALing Communities Study, which will select several communities to
measure the impact of investing in the integration of evidence-based
prevention, treatment, and recovery across multiple health and justice
settings. The Budget provides $500 million to continue the HEAL
initiative in fiscal year 2020.
The Budget supports a targeted investment in the National Cancer
Institute to accelerate pediatric cancer research. Cancer is the
leading cause of death from disease among children in the United
States. Approximately 16,000 children are diagnosed with cancer in the
United States each year. While progress in treating some childhood
cancers has been made, the science and treatment of childhood cancers
remains challenging. Through this initiative, NIH will enhance drug
discovery, better understand the biology of all pediatric cancers, and
create a national data resource for pediatric cancer research. This
initiative will develop safer and more effective treatments, and
provide a path for changing the course of cancer in children.
The new National Institute for Research on Safety and Quality
(NIRSQ) proposed in the Budget will continue key research activities
currently led by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. These
activities will support researchers by developing the knowledge, tools,
and data needed to improve the healthcare system.
Addressing Emerging Public Health Challenges
CDC is the Nation's leading public health agency, and the Budget
supports its work putting science into action.
Approximately 700 women die each year in the United States as a
result of pregnancy or delivery complications or the aggravation of an
unrelated condition by the physiologic effects of pregnancy. Findings
from Maternal Mortality Review Committees indicate that more than half
of these deaths are preventable. The Budget supports data analysis on
maternal deaths and efforts to identify prevention opportunities.
The United States must address emerging public health threats, both
at home and abroad, to protect the health of its citizens. The Budget
invests $10 million to support CDC's response to Acute Flaccid Myelitis
(AFM), a rare but serious condition that affects the nervous system and
weakens muscles and reflexes. With this funding, CDC will work closely
with national experts, healthcare providers, and state and local health
departments to thoroughly investigate AFM.
The Budget also provides $100 million for CDC's global health
security activities. Moving forward, CDC will implement a regional hub
office model and primarily focus their global health security capacity
building activities on areas where they have seen the most success: lab
and diagnostic capacity, surveillance systems, training of disease
detectives, and establishing strong emergency operation centers. In
addition, CDC will continue on-going efforts to identify health
emergencies, track dangerous diseases, and rapidly respond to outbreaks
and other public health threats around the world, including continuing
work on Ebola response.
The Budget also strengthens the health security of our Nation by
continuing CDC's support to State and local government partners in
implementing programs, establishing guidelines, and conducting research
to tackle public health challenges and build preparedness.
Innovations in the Food and Drug Administration
FDA plays a major role in protecting public health by assuring the
safety of the Nation's food supply and regulating medical products and
tobacco. The Budget provides $6.1 billion for FDA, which is an
additional $643 million above the fiscal year 2019 Continuing
Resolution. The Budget includes resources to promote competition and
foster innovation, such as modernizing generic drug review and creating
a new medical data enterprise. The Budget advances digital health
technology to reduce the time and cost of market entry, supports FDA
opioid activities at international mail facilities to increase
inspections of suspicious packages, strengthens the outsourcing
facility sector to ensure quality compounded drugs, and pilots a
pathogen inactivation technology to ensure the blood supply continues
to be safe. FDA will continue to modernize the food safety system in
fiscal year 2020.
promote effective and efficient management and stewardship
Almost one quarter of total Federal outlays are made by HHS. The
Department employs more than 78,000 permanent and temporary employees
and administers more grant dollars than all other Federal agencies
combined. Efficiencies in HHS management have a tremendous impact on
Federal spending as a whole.
Advancing Fiscal Stewardship
HHS recognizes its immense responsibility to manage taxpayer
dollars wisely. HHS ensures the integrity of all its financial
transactions by leveraging financial management expertise, implementing
strong business processes, and effectively managing risk.
In an effort to operate Medicare and Medicaid efficiently and
effectively, both to rein in wasteful spending and to better serve
beneficiaries, HHS is implementing actions such as enhanced provider
screening, prior authorization, and sophisticated predictive analytics
technology, to reduce improper payments in Medicare and Medicaid
without increasing burden on providers or delaying Americans' access to
care or to critical medications. HHS continues to work with law
enforcement partners to target fraud and abuse in healthcare, and the
Budget increases investment in healthcare fraud and abuse activities.
The Budget includes a series of proposals to strengthen Medicare and
Medicaid oversight, including increasing prior authorization,enhancing
Part D plans' ability to address fraud, and strengthening the
Department's ability to recoup overpayments made to States on behalf of
ineligible Medicaid beneficiaries.
Implementing ReImagine HHS
HHS eagerly took up the call in the Administration's Government-
wide Reform Plan to more efficiently and effectively serve the American
people. HHS developed a plan --``ReImagine HHS''--organized around a
number of initiatives.
ReImagine HHS is identifying a variety of ways to reduce Federal
spending and improve the functioning of HHS's programs through more
efficient operations. For example, the Buy Smarter initiative
streamlines HHS's procurement process by using new and emerging
technologies.
conclusion
Americans deserve healthcare, human services, and public health
programs that work for them and make good use of taxpayer dollars. The
men and women of HHS are committed, innovative, hardworking public
servants who work each day to improve the lives of all Americans.
President Trump's fiscal year 2020 Budget will help advance us toward
that goal, accomplish the Department's vital mission, and put
Americans' health first.
Senator Blunt. Well, thank you.
Now we will get to those questions. I am hopeful that we
can get through most of our questions by the vote and leave
sometime shortly after 11:45. But if we do not, I will come
back. And there will be a second round of questions for anybody
that wants it. So I would ask everybody, including me, to stick
with their time limit.
ORGAN/LIVER ALLOCATION POLICY
So the first question I almost got into a moment ago is
about the new liver allocation policy, the solid organ
allocation policy, something that Senator Moran and I have been
very interested in. We had one meeting with the Organ
Transplant Procurement Network group, and frankly our view of
that meeting was very different than what they finally did.
Both the University of Kansas and Washington University in St.
Louis are really among the leading stakeholders in this in
terms of the transplants that they are part of.
I guess the problem is that States in the Midwest, States
in the South, States that have lots of small communities tend
to be much greater organ donors. And obviously, as long as we
had a regional view of this, that was a benefit to their
neighbors.
There has been a dramatic decrease in availability of lung
and liver transplants at Barnes-Jewish Hospital in St. Louis
since the new lung policy went into effect.
I think there will certainly be a lawsuit filed here. Will
you commit today that you will ask OPTN (Organ Procurement and
Transplantation Network), the transplant group, not to move
forward with this controversial policy until that lawsuit has
been dealt with?
Secretary Azar. Well, Mr. Chairman, I am concerned about
the liver allocation policy issues you raised. Frankly, any
transplant organ allocation policy issues are quite difficult
politically and as a matter of public health. I received a
letter from you and many others about the most recent organ--
the liver transplantation allocation policies out of OPTN. And
we requested of them to think again and to ensure--I believe it
was--was it the Kansas and Missouri providers that we wanted to
ensure, especially that comments that came in at the last
minute or perhaps came in late were fully considered by OPTN.
We recently received a letter back in response to my
challenge to them, which I believe your staff has access to,
where basically they said they went through the procedures.
They considered all of the comments, and they remained
steadfast in their conclusion regarding the science and
technical aspects of the allocation decision they made.
I do believe my cards are played out here. Congress
deliberately set up the OPTN system to keep people like me from
actually dictating the policy allocations. But I am happy to
work with the committee on any other solutions here to look at
and ensure that the fair and scientifically valid treatment has
been given here.
Senator Blunt. Well, I would think that one of the reasons
the old system worked was that people were more encouraged to
be donors if they believed that people in their community would
benefit from that.
On liver transplants under the new policy, we think there
would be 32 percent fewer transplants in Missouri. I think
Barnes-Jewish Hospital is number four or five in the country in
transplants. And they have told me since this started, they are
now having to send teams of doctors across the country to get
organs that would have been available under the old policy
locally. I think it has further complicated and added expense
and precious time to the system.
We are going to continue to watch that.
UNACCOMPANIED ALIEN CHILDREN
Let me ask one more question here on a big issue, and that
is your role in providing security and taking care of
unaccompanied children. You have nothing to do with border
security, but you wind up with a great responsibility. Would
you talk about how that has changed in the last few months?
Secretary Azar. Absolutely, Mr. Chairman.
We are in a tremendous crisis at the border right now. We
are getting 300 to 350 unaccompanied alien children crossing
the border and referred to HHS every single day right now.
These are 10, 12, 13, 15-year-old kids. They are not coming
with parents. They are coming across the border by themselves.
And these are historic levels for us. That is a 97 percent
increase in February from the previous year February. It is
just not sustainable at this rate.
I know the ranking member raised in her opening statement
concern about temporary influx facilities. I will work with
this committee to do anything we can to take care of the
children appropriately, any ideas you have how to ensure that
we are doing that well. I would love to enhance our fixed
permanent capacity. It is cheaper. It is more economical. We
have been working on that. It is slow to do. You understand
government procurements and government contracting around
leasing is slow.
We need help. We need help, and at this rate, the funding
even for this year will not be satisfactory. And I want to be
transparent with this committee in particular about that. We
are working with OMB (Office of Management and Budget) on what
that total funding needs could be at the current rate, but it
would exceed where we are even with the transfer and
reprogramming that I notified the committee about. It is beyond
belief, the level of children that are coming across the border
right now.
Senator Blunt. And in your case, the unaccompanied
children.
Secretary Azar. These are unaccompanied children. These are
kids just coming across. They do not have a parent with them.
They are coming by themselves.
Senator Blunt. All right. I have more questions on this,
but I am going to stick with my time restraint. I have a
feeling they will be asked by others. If not, I will ask them
when we get to another round.
Senator Murray.
Senator Murray. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, despite continued assertions that your
budget guarantees affordable healthcare and protects people
with preexisting conditions, the fact is that the
administration is doing everything it can to actually sabotage
healthcare. And this budget appears to be just more of the
same. This budget continues to push harmful policies that
undermine healthcare for millions of people across the country.
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
Your budget calls for repealing and replacing the ACA
(Affordable Care Act) with the failed Trump Care bill, which
was rejected last Congress, and in his clearest message yet to
patients and families, that he sees their healthcare coverage
as nothing more than some kind of political football, last week
President Trump sided with the ruling that all of the ACA
should be struck down. All of it.
Now, according to reports, you initially opposed President
Trump on that and issued a statement of support.
So I wanted to ask you today, did you initially object to
the President's decision to side with the Texas court? Because
you know the impact that this would have. It would be
devastating for so many families.
Secretary Azar. As you can appreciate, the advice of a
cabinet member to the President of the United States is highly
confidential and it would not be appropriate for me to comment
on that.
What I would say is the position the administration took in
the Affordable Care Act litigation is an appropriate position,
supporting a district court's decision. Reasonable minds can
differ on this question of legal issues.
This is not our policy position. That is a legal conclusion
about the ACA, and that litigation, which we did not bring--we
are a party. I am the party in the litigation, but we want to
protect preexisting conditions, if the litigation ends up in
that position. We want to work with you to secure better care
for people and make sure all the types of issues you have
raised are taken care of in any kind of new legislation.
Senator Murray. Well, let me just ask you. As Secretary of
Health, do you agree that if this ruling is upheld, as the
administration is arguing for, it will result in tens of
millions of people losing their coverage and allow insurers to
discriminate against people with preexisting conditions if it
is upheld?
Secretary Azar. Well, the burden would be on us to work
together to actually come up with a better care plan.
Senator Murray. That is not the question. The question if
the court goes through with the ruling, as you have requested
them to, will it result----
Secretary Azar. Well, you would not have Medicaid expansion
and you would not have the exchange subsidies, and we would
work with you to come up----
Senator Murray. And preexisting conditions.
Secretary Azar [continuing]. With a better system that
actually we hope delivers better care for people.
Senator Murray. I have heard that before. But it would mean
that people with preexisting conditions would lose their----
Secretary Azar. The President will never agree to any
legislation that does not protect people with preexisting
conditions.
Senator Murray. I am not asking about legislation. I am
asking about the court decision.
Secretary Azar. A legal interpretation of a court case is
not a policy position about what we want to have happen for
people with preexisting conditions. We are going to fight for
people with preexisting conditions under all circumstances, but
a legal judgment filed by the Justice Department is different
than a policy position to work with you to protect people with
pre-ex.
Senator Murray. Well, it is pretty clear if the
administration goes after this in court and wins, people will
lose their preexisting conditions at that point.
TITLE X
So let me just go on. I wanted to ask you about Title X. As
you know, I am really concerned about this administration's
constant efforts to undermine the historically bipartisan Title
X family planning program. It is the only Federal program
dedicated to contraceptive healthcare and family planning
services and actually helps 4 million people annually get
services like cancer screenings, contraception, crucial
preventive health services.
Your Title X domestic gag rule will take effect very soon,
and it will bar providers from talking to their patients about
all the family planning options. The American Medical
Association has actually called that rule, ``a violation of
patients' rights under the Code of Medical Ethics.'' And they
have actually joined Planned Parenthood to fight that in court.
You also announced the Title X grant recipients for 2019,
dropped five Planned Parenthood affiliates, make it harder for
tens of thousands of women to get the care they need, instead
have ordered funding to an ideologically driven organization
that does not even offer FDA-approved birth control. And you
notified, as I mentioned earlier, your intent to reorganize the
offices that administer both the Title X and teen pregnancy
prevention.
So I just have a few seconds left. If you can answer yes or
no. I wanted to ask you, is birth control an evidence-based
family planning option?
Secretary Azar. We support the full range of family
planning. That is why we fully funded and kept the Title X
program flat funding even as we cut other parts of the budget.
So we do support access to contraception and birth control and
the full range of family planning options.
Senator Murray. And you believe birth control is an
evidence-based family planning program.
Secretary Azar. It is part of the Title X program and we
support that.
Senator Murray. Well, should HHS award scarce Federal
funding family planning dollars to entities that do not
prescribe or provide birth control?
Secretary Azar. So the one entity that you are referring to
actually as part of its grant is required to have--there are
going to be seven federally qualified health centers that are
actually part of their--these are always done as a program with
a grantee and sub-grantees. So they have to offer across the
program the full range of family planning alternatives required
by statute.
Senator Murray. Including birth control.
Secretary Azar. Yes. So they will have other providers in
there, the seven FQHCs (federally Qualified Health Center) that
are a----
Senator Murray. So it will make it harder for women. They
got to get pushed around. I get it. Okay.
And my time is out.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator Murray.
Senator Alexander.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Mr. Secretary.
NIH FUNDING
Let me first pass a compliment to Senator Blunt and Senator
Murray, the ranking member, and other members of the
subcommittee for 3 consecutive years of significant--4
consecutive years of significant increases of funding for the
National Institutes of Health. We see the results of that
everywhere, and I fully support it. And I thank you for your
leadership. Senator Murray, Senator Durbin, and you have been
consistent supporters of that.
ENDING THE HIV EPIDEMIC INITIATIVE
Second, to the President, to you, I am proud of the
initiative that seeks to reduce HIV infections by 75 percent in
the next 5 years, 90 percent in the next 10 years. I hope you
will focus especially on those parts of the country where that
is a special problem. African Americans account for 43 percent
of HIV diagnoses. In 2016, more than 84 percent of the people
in Memphis in HIV were African American. And of the estimated
new HIV diagnoses in Tennessee, more than 25 percent were in
Memphis alone.
MEDICARE WAGE INDEX
And I want to call to your attention the Medicare area wage
index, which I will not ask you a question about, but that is
continuing to be a reason why hospitals, especially in rural
Tennessee and other parts of rural America, close because of
the unfairness of that index.
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
Now, Mr. Secretary, I heard the question by the Senator
from Washington about the Affordable Care Act. I think it is a
pretty far-fetched case in my opinion, but I am not the judge.
I am pretty sure that if there were any decision that resulted
in the Affordable Care Act being overturned, that the court
would stay the effect of the decision, giving Congress and the
President time to do whatever they wanted to do.
Let me ask you this question. Have you made any changes in
the way you are administering the Affordable Care Act as a
result of the Department of Justice's position on this
litigation?
Secretary Azar. We have and will not make any changes to
how we administer the Affordable Care Act in light of the
litigation. It could be a year, 2 years before we get any final
ruling by an ultimate--final court of jurisdiction. I have
instructed my team, my organization. We continue to implement
the Affordable Care Act faithfully and fully across the board
without regard to litigation positions taken by the
administration in court.
Senator Alexander. So whether you like it or not, you
recognize it is the law.
Secretary Azar. Absolutely.
Senator Alexander. On a separate question, the committee
that I am Chairman of and Senator Murray is the ranking member,
the Health Committee, has been working with the Finance
Committee, Senators Grassley and Widen, for the last several
months to see if we could identify a series of steps to reduce
healthcare costs. Testimony before our committee is that up to
half of healthcare costs are unnecessary. We are working on
that the same way we worked on opioids, which means Democrats
and Republicans working together, various committees working
together, staffs working together. So far, so good. Our goal in
the HELP (Health, Education, Labor and Pensions) Committee is
to see if we can produce a recommendation, a markup for the
full Senate by June or July.
Are you and the administration willing to work with us and
support our efforts to address these issues like surprise
medical bills, prescription drugs, direct primary care,
transparency, rebates, and other issues? If we are going to
work in a bipartisan way, is the administration willing to
support our efforts to get a result in this way?
Secretary Azar. We are fully supportive of the efforts of
you, Senator Murray, Chairman Grassley, and Senator Wyden
working together on a bipartisan basis across all of those
issues.
OPIOIDS
Senator Alexander. On opioids, President Trump asked the
president of China to make all forms of ethanol illegal in
China, and China has announced that it will do that starting
May 1st. I want to congratulate you and the President for that
and thank the officials of China for that because our Drug
Enforcement Agency has told us that, one way or the other, most
of the fentanyl that comes into the United States starts in
China. I do not have time for you to answer a question.
But as we think about opioids, I hope that you will keep an
eye on the effect it is having on people with pain while we are
getting rid of opioids that are used inappropriately. We want
to make sure that they are used appropriately by doctors. And
the CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
guidelines, about which there will be a report in May, and the
FDA report in August should be seen as advice and guidelines,
leaving the decisions in the hands of individual doctors, and I
hope you will help us do that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator Alexander. And I want to
say that having you and Senator Murray on this committee to
speak on things like the healthcare issues and moving forward
on NIH research makes a real difference, having both of you
here as the leaders of the authorizing committee, and your
leadership has really mattered particularly on what we have
been able to do at NIH (National Institutes of Health). And
nobody has been more involved in that than Senator Durbin.
Senator Durbin.
Senator Durbin. And congratulations to you and Senator
Murray. This 4 years consistent 5 percent real growth at NIH is
saving lives. The President's recommendation of making a cut in
medical research I believe will be roundly dismissed by both
political parties, and I hope that that is the outcome soon. I
thank you all, including Senator Alexander.
So, Mr. Secretary, I have so many questions and so little
time, as they say.
UNACCOMPANIED ALIEN CHILDREN
Let me go to this unaccompanied children issue for a
minute. When I asked the Inspector General to investigate the
zero tolerance policy of the Trump administration, which
forcibly removed over 2,800 children from their parents when
they came to the United States, we were told that in fact the
public announcement of this program actually postdated the
initiation by as much as a year, that there could have been
thousands that had not been disclosed prior to the
announcement.
When did you first become aware, Mr. Secretary, of the
President's zero tolerance policy?
Secretary Azar. So I became aware of the Attorney General's
zero tolerance initiative basically when he announced it in the
public. I learned of it in the media in April when the zero
tolerance was announced at that point. Then subsequently as we
have been going through this I believe in the summer or late
summer, whenever--maybe it actually might have even been
through the Inspector General's work that you asked for--
learned of some of the previous piloting or demonstration work
that may have been occurring, a lot of it prior to my even
arriving at HHS.
Senator Durbin. How many children were affected by this
piloting or demonstration effort?
Secretary Azar. Well, as the Inspector General said, there
was a surmise there only of numbers. The Inspector General just
said that there could be a couple of thousand but did not know
how many in that case.
Senator Durbin. Did you play any role in crafting this
policy of zero tolerance?
Secretary Azar. No. How could I if I learned about it in
April when it was announced?
Senator Durbin. So let me ask you about unaccompanied
children now. You say there is an inflow or 300 to 350
unaccompanied children a day coming into the system. Your
website says that you have facilities for placement of up to
14,000 children and currently some 12,000 are placed in your
facilities. Is that correct?
Secretary Azar. So as of this morning, we have 12,340
children in our care. We have got 428 available beds, with
another 1,314 beds subject to--that could be available but are
usually--it is an issue of getting adequate staffing to be able
to bring them online. We are very tight right now, Senator.
Senator Durbin. Understood.
And what is the outflow of children who are actually sent
to families or placed outside your facilities?
Secretary Azar. So our discharge rate has been quite high
lately actually. We have really been prioritizing and working
on that. Our discharge rate on a 30-day reference has been 2.0
children per 100 children on discharge, and on the 7-day, we
are actually 2.4 children per 100. I think as I have looked in
the last couple of weeks, we are essentially adding almost 70
to 80 children per day just because of the inflow and outflow
rates.
Senator Durbin. So is it true, as we have been reading,
that these children are primarily coming from three countries?
Secretary Azar. That is absolutely correct. It is
Guatemala, El Salvador, and Honduras. One of the particular
challenges lately has been we have been getting--it is a lot
easier for us to place children out where they have one parent
here in the United States or a close relative because with the
TVPRA (Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act), we
can make that a faster process to check on them. Some of the
children--we have been getting an increasing mix of Guatemalan
male teenagers who have no family connections here. Those
become extremely difficult for us to try to place out.
Senator Durbin. I understand that part of it.
It is interesting to note that these children are coming
from three countries, not Nicaragua, not Costa Rica, not
Mexico, but these three countries that the President now says
he wants to cut off all foreign aid to these countries,
believing in his mind that that is somehow going to solve the
problem. I think it will make it much worse.
I think it is also important to note that this
administration eliminated the program where children could go
through the screening in home country at the local Embassy, the
U.S. Embassy and consulate. And now many of these families in
their desperation have no other recourse to test their asylee
status than come to the border of the United States and present
themselves.
So would you not believe that it would be helpful if we had
a system restored, as it was under the Obama administration,
for screening that begins in country?
Secretary Azar. Senator, I am not an immigration law
expert. I had not known about that program in country. It
actually seems consistent with the discussions that I have
heard from Secretary Nielsen about the desire to have asylum
claims adjudicated while people are in country. I will be happy
to raise that with her and see.
Senator Durbin. Please do. She was part of the group that
eliminated it. And so I hope that you will raise it.
DRUG PRICING
I have a lot of really good questions on prescription drug
pricing.
Secretary Azar. I hope we can keep working together, you
and I, and I really appreciate your support on direct-to-
consumer advertising.
Senator Durbin. Listing the price is favored by 88 percent
of the American people. Thank you, on a regulatory basis, for
moving on this. We did include it in the appropriation bill in
the last round.
Secretary Azar. We got close.
Senator Durbin. We got close. It was killed in the
conference in the House, but I am hoping and praying that
Senator Blunt and others will stand behind restoring that.
Secretary Azar. I would encourage you to take a look in the
Office of Management and Budget's ROCIS system which is where
regulations are filed when sent over to OMB for review. There
is a rule with a title referring to a final rule related to
direct-to-consumer advertising pending at OMB.
Senator Durbin. Thank you.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator Durbin.
Senator Moran.
Senator Moran. Chairman Blunt, thank you very much.
Secretary, thank you for being here.
Let me raise just a topic, and then I want to continue
where Senator Blunt left off in regard to the transplant
program.
FRAUD AND ABUSE/CRITICAL ACCESS HOSPITALS
I want to highlight for you that we have three hospitals in
Kansas, Horton, Hillsborough, and Oswego, small rural
hospitals, all of them critical access hospitals. The thing
they have in common: they are owned by a company called
EmpowerHMS. EmpowerHMS has been investigated by CMS (Centers
for Medicare & Medicaid Services) for billing fraud, but as a
result of that and other factors, business factors, management
factors, those three hospitals are in various conditions,
either shut down or have a trustee in bankruptcy attempting to
operate those hospitals.
And I would, first of all, encourage you not to change your
enforcement procedures or not to in any way pursue fraudulent
behavior any less, but recognize there is a consequence to a
community hospital that, regardless of who the owner of the
hospital is who can be gone that night, the community is left
in a circumstance in which their hospital is no longer
functioning.
And so I would hope that CMS and others at Health and Human
Services, perhaps in conjunction with our State and others, can
have a plan in place that when you are creating a circumstance
that forces a business out of business because of fraud, the
end result is that the person who committed the fraud, the
company who committed the fraud is who pays the price, not the
community who no longer has a hospital. And I would welcome any
thoughts that you or your folks at CMS could provide in this
particular case, but just generally, there is a consequence for
this bad behavior.
And I hope that whatever bad behavior is determined, if you
determine that, that if appropriate, it is referred to the
Department of Justice because the consequences for this
behavior is long-term generational consequences to communities
and the people who live there just of significant challenges
now as a result of--in addition to the challenges we just have
in keeping hospital doors open generally in communities across
Kansas.
LIVER ALLOCATION POLICY
In regard to the liver allocation issue, Mr. Secretary, let
me ask just a couple of questions and then express my concern
and dissatisfaction.
Let me first ask if you believe that enough is being done
to help individuals with end stage liver disease who are not
yet on the wait list. So there is another population, those who
are on a wait list waiting for a liver transplant. There are
those who are not on the wait list yet. Is enough being done to
advance their well-being?
Secretary Azar. I think the number one thing that we can
all be doing is working, as the Chairman referred to earlier,
to increase the supply of livers that we have for
transplantation. That is the most important thing we could do
to help with advancing individuals.
I hope we are doing everything that we can with regard to
care for individuals suffering from liver disease awaiting
transplant. If there are things that we could be doing
differently, please do let me know. I would want to make sure
we are doing that.
Senator Moran. Would you commit the Department to a full
public disclosure, a transparent public debate on this organ
allocation transplant process?
Secretary Azar. I am happy to work with you on what that
might look like. As I mentioned to the Chairman, the challenge
with this OPTN organ allocation issue is that Congress
deliberately took that out of my hands to make it a non-
political issue. And so when we do not like a conclusion, I am
fairly restricted in what I can do. But I believe the OPTN
process was a public process with a public record, but I am
happy to work with you and your staff on any vehicle to ensure
that.
Senator Moran. Mr. Secretary, you are moving me to my
complaining aspect by your comments----
[Laughter.]
Senator Moran [continuing]. Because it was only after a
lawsuit was filed, as I understand it, that this allocation
process was then considered for change. And when you tell me
that we constructed the ground rules for you to be removed from
the process, you do appoint the HRSA (Health Resources and
Services Administration) director. The HRSA director is one who
has written a letter to OPTN encouraging them to quickly
implement the decision that they made and encouraging them.
I would also tell you that while, from time to time in this
job, people tell me something that does not always turn out to
be true. But in our meeting Senator Blunt and I had with the
HRSA director, the request was that we make certain that our
constituencies, transplant programs in our States, submit not
just comments but please bring us a proposal because we are so
interested in listening to the proposal. Do not just complain
about the proposal that is out there. Tell us how to do it
better.
And I can tell you that the end result of our programs
doing that--they were not considered. And in fact, the decision
was made before those comments were submitted, before that
proposal was submitted by our constituents. I wrote down what
you said in a last minute or late, the computer program shut
down because there were so many comments. The only lateness of
our programs supplying their comments and proposals was because
the computer was shut down because of commentary. And the
decision was made before these were ever read, and then they
were approved with no changes thereafter.
The original decision was made by the Liver and Intestine
Committee and without ever seeing the comments of our
constituents. Then secondly, it was approved immediately with
no change even though you can claim, perhaps correctly, that
the comments were then read after the initial decision was
made.
My point is that while I am often--perhaps I misunderstand
what has been requested of me or what my instructions are of
how I can be of help to my constituents. What I think we did
was exactly what we were told to do with no beneficial thing
happening as a result of following those instructions.
So this process has been flawed and it is a flaw that
arises out of the fear of a lawsuit. And after a long period of
time--I know what you are saying, Chairman Blunt.
[Laughter.]
Senator Moran. After a long period of time, the policy in
place was changed almost overnight in response to a lawsuit.
And you are right. The issue is more organ donation and the
policy that is being developed is contradictory to what you
said is the goal.
I will be back for the second round.
Senator Blunt. Senator Merkley.
Thank you, Senator Moran.
Senator Merkley. Thank you very much.
UNACCOMPANIED ALIEN CHILDREN
You mentioned that there is a big influx of unaccompanied
minors crossing the border. And are you referring to people
crossing between ports of entry?
Secretary Azar. We will receive the 300 to 350 children
from wherever they show up. If they show up at a border
crossing alone, if they show up at a non-border crossing alone,
they are UACs (unaccompanied alien children) how they came
across. Or even if they were already resident and come into
Federal authorities and they are unaccompanied alien children,
they will be referred to us no matter what. So I do not know
where they crossed the border.
Senator Merkley. So they are in Tijuana where you are
saying that youth can walk up to the port of entry and present
themselves?
Secretary Azar. If a child comes up to the border, presents
himself and is a 12-year-old, a minor, say, a 12-year-old, and
is an unaccompanied alien child, I believe at that point,
subject to whatever the rules of DHS (Department of Homeland
Security) are--I am not DHS. We would have to ask Secretary
Nielsen. I believe that once they cross the border and if they
are not immediately repatriatable, that they are sent to us.
Senator Merkley. So this is not the way it works, and I
would encourage you to learn a lot more about this. Right now,
if an unaccompanied minor comes to the border in San Diego,
they are not allowed to present themselves at the border.
Everyone who is 18 and up is instructed to return to Mexico to
get into the book. This is the metering process. But if you are
under 18, you are not allowed to get into the book and you are
not allowed to cross the border.
So we are leaving these children permanently exiled in
Tijuana with really no choice about how to proceed that is a
good choice. If they present themselves to the Mexican
authority DIF, they are deported back into horrific
circumstances. If they stay in Tijuana, they are subject to
gangs and the sex predators that have a big sex industry there.
And so their best option is to cross the border illegally.
So while the President of the United States is telling the
world do not cross between ports of entry, we are blocking the
minors from crossing in the ports of entry. Do you think that
that is acceptable?
Secretary Azar. I do not know border law----
Senator Merkley. Well, I encourage you to find out because
you are very directly affected by it. And it is why so many
minors are crossing between ports of entry rather than at ports
of entry because they are being blocked. And the fact that you
have not educated yourself about this horrific treatment of
children at the hands of the U.S. Government really is
unacceptable.
Second, you said that you have sent a letter to Congress to
fund an expansion of the child prison system under this
administration. What expansion level are you planning to go to?
Secretary Azar. So we sent a funding and reprogramming
request that--not a request, but basically a transfer message
that we were transferring $286 million using the Secretary's 15
percent transfer authority and then reprogramming $99 million
of money that is not needed for the refugee program within ORR
as part of the transfer and reprogramming----
Senator Merkley. So $385 million on top of the $266
million----
Secretary Azar. And at this current rate, as I mentioned to
the Chairman, that will not prove adequate for this year.
Senator Merkley. What is the capacity of the child prison
system that you are seeking with this money?
Secretary Azar. So that actually is supportive of our
current rates of about 14,000 beds I believe, as well as our
expected added--we are trying to add as many fixed beds as we
can to care for them.
You keep saying ``prison system.'' If you got an
alternative approach to how to care for these children, please
tell us because it would be nice if you told us how to do that.
Senator Merkley. Let me explain it to you.
Secretary Azar. If there is a better way, we want to be
compassionate and deliver a safe, secure----
Senator Merkley. Yes, okay. Well, you asked me. We will
have a little dialogue here. It is called sponsors. And the
reason it is so hard to get sponsors right now is the
administration is telling potential sponsors that all their
information will be shared with ICE (Immigration and Customs
Enforcement). Therefore, people are not coming forward to be
sponsors because they do not want to be stuck into our criminal
examination system.
Secretary Azar. I believe the Congress actually passed an
appropriations rider limiting the use of any information that
would get to DHS as part of the background checking that we do
as part of our sponsorship checks. So I think that is probably
dated information.
Senator Merkley. But unfortunately, the families are still
being told that their information could be used in this
capacity. So as long as you are still telling families that,
then they are discouraged from coming forward.
Secretary Azar. I will be happy to look at that to see. I
was not aware they were being told that. I will be happy to
look at that for you.
Senator Merkley. These children belong in homes----
Secretary Azar. They do.
Senator Merkley [continuing]. And schools and parks, not
locked up. I call them prisons because they are locked up. I do
not know if you have visited these facilities, but I have.
Secretary Azar. I do frequently.
Senator Merkley. Okay. Well, then you understand what I am
talking about.
Secretary Azar. I completely agree with you. I do not want
any child in our custody. I want every child out with an
appropriate, safely vetted sponsor in the community.
Senator Merkley. Then please examine the reasons why it is
so hard to recruit sponsors because that will facilitate. And
it is also costing a huge expense, this temporary influx, $750
a day for a for-profit operator to run a former air base
facility when a permanent facility costs much less. And with
sponsors, it costs a fraction, just a fraction to have a case
worker working with those families. So not only is it much
better for the children as they wait an asylum process, it is
much better for the American taxpayer. And maybe it means less
profits for these for-profit companies you are hiring to run
Homestead, but should you not watch out for the taxpayers and
the children instead?
Secretary Azar. Senator, I completely share your goal and
my goal and the government's goal that these children should be
with sponsors and not in our care.
Senator Merkley. Good.
Secretary Azar. If we can work together to make that
happen, I will be delighted to work with anyone to make that
happen.
Senator Merkley. Let us just note that they are in
Homestead in Florida. They have not undertaken to address the
child abuse and neglect checks for the staff members so that
they can make sure that the individuals they hire working with
these kids do not have a record as a sexual predator. And that
is unacceptable.
Thank you.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator Merkley.
Senator Kennedy.
UNACCOMPANIED ALIEN CHILDREN
Senator Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Secretary, do you believe in the rule of law?
Secretary Azar. Yes, I do especially as a trained lawyer. I
do, indeed.
Senator Kennedy. Is it illegal to come into our country
illegally?
Secretary Azar. It is, indeed, illegal to come into our
country illegally.
Senator Kennedy. Do you dislike children?
Secretary Azar. I love children, and I want to care
compassionately for any child I am ever entrusted with.
Senator Kennedy. Are you trying to hurt children who are
coming into our country at the border?
Secretary Azar. No. I am proud to lead an organization of
people and have grantees that are some of the most
compassionate, caring child welfare people that I have ever
interacted with who love these children and care deeply for
them.
Senator Kennedy. I read where in March we had about 100,000
folks, mostly from Central America, mostly family units and
children come into America illegally across our southern
border. Does that sound about right?
Secretary Azar. That is my information is it is about
100,000 coming across now in family units per month, and it has
created an absolute crisis for my colleagues at the Department
of Homeland Security.
Senator Kennedy. Ten times more than--or double what it was
I think 10 years ago, something like that.
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
Let me ask you about the Affordable Care Act. I remember
when Congress passed it. We were promised--we meaning I am
American like you are. We were promised two things. We were
promised, number one, that it would make health insurance
cheaper, more affordable. Has it done that?
Secretary Azar. No, it has not. We were promised that
health insurance would cost half what it cost at the time. In
fact, during President Obama's tenure, it doubled in cost for
people having to buy insurance.
Senator Kennedy. I remember vividly because I watched it on
C-SPAN. I remember Congress also promised us that it would make
health insurance more accessible. Has it done that?
Secretary Azar. No, it has not. In fact, it has restricted
choices for individuals now with a large percent of States
having only one carrier in the individual market.
Senator Kennedy. All right. Now, let me ask you this. The
President has expressed his disappointment with the Affordable
Care Act. Does he support getting rid of it before we have a
replacement?
Secretary Azar. The President has always supported
replacing the Affordable Care Act with something else that is
better, never that there should be nothing.
Senator Kennedy. I want to be sure I understand because
there has been some innuendo here. Does he support getting rid
of the Affordable Care Act without a better plan in place?
Secretary Azar. Absolutely not. He insists there be a
better plan in place for people.
Senator Kennedy. Do you know of anyone on Capitol Hill,
Republican or Democrat, who supports a healthcare insurance
program or a healthcare delivery system that would not cover
preexisting conditions?
Secretary Azar. I have not met them.
Senator Kennedy. Does the President support a replacement
plan for Obamacare that would cover preexisting conditions?
Secretary Azar. He does, indeed, and he will never sign any
other plan that does not take care of people with preexisting
conditions.
Senator Kennedy. I want to look at the healthcare system
from 30,000 feet for a second. Here is what I do not
understand. I keep reading that 10 percent of the American
people spend about 67 percent of the healthcare dollars, which
makes sense because we all know that the chronically ill spend
more money than others. And when you run the numbers, when you
consider that we have got 320 million people, really 330
million people, so 10 percent of that is 33 million people. And
we got a $21 trillion dollar--that is 12 zeros--GDP (gross
domestic product), and we spend 18 percent of that on GDP and
you take two-thirds of that 18 percent and then you divide it
by 33 million. What you come out with is $80,000 a person. So
for these 33 million people out of 333 million, we are spending
about $80,000 a person.
Why can we not identify those 33 million? I did not say
$8,000. $80,000. I am going to land this plane on time, Mr.
Chairman.
[Laughter.]
Senator Kennedy. Why can we not identify those people and
with $80,000 a person manage their care better?
Secretary Azar. You know what, Senator. In fact, we can and
we can do that through vehicles like either invisible or
visible reinsurance pools. For instance, even under the ACA, I
have approved seven State reinsurance plans that have brought
premiums down in those States by anywhere from 9 percent to 30
percent by cleaving off the risk for those higher risk people
and separately reinsuring that so that the burden is not borne
by all the other healthier people in that pool. Absolutely.
Senator Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Schatz.
Senator Schatz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member.
Secretary, thank you for being here.
YOUTH TOBACCO USE
I am worried about tobacco use among our young people, and
that is why I am about to introduce the Tobacco to 21 Act with
Senator Young. Our bill would raise the minimum age from 18 to
21 for the purchase of tobacco products, and that includes the
sale of combustible cigarettes and e-cigarettes. The Institute
of Medicine has found that raising the tobacco age of sale to
21 would reduce tobacco initiation especially among kids 15 to
17. It would also lead to a 12 percent decrease in smoking
prevalence. Nine States, including Hawaii and hundreds of
localities have already taken this action.
Do you agree that tobacco use among youth is a severe
public health problem? And do you commit to me that we can work
together on this legislation?
Secretary Azar. Senator, thank you very much for that
question, and thank you for your work in this area.
Like you, I am extremely concerned about tobacco use and
specifically the e-cigarette epidemic among our youth. I am
committed to working with you and with other Members of
Congress on legislation to address tobacco use among youth, as
well as taking any necessary regulatory action.
Commissioner Gottlieb--his last day is today--and I have
been very clear that while e-cigarettes may offer a lower risk
alternative for adult smokers who still want access to
nicotine, we cannot allow e-cigarettes to be an on-ramp to
combustible cigarette use or nicotine addiction for an entire
new generation.
FDA is proposing to prioritize enforcement of flavored e-
cigarettes that are offered for sale in ways that pose a
greater risk for minors to access the products. For instance,
FDA will consider whether the products are sold under
circumstances without heightened age verification.
And while we pursue changes to regulatory policy, we call
on the industry, manufacturers, and retailers, to step up with
meaningful measures to reduce the access and appeal of e-
cigarettes to young people. The epidemic level rise in youth e-
cigarette use has also prompted a series of escalating actions
by the FDA in both enforcement and public education.
So thank you very much, sir, for your help, and I look
forward to working with you on this.
Senator Schatz. Thank you.
TELEHEALTH
Let us move to telehealth. I know you are a big supporter
of telehealth and that you have noted that the regulatory and
payment barriers can limit telehealth services. One section of
the Connect for Health Act would give you the authority to
waive barriers to traditional Medicare reimbursement under two
circumstances, if the telehealth services would reduce spending
while maintaining quality or if the telehealth services would
improve healthcare quality without increasing spending.
Can you talk about what that waiver authority would mean in
terms of public health and especially expenditures regarding
public health?
Secretary Azar. So as you mentioned, I have been passionate
in my advocacy of telehealth. I think it is vitally important
for States like Hawaii, for States that are rural for expanding
access to care and also for expanding just the quality of care
even where we have care delivery and to make sure that all of
America shares in centers of excellence through telehealth.
The Social Security Act, unfortunately, was written in the
1960s before telehealth existed. And so there are many barriers
to that. And I look forward to working with you on any ways in
which greater flexibility could appropriately be brought to me
especially in ways that do not open the door to fraud, abuse,
or of course, waste of precious taxpayer beneficiary resources.
Senator Schatz. We got a lot done with Senator Hatch's
leadership and with a big bipartisan group on telehealth. There
are a few more things to do. This is not the only one. But the
waiver authority is sort of the holy grail. So for the members,
we really got to get this done.
Secretary Azar. I hope perhaps this could be included in
the work that Senator Murray and Senator Alexander are leading
on cost work.
Senator Schatz. Yes.
UNACCOMPANIED ALIEN CHILDREN
And then just a final comment and question. I was struck by
the exchange between Senator Merkley and you in one particular
way. Obviously, it got contentious because this is, frankly,
the kind of thing that should cause people to be emotional.
But to the extent that there is a statute that provides for
confidentiality for potential sponsors but in the moment where
a decision is being made, sponsors are not aware of that
statute, that seems to me to be a light bulb going off for all
of us, that we need to do a better job of communicating to
sponsors that their confidentiality is protected, that their
family situation is protected, and that we in fact, as a matter
of government policy, whatever we think about the border wall,
whatever we think about whose fault is what and what we ought
to consular offices and all these other arguments, that at a
minimum these kids need sponsors. And to the extent that
potential sponsors are afraid to do so because they are afraid
they are going to end up in some database, we need to do a
better job of telling them that there is a law that protects
their confidentiality. And I am hoping we can work together to
follow up on that.
Secretary Azar. Thank you. Of course.
Senator Schatz. Thank you very much.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator Schatz.
Senator Hyde-Smith.
Senator Hyde-Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I certainly appreciate Secretary Azar being here today
and answering the questions the way that you are doing this.
RURAL HOSPITALS
I am, obviously, the Senator from Mississippi. And we have
so many rural hospitals in Mississippi that are really
struggling. A recent report found that half of all rural
hospitals in Mississippi are at high financial risk of closing.
I just read an article that Mississippi has more rural
hospitals at risk of closing than any other State in this
country.
When a hospital closes, obviously the whole community is
affected in so many ways, not only the employment there but
mainly--and what is most important--it means no more access to
emergency care for the community's residents. In an emergency,
timely care is of essence, and having close-by access to them
can truly mean life or death. We just recently had a young lady
in Mississippi just a few weeks ago that died of an asthma
attack.
So I guess my question is, what is HHS doing to respond to
these rural hospital closures that is very critical in my
State?
Secretary Azar. Well, thank you. You have repeatedly raised
with me the concerns about rural hospital access in
Mississippi, and in part because of your efforts, I have
created a task force across HHS to help come up with all ideas
that we can around how we can help address the hospital crisis.
Let me give you some ideas.
One of them we just were discussing, which is telehealth.
How can we help make sure that we are expanding access into
rural America? Because we will end up consolidating everyone
living in urban areas if we cannot provide them healthcare in
rural America. So telehealth is important.
We have to make sure that providers are able to practice to
the maximum of their licensure so that we are not having
artificial restraints on trade and competition that are
blocking access in rural America.
And we also have to make sure that our regulations at CMS
or otherwise are not creating artificial barriers to
economically viable models of hospitals in rural America. Are
we trying to force the 1960s model of hospitals through our
payment systems and other regulations onto rural America? So we
are looking at how do we even re-conceive the needs of rural
America from a hospital perspective.
You said ER, for instance. I was talking with the leader of
a critical access hospital yesterday. I learned about a
requirement that we have which is that to be a CAH (Critical
Access Hospital), you have to have a surgeon on staff who might
do 20 surgeries a year. One has to ask, does that requirement
still hold in the modern era, and is that part of making that
facility economically viable long-term to be able to provide
access in that community?
So this is a deep passion of mine. We are working on this.
Any ideas you have of things we can do to be helpful, certainly
we want to be there.
Senator Hyde-Smith. Thank you very much.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Baldwin.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
Secretary Azar, I want to tell you about Zoe from Seymour,
Wisconsin. Zoe was born with a congenital heart defect, and she
had actually open heart surgery at 5 days old. She will be able
to continue to get coverage and the care that she needs, thanks
to the Affordable Care Act and its protections for people with
preexisting health conditions.
When the Republicans were working to repeal the Affordable
Care Act legislatively, I got a letter from Zoe's mom, Chelsea.
And Chelsea wrote to me and she said to me it is like they
taking the American dream from her, referring to her daughter
Zoe. She wrote, I am pleading with you as a mother to fight for
those with preexisting conditions. Kids in Wisconsin with
preexisting conditions are counting on you to protect that
right.
The administration, your administration, recently decided
to support a lawsuit aimed at striking down the Affordable Care
Act in its entirety and all of its protections.
So how do I explain a decision like that to Zoe and her
mom? Zoe, by the way, just celebrated her sixth birthday. And
this is more or less a rhetorical question because I have some
specifics. But how do you tell a little girl like that what is
going to happen to her?
So I want to just confirm my understanding that if the
Affordable Care Act is struck down in its entirety in court, a
position your administration is supporting, what protections
preventing insurance companies from discriminating against
those with preexisting conditions will still remain in law, if
it is struck down?
Secretary Azar. So, of course, there are the existing ERISA
(Employee Retirement Income Security Act) protections and HIPAA
(Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act)
protections around preexisting conditions that would not be
impacted by that for those of us----
Senator Baldwin. But the marketplace insurance----
Secretary Azar [continuing]. Employer-sponsored insurance.
And then as I was mentioning with Ranking Member Murray, we
will be working then with Congress to ensure that any new
better care has protection for preexisting conditions.
Senator Baldwin. So in other words, if it is struck down,
for a time there will be nothing in place to protect Zoe and
kids like her.
The truth is that there is not a plan right now to protect
Zoe or people like her with preexisting conditions, and not
only would this lawsuit take away these protections, but
President Trump has broken his promise by expanding the use of
junk health plans. That is what I call them because they do not
have to cover preexisting conditions.
And I just want to share a couple of examples in Wisconsin.
One of the plans currently available in Wisconsin from
Companion Life--the very first sentence of their policy states,
``preexisting conditions diagnosed within the 60-month period
immediately preceding such covered person's effective date are
excluded for the first 12 months of coverage.''
Another plan sold in Wisconsin now says, ``no benefits are
payable for expenses for a preexisting condition described as a
condition that, would have caused an ordinarily prudent person
to seek medical advice, diagnosis, care, or treatment within 12
months immediately preceding the date of coverage.''
So explain to me how this decision not only to join this
lawsuit to try to totally repeal and overturn the Affordable
Care Act but this decision to proactively expand the use and
availability of these junk plans is not a broken promise to
protect people with preexisting conditions.
Secretary Azar. So I assume you are referring to the short-
term limited duration plans which we restored to use as the
Obama administration had. These plans are not for everyone. And
if a plan like that--and I am quite glad that the consumer
disclosure--enhanced consumer disclosures that we have are
making it so apparent that if you had a preexisting condition,
those would not be plans that you should choose. You would very
well want to be getting an exchange-based plan that would cover
your preexisting conditions or a short-term----
Senator Baldwin. Well, but you are arguing----
Secretary Azar [continuing]. That does cover preexisting
conditions.
Senator Baldwin [continuing]. In court to overturn the
Affordable Care Act. So there will not be a marketplace.
DRUG PRICING
Now I want to move on to something that you and I have
discussed at length, which is drug prices. If the
administration is successful in the lawsuit and the Affordable
Care Act is struck down, the law's prescription drug price
reforms would also be gone.
Secretary Azar, your own Medicare prescription drug price
proposal would be wiped out, and that is because your own pilot
program is being tested through the Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Innovation, CMMI, which was created under the
Affordable Care Act. So yes or no, Secretary Azar. If the
lawsuit succeeds and the Affordable Care Act is struck down in
court, CMMI will cease to exist and so will this pilot. Is that
true or false?
Secretary Azar. There are a great deal of ifs in there. But
CMMI is part of the Affordable Care Act, and my hope would be
that any better care system we set up would similarly give me
authorities to do demonstrations and pilots such as the one
that we are firmly committed to there----
Senator Baldwin. So it would cease to exist.
Secretary Azar. We would have to find additional authority.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Capito.
Senator Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here.
OPIOIDS/HIV
My first question from the State of West Virginia--Senator
Manchin--we are both lucky enough to be on this subcommittee--
have been ravaged by the opioid epidemic. But we are starting
to look at some of the ripple effects. And I know that you in
your statement addressed the increase of hep C and B and also
HIV.
Could you just tell me just briefly how you are meeting
those challenges working with our public health officials in
our State? Some of them I think have been very forward leaning
in trying to master this.
Secretary Azar. Absolutely. So first off, the ending HIV
epidemic will be very helpful with the additional funding and
the focused efforts there. We see 10 percent of new HIV cases
are coming out of injectable drug use. And so the efforts there
where we hope we will actually completely stop the spread of
HIV in this country would tackle that.
In addition, we have special funding as part of the budget
in the opioid initiative that we have requested to help with
HIV spread and hep C infectious disease spread connected to the
opioid problem that we have in the country.
Senator Capito. Well, in my conversations with the head of
the CDC just recently, he did tell me that with the new
availability of different metrics that you are able to identify
clusters quicker and be more effective with that. So that is
very important to us.
CHILDHOOD CANCER
I am going to shift to another issue that I am very
passionate about, and that is Senator Reed and I--he is a
member of the subcommittee as well--worked together to pass the
STAR Act, which is the Childhood Cancer Survivorship,
Treatment, Access, and Research. We got $30 million in the
budget for that. I would like to know what your Department is
doing on that and where you think it will lead to.
Secretary Azar. Well, first, thank you for your support of
the STAR Act and getting that passed.
We have already begun implementation at the National Cancer
Institute of the NCI-specific sections there.
One of the most important parts here is enhancing the
biospecimen collection and biorepositories that really aid us
in the research programs needed to focus on pediatric cancer.
That is vital to just building the evidence base and
information we need. And also to conduct and support childhood
cancer survivorship research efforts.
At CDC, we are working to implement the CDC cancer
registries there. So we look forward to their continued
successful early case capture program that lets us identify
children right away. So that also helps us with the research
programs by getting that type of information and making that
available.
Senator Capito. So does the budget reflect next year a
continuation of that funding?
Secretary Azar. So, as you know, our budget proposes an
additional $50 million to NIH for the pediatric cancer research
program as part of a $500 million 10-year program with a focus
on pediatric cancer research. You know, pediatric cancer has
been neglected for a long time.
Senator Capito. Right. I know that.
Secretary Azar. And thanks to the STAR Act, thanks to the
President's initiative here on pediatric cancer, I hope we will
get a greater focus there.
Senator Capito. I hope so too. Some of our leading
hospitals, research hospitals, in our State are putting a great
focus on this.
MATERNAL MORTALITY
Lastly, I would like to ask you another thing. A statistic
that I found rather surprising because I do not think we think
of ourselves like this as a country, but the rising statistics
of maternal mortality. And I think you are quoted in your
statement as saying over 700 women died in and around
associated with childbirth. We did pass with a bipartisan
effort the Maternal Mortality Accountability Act for us to get
good statistics on what is actually going on here because you
state that these deaths are actually--many of them--very
preventable.
What steps is your Department taking to take charge of this
issue?
Secretary Azar. Well, as you mentioned, maternal mortality
rates in the U.S. have more than doubled over the past few
decades.
Senator Capito. I mean, do you have any idea why?
Secretary Azar. Well, so much of it is about prenatal care
and labor and delivery care and access. You know, in rural
America, we have a real labor and delivery crisis.
Senator Capito. Yes.
Secretary Azar. And associated that is appropriate prenatal
care. And of course, the immigration crisis is bringing in so
many individuals in terms of getting adequate prenatal and
labor and delivery care also. I do not know the full
demographic breakdown on that.
But I appreciate, obviously, Senator Murray's leadership in
this space also.
Our budget proposes the $58 million for the Maternal
Mortality Prevention and Surveillance at CDC, which you just
mentioned. And that includes $12 million to support data
collection and research to understand even better the causes of
these deaths so we really can aim at the problem and then
tailor solutions towards that.
Senator Capito. Well, I think you will find both Senator
Murray's leadership and others--you will have a very supportive
Senate and probably Congress in this effort. Obviously, the
President is supporting this as well. Thank you so much.
Secretary Azar. Thank you.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator Capito.
Senator Murphy.
Senator Murphy. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here today.
I want to thank the Chairman and the ranking member for
acknowledging at the outset what is the reality here. This
budget is not going to be reflected in the one that Congress
ultimately passes. We would never support the kind of draconian
cuts that are in it to people in need, to very sick people, to
very vulnerable populations. And so I understand that we are
going to work together, Republicans and Democrats, to make sure
that this budget never ever sees the light of day.
But I think for the good of the order, it makes sense to
repeat why this budget is so offensive to many of us. It is not
just the cuts. It is that they stand in contrast to a giant
gift-wrapped present that this Congress gave to the very, very
wealthy in this country about a year ago, a $2 trillion unpaid-
for tax cut that was promised to increase wages by $4,000 per
person. That simply has not done that. It, when fully
implemented, will deliver 80 percent of the benefits to the top
1 percent of income earners, and now we are seeing who is being
asked to pay for it, frail seniors in Connecticut who are going
to have their heating shut off in the winter because the Trump
budget does not fund the Low-Income Heating Assistance Program.
So I think that is at the heart of our frustration. It is not
just that this budget does not reflect our values. It is that
it stands in contrast with a tax cut that just is not going to
deliver results for the majority of Americans.
OPIOIDS
Mr. Secretary, I wanted to talk to you about the effect of
this budget on the opioid epidemic. In your testimony, you
point to about $5 billion in funding that is directly dedicated
to the opioid epidemic. That is largely money that was already
in the budget. But it stands in contrast to $1.5 trillion in
Medicaid cuts in this budget, including the wholesale
elimination of the Medicaid expansion. Four out of 10 non-
elderly adults that are dealing with opioid addiction today are
on Medicaid. And so when you put $5 billion in essentially flat
funding for specific opioid treatment next to $1.5 trillion in
cuts to the insurance program that actually allows States to
pay for treatment, the result is a devastating net negative, a
dramatic contraction of Federal dollars out of the opioid
treatment system.
And I guess I just want to be honest what we are doing
here. I know you may say, well, we are still going to spend
more money in real dollars, but this is a $1.5 trillion cut
compared to what we expected States to spend. And I feel like
we should just be honest that what this budget asks is for
States to pick up a much bigger share of the burden for caring
for people with addiction and that this national emergency we
declared comes with it an expectation that the Federal
Government would do less and States will do more. Connecticut
will try to scramble to come up with the money when we lose
100,000 people off of the rolls of our Medicaid program. Other
States may not be able to come up with those dollars.
I just want to ask you that. Is this not what we are doing?
Are we not just asking States to essentially pick up the burden
of the opioid epidemic, given the comparison of the Medicaid
cuts in this bill to the $5 billion in specific opioid funding?
Secretary Azar. I do not think so. Well, you are right. We
have a $1.5 trillion reduction that is in the budget for the
Medicaid expansion and the Affordable Care Act exchange
subsidies. We add back a $1.2 trillion program that would be
State-based flexibility. My hope is that it would actually
correct--one of the things I worry about with the opioid crisis
and many other public health issues we deal with is that the
Medicaid expansion, with its focus on able-bodied adults, has
taken away from our--it has actually incentivized coverage
there away from the aged, disabled, children, pregnant mothers,
those for instance, opioid-addicted that are part of the core
Medicaid.
And my hope is that with the $1.2 trillion program and the
complete flexibility for the States on that money, that they
actually would focus that in areas like you just talked about
where the needs are greatest and really prioritize in those
areas. And it might actually enhance coverage and access for
those individuals that we all care so much about.
Senator Murphy. Yes. We have heard this for a long time,
that flexibility will allow States to enhance and greater focus
their coverage, but in the end, it is a whole lot less money
than they were getting today. And States are begging for
additional dollars to care for people with the opioid epidemic.
Asking them to just focus better with less money I just think
ignores the feedback that all of us are getting, Republicans
and Democrats, about the realities on the ground.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Manchin, followed by Senator Shaheen. Senator
Manchin.
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
And thank you, Secretary, first of all, for being here and
also for your service.
OPIOIDS
You and I have talked briefly. I am asking for the help
that we need in our little State of West Virginia. We face the
largest per capita economic burden in the country, and I think
my dear friend, Senator Shaheen, is right behind us on this.
The epidemic of opioids is costing our economy in our little
State $8.89 billion a year and forcing us to dedicate the
largest share of GDP of any State to costs related to the
crisis, which is 12 percent.
I appreciate what you all have done. And everybody is
concerned about the cutting. I think we will work through this.
Okay.
But the 15 percent set-aside that you have for hard-hit
States I am asking, through your rules and regulations, if you
can do this. You have to take in consideration the deaths per
capita not just the total deaths. I got counties that this is
enormous. But if you look at the total deaths and offsetting
the 15 percent, we cannot help them that much. Does that make
sense?
Secretary Azar. There is a lot of sense to that, and I
appreciate your raising that issue. One thing would be where--
and you all helped us a lot with not just the SUPPORT Act but
with your appropriations funding on opioids with helping us
with the formulas to allow a focus of money on the highest
burden States. If that issue of deaths versus incidence per
capita is in there, obviously I need you to fix that.
Senator Manchin. We can fix it. If not, if you can----
Secretary Azar. And there may be some allocation issues
within the States, for instance, rural versus urban within the
State. I am happy to work with you and the government in West
Virginia to educate and focus on that area.
Senator Manchin. I have two very quick ones and my final
comment.
The Jessie's Law. We talked about that. And you might want
to expand on what can be done and how quickly you can make this
happen. I know there is some hoops that we have to draw
through, but all of us have agreed that Jessie's Law is
something that is extremely needed and it can save lives. And
it is so simple, but yet we are running into so many
complications as far as privacy, HIPAA, and all these other
things. Can you just briefly state----
Secretary Azar. Absolutely. And thank you for prioritizing
the work in this area. I am going to be speaking with our head
of the Office of National Coordinator, as well as SAMHSA
(Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration), to
make sure it is a priority to share these best practices that
are part of the Jessie's Law that are in the SUPPORT Act.
We do have to examine issues like 42 CFR, part 2 to make
sure that there are not unintended consequences, for instance,
where providers do not put information about somebody's
addiction status in the electronic medical record for fear of
additional regulatory complications there. And so we need to
work on that and make sure that is not standing in the way of
appropriate care and treatment because what happened to Jessie
should not happen.
Senator Manchin. Absolutely. You understand it, and I
appreciate your diligence towards that because it just means so
much to all of us.
Very quickly. Funding for this horrible, horrible disease
of addiction. I have introduced LifeBOAT year after year after
year. LifeBOAT basically says that all pharmaceuticals that are
producing opiates should pay 1 penny per milligram for
production fees. That would give us the permanent funding. I
know it is a tough one. It is a heavy lift for some of my
friends. I am not looking at that as a tax. If you want to make
this product, if you think we need all these products, then you
ought to pay a production fee to make sure that we have a
constant stream of money. This goes to the areas that are hit
the hardest. It will not put anybody out of business.
Secretary Azar. The genesis of this crisis were the legal
opioids, and that is why I am so glad that we have gotten legal
opioid prescribing down by 20 percent. And I think the MME, the
morphine----
Senator Manchin. If you can talk to the President on this
one, this would be a great LifeBOAT Act. 1 penny per milligram
would be a tremendous help.
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
Finally on the Affordable Care Act, the President says he
is not going to do anything till after 2020. So we are going to
have it depending on what the courts do. Let us say the court
kind of abdicate from this and we still have it. You have a lot
of expertise and you bring an awful lot to the table. How would
you fix what you have in front of you if that is all you had,
nothing new, not reinventing the wheel? I was not here in 2000.
I would have been hard-pressed to vote for what was in front of
me. I would have worked like heck to change a few things, but
what we have is integrated into our system, one-sixth of our
economy. How would you recommend to fixing?
Secretary Azar. I believe there are tremendous deep
problems in the ACA in just how the insurance benefit is
structured there, issues around--I will give you one example
which is the 3 to 1 rating. Essentially, you have made
insurance for individuals who are healthy and young,
unaffordable and they walk from the market. And that created
this kind of downward spiral that we have seen.
Senator Manchin. Got you. You are saying because we are
preventing higher than a 3 to 1 rate on the people that are
very sick.
Secretary Azar. Right.
Senator Manchin. But that is where we get into it. Our
differences with our Republican friends--they cannot come up
with how do you protect preexisting conditions. You can say,
oh, yes, we are going to make it illegal for anyone, any
insurance company not to sell. And by definition you said they
cannot deny your preexisting condition. You can charge us out
of the market that I cannot afford or my aunt cannot afford,
and it will break the family and they go without because back
home in West Virginia, they will say I do not want to be a
burden to my family. That means they cannot afford what is out
there.
You are preventing them from being denied. You are not
preventing from being able to afford it.
Secretary Azar. Right. And there are ways that one can
actually make sure that insurance for people with preexisting
conditions is affordable. Senator Kennedy and I had a bit of a
discussion earlier about that, about reinsurance vehicles that
are actually quite well established and work very well.
Senator Manchin. We have a bill called--it was the Collins-
Nelson, and I am going to be introducing that with Susan now
since Bill is not here. And we would love to have your support
on that because we think that would be a big fix and reducing
from the private pay. It could reduce anywhere from 20 to 40
percent overnight.
Secretary Azar. We would be happy to work with you on that,
especially if we could do that in conjunction, as we had
before, with what was going to be the Alexander-Murray-Collins-
Nelson package that would have CSR (cost-sharing reduction)
funding attached to that.
Senator Manchin. Those two bills have been laying on the
Majority Leader McConnell's desk for close to 2 years.
Secretary Azar. We would be happy to work with you on
those.
Of course, I think where we have got a stumbling block,
Senator Murray, was around ensuring that the funding on the
CSRs would have appropriate Hyde Act protections, and that
ended up I think being the stumbling block for us at the end of
the day there.
Senator Manchin. I am sure she would like----
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator. If you want to stay for
a minute, there will be time for more questions if you have
more to ask.
Senator Shaheen.
Senator Shaheen. Well, thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being
here.
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
I would say that there was actually an agreement between
both sides on the Alexander-Murray legislation and a strong
list of bipartisan sponsors, and it is unfortunate that because
there was opposition from the White House, because there was
opposition from the leadership in the Senate, that bill was not
able to come to the floor. And I would encourage you. I think
everybody who has been in the Senate since we passed the
Affordable Care Act recognizes that we need to improve some
things that some things are not working.
But the response is not to refuse to come to the table. It
is not to overturn the law so that people have no alternatives.
The answer is to work together to get it done. And I am very
disappointed that we have not seen that kind of leadership
either from the Senate leadership or from the White House. So I
hope you will share your views that you think there are things
we could do together because so far that has been missing from
the conversation.
OPIOIDS
I want to agree with Senator Manchin of the importance of
the set-aside on the opioid funding. It has been critical in a
State like New Hampshire where, as you know because you are
familiar with it, we have a huge problem. We are behind West
Virginia in terms of the overdose death rate, but way too high
for our State. We have way too many families who are affected,
and the pain is--you cannot talk to anybody in New Hampshire
who does not know someone or has not been affected personally
by this epidemic.
And those set-aside dollars that have been used for the
State opioid response grants have made a huge difference in New
Hampshire. It has allowed us to set up a hub and spoke system
that keeps people within an hour from a place where they can
get treatment, which has been very important. We are still
waiting to see exactly how this is going to work, but it is an
improvement and something that would not have been done without
those dollars.
We had a hearing here a couple of weeks ago--and I was
talking to you about it at the start of this hearing--where
there were people from States across this country who were
directors of programs to respond to the opioid epidemic. And I
asked them all a question. One was from New Hampshire. She
heads a recovery center. I said what happens if these Federal
dollars go away. And she said, well, I will go back to bake
sales. Some of the other folks were a lot more direct. They
said people will die.
In New Hampshire, the expansion of Medicaid has been one of
the things that has been most critical to ensuring that people
can get treatment and that we can prevent some of those deaths.
And yet, I share the concerns that Senator Murphy was raising
about what this budget does to repeal the Medicaid expansion
and replace it with block grants because not only does it cut
the amount available to States, but it assumes then every State
is going to come up with the funding to replace that. And I
think that is a huge question in a lot of the country.
So can you talk about what we should say to those people
who are running the programs to address the opioid epidemic
about what they should do if these Federal dollars go away?
Secretary Azar. Well, I appreciate your concern. The
President is adamant. Our budget reflects this about the
funding and support for the opioid epidemic and the work that
we have together. And we want to keep working with you to
ensure the States that have the highest burden are getting the
share of resources that they need to deal with this.
In addition, our budget proposes with Medicaid that we
would actually expand access for women postpartum for 1 year,
to have eligibility postpartum, who are suffering from
addictions. That is one of the changes we have got in the
budget. We continue to process the IMD exclusion waivers to
ensure that we have inpatient capacity and expanded capacity
for inpatient in communities. So we are continuing to drive
forward fully engaged, fully focused around the opioid
epidemic. We are seeing the results. We targeted the State
opioid response grants actually to ensure access to medication-
assisted treatment, you know, the gold standard. And I think we
are helping to really just expand capacity by making it quite
clear that this is the most evidence-based approach to people
for treatment and lifelong recovery.
Senator Shaheen. Well, I appreciate those changes. I think
they are very important. But if the fundamental funding source
and coverage source for people to get treatment goes away, then
those will make a small difference but they will not address
the underlying problem.
Can I ask one more question, Mr. Chairman?
DRUG PRICING
Yesterday, a study from the Kaiser Family Foundation found
that Medicare Part D spending on insulin grew by 840 percent
between 2007 and 2017. As you know, diabetes is one of the most
expensive chronic illnesses we have in this country, and
figuring out how to help patients with the cost of insulin at
the pharmacy counter is very critical. But it is also a
question about how can we be most effective with our public
dollars to address illness.
So I know that your Department has proposed new rules to
limit the impact of pharmacy benefit manager rebates that have
helped to drive up the cost of Part D drugs. Can you tell us
whether you think removing that link is going to help address
things like those insulin costs, or do we need to be doing
something else?
Secretary Azar. Well, I would defer on the something else
side. But I can tell you that the rule that we have proposed to
get these rebates out of the system and instead have those go
as discounts to the patient at the pharmacy level would be
revolutionary for the patients in the situation you are talking
about, especially classes like insulins or arthritis medicines
or high-cost cholesterol medicines that are very highly rebated
now. You might have in some of those classes, average 70
percent rebates.
Imagine January 1 of 2020. When that patient walks in the
pharmacy, if this rule goes forward, they will get a 70 percent
discount every time they fill that prescription. It is a
revolutionary change for patient access and affordability if we
can get this through. And I pray that we will have your support
to help do that. It is $29 billion of rebates that are going to
the pharmacy benefit managers now that would go to patients
starting January 1, 2020 if we can make this happen.
Senator Shaheen. Well, I look forward to hearing more about
it. Thank you.
Senator Blunt. Senator Murray.
Senator Murray. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And
thank you for allowing us to ask one more question.
UNACCOMPANIED ALIEN CHILDREN
Mr. Secretary, I did want to express my serious concerns
about what is going on in the unaccompanied children program.
Most shelters, as you know, are working to provide excellent
care to this very vulnerable population. HHS, as you know, is
charged with the welfare of every child in its care, and I am
deeply troubled by some of the reports of forced drugging,
sexual abuse, and substandard conditions at some of the
temporary facilities. And I was especially appalled by the
great lengths that former ORR (Office of Refugee Resettlement)
Director Scott Lloyd went to prevent minors in ORR custody from
accessing reproductive care, including cases where pregnancies
were the result of sexual assault.
And despite the fact that a Federal judge issued an
injunction in March of 2018, barring ORR from obstructing
access to abortion, a recently released spreadsheet shows that
ORR continued to track minors' private reproductive health
information through June 2018. And there is no indication that
the information collected in that spreadsheet is being used to
ensure access to reproductive care.
I wanted to ask you, does ORR still keep a spreadsheet
containing the reproductive health information of pregnant
minors?
Secretary Azar. I am not aware of any centralized
spreadsheet. I could not answer for him, but I believe the
intention--this was the last menstrual period date, which of
course for any of us who have had children know is vital to
prenatal care, just to know gestational age of the child, not
ongoing cycle information or otherwise. And that is my
understanding. I am not aware whether there would be--and I
doubt there is any type of central repository.
We have actually ensured now the delegation from the ORR
Director of all decisions on significant medical procedures for
our unaccompanied alien children to the ORR career staff. And I
believe we are fully compliant with the court's order and
injunction and faithfully executing on that.
Senator Murray. Well, what are you doing to make sure that
ORR complies with the court order?
Secretary Azar. I have and always will make clear that when
there is a court order in place, we are to faithfully apply
that. And so the order that you are referring to--I believe
that we are in full compliance with it. If we are not, I would
like to know. But I certainly would give instruction always
that we should be in compliance with court orders.
Senator Murray. When were you first aware that Director
Lloyd was being regularly briefed on pregnant minors' health
information and actually was personally contacting pregnant
minors to discourage them from seeking abortions? Do you
believe that is an appropriate role for the Director, and when
did you know?
Secretary Azar. I think you and I spoke about this actually
during the confirmation process, if I remember correctly, back
in my first hearing in early December, before I was in office.
So I think probably this was an issue of some controversy even
then--public controversy. So I think probably around then.
Goodness. I cannot quite remember.
The issue of a 12-year-old girl who was pregnant in our
care--we are the custodian of that child, and we are delegated
to make the serious medical decisions as the parent of that
child, but in consultation, if we can, with the parents of that
child.
Senator Murray. This is really, important information.
Senator Feinstein and I sent last week a letter to you asking
you to have your staff brief us fully on what you were doing,
where that information is, and how it is being used, and would
like you to commit to having----
Secretary Azar. We will certainly work with you on that.
Absolutely.
Senator Murray. Thank you.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator.
I have two quick things. There will be more for the record,
I am sure.
BEHAVIORAL HEALTH
First, we are nearing the end of the 2-year pilot period of
excellence in mental health. Our goal to come up with all the
information we can about the impact of treating behavioral
health like all other health and what is the impact on other
health cost.
So my request to you, as we talk about a 2-year extension
to just get more information for States to look at in the
future, it would be very helpful if you could commit to provide
us any early CMS data before that program expires.
Secretary Azar. I will work with the Administrator to get
you any information. We have data to help support the analysis
to support that legislative effort.
Senator Blunt. You understand what I am saying. If you have
got early data----
Secretary Azar. Any data. Exactly.
Senator Blunt [continuing]. To show one thing or another
here, it would be helpful for us to say we believe this is
where this is headed. And we would like to compile a little
more information. The goal here again is to put the information
out there that shows not only is this the right thing to do,
which everybody already knows, but it is the fiscally smart
thing to do as well.
UNACCOMPANIED ALIEN CHILDREN
And my other question, on the sponsor criteria on the
unaccompanied children that you talked about, who sets that
sponsor criteria in terms of what the sponsor has to provide
and how that is shared or not shared? Is that you or is that
Homeland Security?
Secretary Azar. So it would be statute as well as us. So
the sponsorship criteria are set in the--I believe it is the
Trafficking Victims Protection Act, largely the categories of
category 1, 2, 3, and 4 sponsors. Our preference is always a
category 1 sponsor, which would be a parent or guardian here in
the United States already that we can place them with. Then
category 2 would be our other relatives, aunts, uncles,
brothers, sisters, that we would place them with. And then the
3 would be more distant relatives that we could place.
There are certain mandates in the statute, for instance,
where there are various red flags. We have to do home visits
and home inspections. We always have the right to and do do
fingerprints and other biometric checking to confirm identify
or to assist with background checking of any individuals. That,
to my knowledge, has long been the case.
We have had some heightened requirements, in part driven
by--if you remember your colleague on the Permanent
Subcommittee on Investigations did some work, Senator Portman
and Senator Carper, on children who got placed with traffickers
or ended up with traffickers in Ohio at the eggplant.
So it is always a balance. We want to make sure we are
balancing keeping children in congregate care as short a time
as possible, but also making sure when they are placed out, we
are placing them into a safe environment. And so we are always
assessing any discretionary aspects of that balance to strike
that. So we have required fingerprints at various times of all,
say, household members for a level 2 sponsor.
We decided in December that we were not seeing enough hits
there in terms of information, added information that merited
the delay from people coming in as these household members. And
so we pulled back on that. We are always assessing what the
needs are.
Senator Blunt. I believe in your earlier response to
Senator Merkley, you said you believed your direction from the
Congress was that that information is not to be shared with the
Immigration Service.
Secretary Azar. No, no. If I could clarify. That
information is shared with immigration services so that we can
confirm identity, do background checking, and also get
immigration status. We have long, previous administrations
included, gotten immigration status. That is part of our
placement decisions, not that they are precluded by being
illegally in the country. We do not do that, but rather if
somebody, for instance, is just about to be deported, they
would not be an adequate long-term sponsor for someone. So we
want to make sure of that information.
Senator Blunt. If you find out someone is illegally in the
country and not about to be deported, what do you do with that?
Secretary Azar. If the person is within the categorization
of sponsors and an appropriate sponsor from a child welfare
perspective, we place the child. Most of our children are
placed probably with individuals who are illegally in the
country.
That information at DHS--my understanding is that there is
an appropriations rider that was passed as part of the large
budget deal to end the closure of the government that actually
restricts the use of that information over at DHS. But I would
have to defer to DHS and its lawyers on that question.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Secretary.
Senator Moran.
Senator Moran. I will attempt to be brief, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for the second round.
LIVER ALLOCATION
Mr. Secretary, I want to highlight--you and I would agree
this is a significant issue affecting liver transplants. This
policy has consequences and it is significant. That is true.
Correct?
Secretary Azar. Yes. The issue of liver transplants are
very important to all of us. Absolutely.
Senator Moran. And I got involved or interested in this
topic after a conversation with a liver transplant program in
my State. But as a result of that activity, I have been amazed
at the number of people, individuals in Kansas and elsewhere,
who come to me to talk about the importance of this liver
transplant policy, people who have had a liver transplant,
people who are waiting for a liver transplant, people who want
to be on a list for a liver transplant.
And again, you and I both would highlight and I would use
this opportunity to highlight the importance of people being
organ donors. We need more organs to meet the demands.
But this is not just about the consequences to a particular
transplant program. This issue has significant consequences, in
fact, life and death consequences for people across the
country.
And finally, I would remind you that Senator Grassley,
along with almost half the Senate, sent a letter to you, which
I do not believe--at least I have not seen a response, and I
would encourage you to respond.
Secretary Azar. Thank you. And I do want you to know that I
take that letter very seriously. It has my personal attention,
and that is what prompted me to actually ensure that we went to
OPTN and asked them to think again and to ensure the full
consideration of the comments out of Kansas and Missouri
providers. That was, even in spite of the computer glitch--and
I understand the process here was bad in terms of the
interactions with you. And on behalf of the Department, I
apologize to you for any lack of courtesy and also just any
problems in that process.
My understanding is those comments, in spite of the
computer glitch, were summarized to the OPTN board in their
decisionmaking. So at least it was part--the summary was a part
of the original decision-making and then presented in full to
the liver committee later.
I understand that is not necessarily everything you want to
hear in terms of it would have been nice if they had been
presented in full before any initial presumptive decision was
made. That is why I went back and said please think again.
Please, look at these comments. Look at these concerns.
Obviously, I have got tremendous respect for every signatory on
that letter.
I hope if you do not have it, we will get it to you, the
letter of response that I got. And if there are further avenues
that are appropriate, legally justifiable to ensure appropriate
process and consideration, I am most happy to consider them.
Senator Moran. I have not been discourteously treated, but
I failed to get the results I am looking for even when
courteously treated. And it is results that I am looking for on
behalf of folks who desperately need a liver transplant and
other organs.
Thank you.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator Moran.
Thank you, Secretary Azar.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
The record will stay open for 1 week for additional
questions.
[The following questions were not asked at the hearing, but
were submitted to the Department for response subsequent to the
hearing:]
Questions Submitted by Senator Roy Blunt
acf
Family First Prevention Services Act Implementation
Question. Please provide an update on ACFs implementation of the
Family First Act, and specifically its evaluation of evidence-based
programs newly eligible for funding under Family First for prevention
related activities. When does ACF plan to include the first list of
programs and models eligible for funding in the national clearinghouse?
What challenges are ACF facing in timely evaluating programs and models
for inclusion in the clearinghouse and how can Congress support ACFs
work in this area?
Answer. The Children's Bureau (CB) and the Office of Planning,
Research and Evaluation (OPRE) have taken the opportunity,
requirements, and timelines within the Family First Prevention Services
Act (FFPSA) with regard to establishing the Title IV-E Prevention
Services Clearinghouse (Clearinghouse) very seriously. Our goal has
been, and remains, to review and rate as many services and programs as
quickly as possible through the Clearinghouse to support States'
efforts to improve outcomes for children and families through
implementation of FFPSA.
In November, CB released ACYF-CB-PI-18-09, which provides
instructions on the requirements State title IV-E agencies must meet
when electing the title IV-E prevention program. The Program
Instruction includes a description of the HHS initial practice criteria
and first list of services and programs selected for review as part of
the Clearinghouse.
The Clearinghouse has developed standards and procedures in
accordance with the statutory requirements detailed in the FFPSA. The
specific statutory requirements mean that these standards and
procedures are unique, and do not precisely match those of any existing
clearinghouse. The Clearinghouse will provide additional information, a
more detailed description of the revised initial criteria, procedures
for systematic review and re-review, and definitions of key terminology
in the Prevention Services Clearinghouse Handbook of Standards and
Procedures, which was published on April 26.
We also released ratings for the first list of programs of services
and will select additional programs and services for review later this
summer.
Below is a more comprehensive timeline of events that have occurred
and estimated dates for the release of additional information:
------------------------------------------------------------------------
EVENT
ESTIMATED DATE
DESCRIPTION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ENACTMENT OF FFPSA
February 2, 2018
The President signed the
Bipartisan Budget Act of
2018, including FFPSA.
rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr
PUBLICATION OF FRN
June 22, 2018
The CB published a FRN
soliciting comments on
the initial criteria and
potential programs and
services for review and
inclusion in the
Clearinghouse.
rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr
CLOSE OF FRN COMMENT
July 22, 2018
The CB received and
PERIOD
reviewed over 360 unique
comments on the FRN.
rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr
AWARD OF
September 2018
The CB awarded the
CLEARINGHOUSE
Clearinghouse contract to
CONTRACT
Abt Associates.
rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr
TITLE IV-E PREVENTION
November 30, 2018
The CB published program
SERVICES PPROGRAM
instructions on the title
INSTRUCTION
IV-E prevention program
for States and title IV-E
Tribal agencies. The CB
concurrently published
program instructions on
the kinship navigator
program and the revised
title IV-E financial
reporting form.
rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr
PREVENTION SERVICES
Spring 2019
Release of the Prevention
CLEARINGHOUSE
Services Clearinghouse
HANDBOOK OF
Handbook of Standards and
STANDARDS AND
Procedures, which will
PPROCEDURES
include (1) procedures
for identifying programs
and services and
associated research
studies for review or re-
review, (2) standards for
assessing the design,
execution, and findings
of research studies and
rating programs and
services, and (3)
definitions of key terms.
rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr
WEBINAR ADDRESSING
Spring 2019
The Clearinghouse project
CLEARINGHOUSE
team will provide an
STANDARDS AND
overview of the standards
PROCEDURES
and procedures and answer
questions about elements
of review processes.
rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr
PROGRAM AND SERVICE
Spring 2019
Release of the ratings of
RATINGS
programs and services
(may be rated as
``promising,''
``supported,'' ``well-
supported,'' or ``does
not currently meet
criteria.'')
rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr
NEXT PROGRAMS AND
August 8, 2019
Release of additional
SERVICES TO BE
programs and services
REVIEWED
selected for systematic
review.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Challenges to the timely review of programs and services for inclusion
in the Clearinghouse:
--The need to award and start-up a new contract to establish and
maintain the Clearinghouse's independent, systematic evidence
review. We explored all options for the most expeditious path
to awarding the contract, while complying with the requirements
of Federal contract law and policy;
--The need to develop standards and procedures. There were key
differences between the statutory requirements of FFPSA and the
standards and procedures used by other clearinghouses;
--Time to engage stakeholders and experts (both through the Federal
Register Notice and targeted outreach) to ensure the
Clearinghouse is relevant and responsive to the field expert
and stakeholder participants have given accolades to the Abt
Associates project team for their rapid progress establishing
the Clearinghouse; and
--The large number of programs and services, across broad topical
areas, that might be considered for review.
--The capacity of the Clearinghouse to review these services. FFPSA
provides a $1 million annual appropriation for the
Clearinghouse and other related technical assistance. The 2020
Budget proposed increasing this appropriation to $8 million
annually in order to better meet the needs of the Clearinghouse
and of States seeking technical assistance in implementing the
law.
Supporting Children and Families Affected by Substance Use Disorder
Question. The fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019 Labor/HHS
appropriations bills each included $100 million in additional funding
at ACF for supporting children and families affected by the opioid
epidemic and substance use, including funding for implementing plans of
infant safe care under CAPTA, Regional Partnership Grants, and Kinship
Navigators. What is ACF doing to support parents and caregivers of all
types affected by substance use, including helping keep families
together successfully when appropriate? What guidance and technical
assistance is HHS providing to States and local service providers,
including making sure they're aware of funding opportunities, and new
opportunities under Family First? What is ACF doing to help build the
evidence-base of what works in supporting children and families
affected by substance use, and how can Congress support these efforts?
Answer. CB is committed to supporting children and families
affected by the opioid epidemic in accordance with the current
statutory structure for doing so. We are also committed to using
technical assistance resources and tools to address the problems of
opioid addiction and its impact on infants, children and families. With
your partnership, we hope to continue and expand these effective
programs. Thank you again for your interest and we hope that this
overview of CB activities and programs to support children and families
affected by substance misuse is responsive to your concerns.
Regional Partnership Grant Program
The Regional Partnership Grant (RPG) program provides competitive
grants that support collaborative partnerships between providers of
child welfare services, substance use disorder treatment, and other
family support services. Grantees are responsible for implementing
regional partnerships aimed at improving the well-being, permanency,
and safety outcomes of children who were in, or at risk of, out-of-home
placement as a result of a parent's or caregiver's substance use
disorder, including opioid use disorder. To comply with the
requirements of the legislation and contribute knowledge to the fields
of child welfare and substance use disorder treatment, all RPG grantees
are required to conduct well-designed local evaluations and participate
in the national cross-site evaluation. Grantees are required to
identify and use appropriate evidence supported or emerging (evidence-
informed) programs or practices and encouraged to consider adapting
these practices for their target populations if needed.
In fiscal year 2018, ACF received $40 million for the RPG Program,
including an additional $20 million appropriation above the authorized
funding level. Funding went to provide continued support to the 17 5-
year RPG grants (in 17 States) that were awarded in September 2017. In
addition, the funding supports the vital programmatic technical
assistance (through the National Center on Substance Abuse and Child
Welfare (NCSACW)) and the cross-site evaluation and evaluation
technical assistance that supports the efforts of RPG grantees and
allows the field to learn from their work. In September 2018, CB
awarded an additional 10 RPG grants in 8 States for a 3-year period.
In fiscal year 2019, ACF again received $40 million for the RPG
Program, including an additional $20 million appropriation above the
authorized funding level. Similar to the prior year, this funding goes
to on-going support of previously awarded grants, as well as
programmatic and evaluation technical assistance, and the cross-site
evaluation. In November 2018, ACF posted a funding announcement for an
anticipated 7 RPG projects.
Technical Assistance to States and Local Communities
The NCSACW is one of the primary ways CB provides technical
assistance to support to communities working to support families
affected by substance use disorders. The mission of the NCSACW is to
improve family recovery, safety and stability by advancing practices
and collaboration among agencies, organizations and courts working with
families affected by substance use and co-occurring mental health
disorders and child abuse or neglect.
NCSACW provides no-cost consultation, training, and technical
assistance to child welfare agencies, substance use disorder treatment
agencies, courts, and their allied systems including healthcare, and
early childhood providers to improve outcomes for children and families
affected by substance use disorders, including opioid use disorders.
NCSACW's technical assistance helps these different systems come
together to develop or enhance policies, practices, and procedures that
benefit families. Technical assistance methods and strategies include
phone, email or web based individualized consultation to provide
information and resources; long term technical assistance programs;
NCSACW Website, which hosts a variety of materials, publications and
resources, including free online tutorials and a Child Welfare Training
Toolkit aimed to improve knowledge and competencies on relevant and
pressing issues of the field; and information dissemination through
national webinars and conference presentations.
For example, the NCSACW has implemented a specialized 18-24 month
In-Depth Technical Assistance (IDTA) program focused on improving the
safety, health, permanency in their relationships, and well-being of
infants with prenatal substance exposure and the recovery of pregnant
and parenting women and their families. States who are currently
receiving IDTA include New York, North Carolina, Maryland, and West
Virginia. It is anticipated that several new communities will be
starting the IDTA program in the summer of 2019. For more information,
please visit https://ncsacw.samhsa.gov/.
Plans of Safe Care
The CB issued Program Instruction (PI) ACYF-CB-PI-18-06 on May 31,
2018. Within that PI, CB notified States of the $60 million increase in
the fiscal year 2018 appropriation for the Child Abuse Prevention and
Treatment Act (CAPTA) State grant. The PI informed States that the
funds were to be prioritized for the development, implementation and
monitoring of plans of safe care for substance-exposed infants,
consistent with the requirement found at 42 U.S.C. 5106a(b)(2)(B)(iii)
(section 106(b)(2)(B)(iii) of CAPTA), as amended by the Comprehensive
Addiction and Recovery Act of 2016 (CARA). The CB also directed States
to include information on their plans for using the increased funding
when submitting the Annual Progress and Services Report and CAPTA State
Grant Annual Report that was due June 30, 2018.
To provide technical assistance to support these implementation
efforts by States, CB has provided technical assistance in several
different ways. The CB has tasked the NCSACW to provide technical
assistance related to CAPTA Plans of Safe Care on several different
levels, including responding to technical assistance requests from
States, creating technical assistance tools for States and communities
to use, and supporting CB technical assistance efforts.
On January 29-30, 2019, CB and its regional office in Region 9,
with the support of the NCSACW, brought together State and county level
teams from Arizona, California, and Nevada to attend a two day
convening to advance the capacity of State and county capacity to
improve the safety, permanency, recovery and well-being of infants with
prenatal substance exposure and their families. State and county teams
included representatives from child welfare, substance use treatment,
court improvement projects, maternal and child health and others.
Participant teams heard from experts from the field, other States
sharing best practices, as well as engaging State and county teams,
with technical assistance support from the NCSACW, to complete concrete
action planning.
In addition, in May 2018, the NCSCAW provided technical assistance
for a regional convening of States working to implement comprehensive
and collaborative approaches to Plans of Safe Care for infants with
prenatal substance exposure and their families/caregivers in Regions 4,
6 and 7. The convening provided all States with a similar knowledge
base on pregnant and parenting women with substance use disorders and
support the implementation of Plans of Safe Care, including issues
related to identification, notification and monitoring of plans of safe
care for infants affected by substance abuse. The sessions provided
opportunities for peer-to-peer discussion on model programs, for
information exchange among peers on States' efforts to implement plans
of safe care, and to highlight resources available to States on these
topics.
CB Central and Regional Office staff have also conducted site
visits to State child welfare agencies in New Jersey, Oregon,
Louisiana, and Ohio in August and September 2018 to gain a greater
understanding of the States' policies and practices related to their
implementation of the CARA amendments to the CAPTA Plans of Safe Care.
NCSACW staff also supported these site visits. Technical assistance
needs were identified through this process, and resources were provided
to States in follow-up. CB is currently in the process of planning
several site visits to be completed in summer of 2019.
Kinship Navigator Program
When parents struggle with opioid addiction and other substance use
disorders, it is often grandparents and other relatives who take
primary responsibility for the care of children in need of a safe and
stable placement. Kinship navigator programs represent an important
strategy to help grandparents and other kin caregivers to learn about
and access programs and services to meet their own needs and the needs
of the children they are raising.
As you know, the FFPSA authorized the use of funding under title
IV-E of the Social Security Act to support kinship navigator programs
that meet criteria as a promising, supported or well- supported
program. On November 30, 2018, the Children's Bureau issued guidance to
States, territories and Tribes participating in the title IV-E program
on the requirements for participating in the title IV-E Kinship
Navigator Program. That guidance included information on the initial
practice criteria being used to assess programs and identified two
initial kinship navigator models identified for review by the Title IV-
E Prevention Services Clearinghouse.
To prepare States, territories and Tribes to participate in that
program, the Congress also appropriated funds under title IV-B of the
Social Security in fiscal years 2018 and 2019 to be used to develop,
expand or evaluate kinship navigator programs. Using the fiscal year
2018 funds, HHS awarded $19 million to 57 State, territorial and Tribal
title IV-E agencies in September 2018. The CB issued guidance on the
actions required to apply for the fiscal year 2019 funding provided
under title IV-B by the Appropriations Committee. The CB is currently
reviewing the applications for funding received and expects to make
awards later this fiscal year.
In addition to the efforts described, the CB has in the past and
will continue to provide information and technical assistance on new
initiatives, funding opportunities, policy changes, other key
information on these programs, through webinars, the maintenance of
related listservs and other outreach activities.
acl
Administration for Community Living
Question. The budget includes cuts to the Developmental
Disabilities Act programs for fiscal year 2020, including a 26 percent
reduction for the State Councils on Developmental Disabilities and 9
percent reduction to the Projects of National Significance. The
Projects of National Significance funding supports data collection and
funding for small, innovative projects that lead to best practices. How
do these cuts compare to the reductions across ACL--are they
commensurate? How would these cuts affect ACL's mission to maximize the
independence, well-being, and health of people with disabilities across
the lifespan?
Answer. The overall requested Program Level is 7 percent below the
fiscal year 2019 Enacted level. While every budget requires difficult
decisions, the requested level prioritizes direct services for older
adults and people with disabilities that help them to remain
independent and participate fully in their communities. At the
requested level, ACL will continue to work to maximize the
independence, well-being, and health of people with disabilities across
the lifespan.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Mr. Secretary, the budget takes unsustainable cuts to the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention. I'm particularly concerned about
the 20 percent reduction to CDC chronic disease initiatives. While I
support providing States with flexibility to allocate resources to best
suit their needs, I am concerned that these cuts, combined with the
elimination of the Preventive Health and Health Services Block Grant,
will only reduce a States' ability to prevent diseases that make up the
vast majority of our Nation's healthcare costs.
Why did the Department cut important resources that go to States
for some of the most critical chronic conditions like heart disease,
stroke, and diabetes?
Answer. In this constrained budget environment, difficult decisions
had to be made across the Federal Government, including at CDC. The
fiscal year 2020 President's Budget request for CDC focused resources
on the highest priority public health activities.
The fiscal year 2020 President's Budget carries forward the fiscal
year 2019 President's Budget proposal to eliminate funding for the
Preventive Health and Health Services Block Grant (PHHSBG). When the
PHHSBG was first authorized in 1981, there were minimal resources
within CDC's budget allocated for categorical programs such as heart
disease, diabetes, immunizations, and obesity, and many States did not
receive funding from CDC to support prevention of chronic disease.
The Budget continues the proposal of the new 5-year block grant
program, America's Health, which will provide flexibility to grantees
and focus on the leading public health challenges faced by States,
Tribes, localities, and territories.
--With block grant funding, States and Tribes have the flexibility to
organize prevention and control efforts and deploy evidence-
based interventions in a manner that makes the most sense to
their jurisdictions and circumstances.
--Grantees could implement customized strategies to:
--Improve the health and quality of life of people living with
heart disease, diabetes, obesity, and arthritis.
--Help people manage and control their high blood pressure.
--Help people who use tobacco to stop using and people who don't
use tobacco to stay tobacco-free.
--Help people make sensible, healthy food and beverage choices
wherever they are.
--Increase opportunities for people to be physically active at
home, at work, in communities, and throughout the day.
CDC will continue to conduct critical science and provide health
information that protects our Nation against health threats, and
respond when these arise.
nih
National Institutes of Health
The fiscal year 2020 budget request reduces funding for the
National Institutes of Health by $4.9 billion or 12.6 percent. I
understand that your budget adheres to the budget cap level and that
required significant reductions across the Department. NIH makes up
nearly half of the Department's budget, so you had to make a difficult
choice with this account. However, has the Department done any analysis
to understand what the impact of these cuts would mean to medical
research? How many grants would be reduced? What research programs
would end? How many labs across the country would close? How many
clinical trials would stop? Simply put, does the Department fully
understand the impact this decision would have on the millions of
Americans suffering from illness and the thousands of scientists trying
to help them?
Answer. NIH estimates that the number of new and competing Research
Project Grants (RPGs) awarded would decrease from about 11,675 in
fiscal year 2019 to 7,894 in fiscal year 2020. In addition, funding for
noncompeting RPGs would be reduced; the size of the reduction to
specific awards would depend on the Institute involved. Similar
reductions to other types of research grants would also be expected. In
general, NIH seeks to avoid reductions of a magnitude that would end
programs or close labs, so that existing research activities can
continue on a smaller scale or slower timeline.
--Research Project Grants (RPGs).--The fiscal year 2020 President's
Budget would provide $18.6 billion for RPGs, which is $2.9
billion less than the fiscal year 2019 estimate. This amount
would fund 7,894 Competing RPGs, or 3,781 less than for the
fiscal year 2019 estimate. It would also support 28,760
Noncompeting RPGs, 1,268 more than the fiscal year 2019
estimate. In addition, the projected average cost for Competing
RPGs of approximately $472,000 would be 12.7 percent below the
fiscal year 2019 projected average cost of nearly $540,600.
--Small Business Innovation Research/Small Business Technology
Transfer (SBIR/STTR).--The fiscal year 2020 President's Budget
would provide $921.1 million for SBIR/STTR program grants,
which is $163.0 million below the fiscal year 2019 estimate.
The minimum set-aside requirement of 3.65 percent is achieved
in fiscal year 2020.
--Research Centers.--The fiscal year 2020 President's Budget would
provide $2,218.0 million for Research Centers, which is $470.2
million less than the fiscal year 2019 estimate. This amount
would fund 1,155 grants, 180 less than the fiscal year 2019
level.
--Other Research.--The fiscal year 2020 President's Budget would
provide $2,209.7 million for this mechanism, which is $280.0
million less than the fiscal year 2019 estimate. This amount
would fund 6,244 grants, which is 752 less than the number of
awards projected for fiscal year 2019.
--Training.--The fiscal year 2020 President's Budget would provide
$801.9 million for training, which is $87.1 million below the
fiscal year 2019 estimate. This amount would fund 14,992 Full-
Time Trainee Positions (FTTPs), which is 1,674 fewer than
planned for fiscal year 2019.
oash
HIV Initiative
Question. Your ``Ending HIV'' initiative would dedicate $291
million with the goal of reducing HIV infections by 75 percent in 5
years and 90 percent in 10 years. Please provide a detailed description
of how the Department identified that these resources would have this
kind of impact on reducing infections over 10 years.
What specific evidence can you point to that this type of
initiative is effective in reducing HIV infections?
It is my understanding that the fiscal year 2020 investment is a
down payment on an initiative that will require additional resources in
future years. What is your best estimate of resources needed over the
next 5 years? Please provide your estimate by fiscal year and Operating
Division.
Answer. As was noted by HHS leadership in an editorial in the
Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA), scientific advances
over the last four decades suggest that, theoretically, the HIV
epidemic in this country could be ended quickly by expanding access to
treatment to all persons with HIV and pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP)
to all those at high risk. Accordingly, the Administration has
developed a practical, achievable plan to focus on hotspots of HIV
infection, both demographic and geographic. Lessons learned and
effective strategies emanating from this initiative would ultimately be
applied to profoundly reduce HIV incidence nationwide through Federal,
State, and local health departments and nongovernmental organizations.
The strategic initiative includes 4 pillars:
--diagnose all individuals with HIV as early as possible after
infection;
--treat HIV infection rapidly and effectively to achieve sustained
viral suppression;
--prevent at-risk individuals from acquiring HIV infection, including
the use of pre- exposure prophylaxis (PrEP); and
--rapidly detect and respond to emerging clusters of HIV infection to
further reduce new transmissions.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2724455.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The fiscal year 2020 budget request is part of a multi-year
initiative focused on ending the HIV epidemic in America by 2030.
Opioids
Question. Secretary Azar, this Subcommittee has worked in a bi-
partisan way to provide $3.8 billion in fiscal year 2019 to address the
opioid epidemic. In fact, fiscal year 2020 will mark the fifth year
that this Subcommittee has dedicated significant resources to address
the epidemic. What data does HHS have to show that these funds are
effective in solving this crisis?
--Where should we prioritize future resources?
--What programs are working and what programs are not?
$1.5 billion is provided directly to States through a flexible
grant so States can use funds as they see fit. Unfortunately, we
continue to hear that States are not spending those funds in a timely
manner. Does HHS know why this is the case? What can be done to
increase the spending rates?
Answer. As noted in the Department's 2018 Annual Report, dedicated
efforts from the Federal Government to communities and individuals have
begun to show promising signs: from 2016 to 2017, according to the HHS-
run National Survey on Drug Use and Health, the number of Americans
initiating heroin use dropped significantly.
From January 2017 through November 2018, there has been a 26
percent decrease in total morphine milligram equivalents dispensed
monthly by pharmacies; a 338 percent increase in naloxone
prescriptions; a 22 percent increase in number of patients receiving
buprenorphine, one form of medication-assisted treatment (MAT) for
opioid addiction, per month; and a 47 percent increase in number of
naltrexone prescriptions, another form of MAT, per month. In addition,
HRSA-funded community health centers saw a 64 percent increase in MAT
patients and 75 percent increase in MAT providers from 2016 to 2017;
SAMHSA's Medication Assisted Treatment--Prescription Drug and Opioid
Addiction program achieved a 62 percent abstinence rate at 6 month
follow-up, exceeding its target rate.
The Department is constantly evaluating its programs, and we look
forward to working with Congress as it determines the best allocation
of resources to fight the opioid epidemic.
In regards to States spending down their grants, the Department
proactively provides technical assistance and stands ready to help in
any way possible.
samhsa
Hair Testing
Question. Secretary Azar, the last surface transportation bill (the
FAST Act) mandated that HHS issue technical guidelines for the adoption
of hair testing as a federally-accepted drug testing method by December
4, 2016. This deadline is now more than 2 years overdue. What is the
reason for the delay? Will you commit to expeditiously completing these
guidelines?
Answer. In August of 2015, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration's (SAMHSA) Drug Testing Advisory Board (DTAB)
recommended that SAMHSA pursue hair as an alternative testing specimen
with the caveats that `` . . . performance standards that sufficiently
address external contamination and hair color impact . . . '' be
established before using hair as a specimen in Federal drug testing
programs. In addition, Section 5402(b) of the Fixing America's Surface
Transportation (FAST) Act, enacted on December 4, 2015, required HHS to
``issue scientific and technical guidelines for hair testing as a
method of detecting the use of a controlled substance for purposes of
section 31306 of title 49, United States Code.''
SAMHSA has critically examined the current state-of-the-science and
technology concerning hair drug testing and the utility of hair as a
specimen for use in Federal programs. During this process, SAMHSA
consulted with subject matter experts including hair testing
researchers; laboratory practitioners and laboratory directors; medical
review officers (MROs); and toxicologists with expertise in workplace
drug testing regulations, programs, technologies, specimens, policy and
is currently completing several studies. As a result of this
evaluation, SAMHSA identified a number of unresolved issues that
currently may limit the feasibility of hair testing for federally
regulated programs.
Due to the complex scientific and legal issues associated with hair
testing, it has taken longer than anticipated to develop the guidelines
required by the FAST Act. HHS has developed a draft proposal of the
Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug Testing using hair,
which is in its final review stages. Once finalized, HHS plans to
submit this proposal to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in
the second quarter of 2019 for review.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jerry Moran
Global Health Security Agenda
Question. The ongoing Ebola outbreak and other infectious disease
threats, such as Zika, and antibiotic resistance, help reinforce the
importance of the Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA)--a growing
partnership of over 64 nations and stakeholders to help create a world
safe and secure from infectious disease threats. Across multiple
agencies, including CDC, USAID, and NIH, $1 billion in GHSA funding
between 2014 and 2019 has supported efforts to build global health
capacity to effectively combat infectious diseases. As you may know,
this pool of funding expires in 2019. Can you speak to the importance
of GHSA funding and commit to work with the members of this committee
to support this vital initiative?
Protecting Americans through building the health security capacity
globally is a core mission of the CDC. The fiscal year 2020 President's
Budget request includes $100 million for CDC for global health
security, which will help to build a sustainable platform as CDC
transitions these activities from supplemental balances to base
appropriations. These funds will allow CDC to continue targeted
bilateral support to countries that are building critical public health
capacity to detect and respond to global health threats, enhance
regional cooperation on priority threats such as viral hemorrhagic
fevers and respiratory diseases, address cross-cutting vulnerabilities
such as access to diagnostic tests and laboratory reagents, and
facilitate rapid deployment of technical support to address emerging
public health challenges.
The United States Government remains committed to the Global Health
Security Agenda (GHSA) and CDC continues to be an active partner
through the next phase, GHSA 2024. The focus of this next phase
includes enhancing accountability for delivering on commitments,
measuring progress, and increasing domestic support for health
security, including through enhanced partnerships with the non-
governmental sector.
Early Career Researchers
The researchers who develop new vaccines, diagnostics and
therapeutics are a vital tool against emerging infectious diseases. The
21st Century Cures Act provided the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
with the means to launch the Next Generation Researchers Initiative.
Can you explain what steps your institute is taking to support early
career researchers? Should any additional steps be taken to ensure the
U.S. has the scientific workforce necessary to meet the needs presented
by emerging threats?
Answer. New scientists and innovative ideas are vital to the health
of the biomedical research enterprise, including efforts to develop
diagnostics, therapeutics, and vaccines to address emerging infectious
diseases. Consistent with the NIH-wide efforts under the Next
Generation Researchers Initiative (NGRI), the National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) has prioritized support for
early-career researchers and has created special programs and used
other funding approaches to ensure a robust biomedical research
workforce for the future.
When applications for NIH research grants are reviewed for
scientific and technical merit, NIH prioritizes funding for early State
investigators with meritorious scores. NIH established this policy to
allow reviewers to evaluate new researchers in the context of the early
stage of their career, when reviewers may expect fewer preliminary data
and publications from such researchers. In addition, when NIAID sets
its payline for investigator-initiated research grants, it typically
sets a second, higher payline for grants supporting new investigators.
As a result, the cut-off point for funding applications is higher for
those seeking support for new investigators than for the general
application pool, making it easier for promising new investigators with
a shorter history of successful research to receive support from an
award. In addition to this preferential payline for grants supporting
new investigators, NIAID also uses ``select pay'' to fund applications
that receive good evaluations but would not otherwise meet the funding
payline. In this case, NIAID may select `high risk, high reward' or
other high priority projects, including those to support early-career
researchers, for funding. Early-career researchers can be supported by
bridge awards as well. Bridge awards are designed to provide short-term
support for scientists who fall just outside the funding limits. NIAID
uses bridge awards to allow time for scientists to gather additional
data in support of a revised funding application. Early-career
researchers may particularly benefit from these types of support as
they move from training to begin their independent research endeavors.
NIH research training grants provide another important resource for
young scientists transitioning to research independence. These training
grants include National Research Service Award institutional research
training grants and the research career ``K'' development awards. NIAID
funds two ``K'' research career development transition awards to
support early-stage investigators, the K22 and the K99. NIAID has
recently expanded its K99 program to target physician-scientists, with
the goal of improving the retention of these individuals in research-
oriented careers. In addition, NIAID recently established its R25
research education program to support educational activities that
complement and enhance research training of early-stage investigators
in NIAID mission areas including emerging infectious diseases.
Lastly, NIAID is implementing a New Innovator Award Pilot Program.
The NIAID Pilot Program would use a `high risk, high reward' funding
mechanism to support applications addressing NIAID research areas,
including biodefense and emerging infectious diseases. The Pilot
Program would encourage innovation by allowing early-stage
investigators to propose bold new ideas with a minimal requirement for
supporting data. NIAID released a request for information in 2018 to
seek input on the Pilot Program from stakeholders throughout the
scientific research community and the general public. The Institute is
now reviewing the public input and finalizing the design of the Pilot
Program. NIAID anticipates that the Pilot Program will help advance
innovations in NIAID research, including promising approaches for
emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases. These NIAID activities
will help ensure support for the scientific workforce necessary to
address emerging public health threats.
The FAST Act mandated that HHS issue technical guidelines for the
adoption of hair testing as a federally-accepted drug testing method
within 1 year of the bills enactment. Unfortunately, that deadline is
now more than 2 years overdue. Will you commit HHS and SAMHSA to
completing the required technical guidelines for hair testing that will
provide trucking companies with an extremely effective tool in
protecting highway safety this year?
Answer. In August of 2015, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration's (SAMHSA) Drug Testing Advisory Board (DTAB)
recommended that SAMHSA pursue hair as an alternative testing specimen
with the caveats that `` . . . performance standards that sufficiently
address external contamination and hair color impact . . . '' be
established before using hair as a specimen in Federal drug testing
programs. In addition, Section 5402(b) of the Fixing America's Surface
Transportation (FAST) Act, enacted on December 4, 2015, required HHS to
``issue scientific and technical guidelines for hair testing as a
method of detecting the use of a controlled substance for purposes of
section 31306 of title 49, United States Code.''
SAMHSA has critically examined the current state-of-the-science and
technology concerning hair drug testing and the utility of hair as a
specimen for use in Federal programs. During this process, SAMHSA
consulted with subject matter experts including hair testing
researchers; laboratory practitioners and laboratory directors; medical
review officers (MROs); and toxicologists with expertise in workplace
drug testing regulations, programs, technologies, specimens, policy and
is currently completing several studies. As a result of this
evaluation, SAMHSA identified a number of unresolved issues that
currently may limit the feasibility of hair testing for federally
regulated programs.
Due to the complex scientific and legal issues associated with hair
testing, it has taken longer than anticipated to develop the guidelines
required by the FAST Act. HHS has developed a draft proposal of the
Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug Testing using hair,
which is in its final review stages. Once finalized, HHS plans to
submit this proposal to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in
the second quarter of 2019 for review.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Shelley Moore Capito
cms
Non-Opioid Alternatives in Surgery/Post-Surgery Settings
Question. The ``SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act,''
included Section 6082 to encourage you to review Medicare payment
systems that may incentivize the use of opioids over proven non- opioid
alternatives--such as continuous peripheral nerve blocks and other
treatments. I know HHS took a small step forward last year with limited
coverage of an injectable alternative, but it seems like a lot more can
and should be done here.
Are you considering any further changes to Medicare's payment
systems in order to incentivize doctors and healthcare providers to use
alternative methods over opioids?
Answer. The Administration has made historic investments to address
opioid misuse, abuse, and overdose, but significant work must still be
done to fully turn the tide of this public health crisis. The
President's Fiscal Year 2020 Budget supports HHS's five-part strategy
to:
--Improve access to prevention, treatment, and recovery services,
including the full range of medication-assisted treatments;
--Better target the availability of overdose-reversing drugs;
--Strengthen our understanding of the crisis through better public
health data and reporting;
--Provide support for cutting edge research on pain and addiction;
and
--Improve pain management practices.
As you noted, based on recommendations from the President's
Commission on Combatting Drug Addiction and the Opioid Crisis, CMS
reviewed its payment policies for certain drugs, specifically non-
opioid pain management treatments, which are bundled into larger
surgical payments in the hospital outpatient setting and ambulatory
surgical centers. In response to this recommendation as well as
stakeholder requests and peer-reviewed evidence, for calendar year
2019, CMS finalized a policy to unbundle and pay separately for non-
opioid pain management drugs that function as a supply when used in a
covered surgical procedure performed in an ambulatory surgical center.
In addition, CMS sought feedback in the Calendar Year 2019 Hospital
Outpatient Prospective Payment System (OPPS) and Ambulatory Surgical
Center (ASC) proposed rule on whether other non-opioid alternatives for
acute or chronic pain, such as drugs and devices, have demonstrated
decreases in opioid prescriptions and whether they warrant separate
payment under the OPPS and ASC payment systems. CMS is continuing to
analyze this issue as the agency implements section 6082 of the SUPPORT
for Patients and Communities Act, which requires review and revisions
to payments under the OPPS and ASC payments systems to avoid financial
incentives to use opioids instead of non-opioid alternatives for pain
management.
42 CFR Part 2
Question. Leadership at HHS has commented on more than one occasion
on the need to modernize 42 CFR Part 2 which sets requirements limiting
the use and disclosure of patients' substance use records from certain
substance use programs. Is your Department planning to initiate such a
rulemaking process?
Answer. The Part 2 regulations were established in order to protect
Americans with substance use disorders from facing threats to their
privacy or encountering discrimination in the provision of their
healthcare, among other negative consequences. But the law underlying
Part 2 was adopted more than 40 years ago in a less complex healthcare
environment, and the Department now believes it can be perceived as a
barrier to patients' receiving high quality, coordinated medical care.
Part 2 has become a bigger challenge because more medical
professionals than ever are getting involved in the provision of
treatment for substance use disorders. That's a great thing, and it's
not something we want our regulations to stand in the way of. Reforming
Part 2 and clarifying the many points of confusion around both Part 2
and HIPAA will be a boon to all providers who want to provide better
quality, more coordinated care.
Comprehensive Opioid Recovery Centers (CORCs)
Question. The ``SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act,''
[Section 7121] authorized $10 million per year for the next 5 years to
establish Comprehensive Opioid Recovery Centers in at least 10 of the
States that have been most hard hit by the opioid crisis. The
President's fiscal year 2020 budget includes $786 million for the
implementation of the SUPPORT Act, but does not provide additional
information on the specific funding levels of the various programs
authorized by the SUPPORT Act. Does HHS intend to fund the
implementation of the Comprehensive Opioid Recovery Centers out of this
$786 million in funding and at the full $10 million authorized by
Congress?
Answer. The Budget sustains $4.8 billion in critical investments to
combat the opioid crisis using HHS's five-part strategy focused on
surveillance, addiction prevention, treatment, and recovery services,
access to overdose reversal drugs, pain management, and research. We
look forward to working with Congress in our implementation of the
SUPPORT Act.
SAMSHA Interagency Task Force on Trauma-Informed Care
Question. Section 7132 of the ``SUPPORT for Patients and
Communities Act'' created the Interagency Task Force on Trauma-Informed
Care and established SAMSHA Assistant Secretary McCance-Katz as the
chairperson. Section 7132 required that the Task Force membership be
appointed within 60 days of enactment of the law, which occurred on
December 24, 2018, with the first meeting to occur sixty days later. It
is my understanding that the Task Force is not yet organized and
operational, is this correct? If so, why has this delay occurred and
what is the timeline for this to be rectified?
Answer. The Interagency Task Force on Trauma-Informed Care held its
first meeting on March 31 and again on July 12 with strong
representation from across Federal agencies. SAMHSA has begun
organizing the Task Force to address the requirements in the law.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Cindy Hyde-Smith
ahrq
Question. The current President of the American Osteopathic
Association Dr. Bill Mayo is from Mississippi, and we also have a
relatively new osteopathic school of medicine at William Carey
University. Compared to their MD counterparts, DOs participate less in
Federal research programs. How can the Department of Health and Human
Services work with osteopathic medical schools to ensure that DOs are
included in Federal research projects, particularly as it relates to
primary care?
Answer. AHRQ and other HHS OPVIVs are happy to meet with
organizations new to getting grants and answer any questions. More
information about AHRQ's Funding opportunities can be found at (https:/
/www.ahrq.gov/funding/policies/foaguidance/index.html) In addition,
AHRQ has a number of opportunities to engage in collaborations aimed at
increasing the uptake of evidence in practice and improving quality and
outcomes of care. Two current opportunities are our Cardiac
Rehabilitation Initiative which aims to reduce rates of heart attack
and strokes in people who have had a cardiac event by engaging
hospitals across the Nation (https://www.ahrq.gov/news/newsroom/press-
releases/cardiac-rehabilitation-project.html) and our AHRQ evidence-
based Care Transformation Support (ACTS) Initiative which is seeking to
learn how to best use informatics to make it easier to access evidence
at the point of care (https://healthit.ahrq.gov/acts).
cdc
Question. Secretary Azar, I am concerned that the special
conditions around Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs that the
Centers for Disease Control has included in the recent notice of
funding opportunity for the Overdose Data to Action funding this
Committee provided. Those conditions, which require that States connect
to the Department of Justice's RxCheck system in addition to the
National Association of Boards of Pharmacies' PMP Interconnect system,
impose long-term costs on States and appear duplicative. I have a few
questions about this decision:
--It is my understanding that States have had the option of using
RxCheck for several years now, but most States have chosen not
to. Why have States not adopted RxCheck voluntarily? Why does
CDC need to force States to adopt RxCheck?
--What is the need for two separate interstate data sharing hubs that
do the same thing?
--What is the expected timeline for RxCheck to be fully operational
as an interstate data sharing hub for all 50 States, DC, Puerto
Rico, and the Defense Health Agency?
--How will HHS help States and their end-users (pharmacy benefit
systems, EHRs, HIEs, etc.) rebuild their integration
capabilities to accommodate RxCheck and PMP Interconnect?
--How many States have connected to RxCheck and are live (i.e. using
RxCheck to send and receive interstate data queries)?
--How many interstate data sharing requests are currently being
processed monthly through RxCheck?
--Does the CDC plan to provide funding for the ongoing annual
maintenance costs associated with connecting to RxCheck after
the 3-year grant period of the Overdose Data to Action funding
is over?
Answer. The Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA) included grant
condition language within their Notice of Awards under their Hal Rogers
PDMP program. In the interest of Federal collaboration and stewardship,
CDC included similar language within its fiscal year 2019 Overdose Data
to Action Notice of Funding Opportunity (D2A NOFO). The award
conditions reflect CDC's commitment to preserving State flexibility in
selecting technology solutions that best address a State's needs. CDC
is committed to ensuring that States have access to multiple platforms
to support interstate and intrastate integration, regardless of vendor
used. This includes providing options for prescription drug monitoring
program (PDMP) interstate data sharing as well as supporting PDMP
integration within electronic health records (EHRs) and health
information exchanges (HIEs). The aim is to maximize interconnectivity
of all innovative resources that exist within this space.
The award conditions require that
--States maintain ownership of the PDMP data they collect. This will
help ensure that the State (or the State entity that operates
the PDMP) maintains control over its data, including the
ability to promptly access the data from subrecipients or
contractors;
--States must establish and maintain access to the Bureau of Justice
Assistance's (BJA's) designated PDMP data sharing system, the
RxCheck Hub. The intent is to give states an optional platform,
and therefore greater flexibility, when initiating and/or
responding to a data-sharing request.
A State will not be required to switch its data sharing and
integration work to RxCheck hub. The award conditions allow each State
to determine its preferred hub for initiating interstate data sharing
requests with another State or States. The award conditions do require
a State to receive and respond to requests received using the preferred
hub of the initiating State. A State that wishes to initiate queries
using, for example, PMP Interconnect is fully compliant with the award
conditions if the state initiates queries using PMP InterConnect.
States remain free to use proprietary solutions such as the PMP
Interconnect--Gateway connection for interstate data sharing and
intrastate integration work. CDC will continue to support States in
maximizing and enhancing the use of PDMPs.
Question. What is the need for two separate interstate data sharing
hubs that do the same thing?
Answer. Currently, there are a limited number of national platforms
that facilitate bilateral exchange of data across State lines. The
first is RxCheck Hub from the U.S. Department of Justice's Bureau of
Justice Assistance and the second is PMP Interconnect from the National
Association of Boards of Pharmacy (NABP), which was developed and is
operated by Appriss, Inc. CDC is committed to ensuring that States have
access to both the RxCheck hub and PMP Interconnect to support
interstate and intrastate integration, regardless of State vendor used.
The special conditions are designed to support State flexibility in
moving toward interstate and intrastate interoperability. This includes
providing options for PDMP interstate data sharing as well as
supporting PDMP integration with electronic health records (EHRs) and
health information exchanges (HIEs). The aim is to maximize
interconnectivity of all innovative resources that exist within this
space. CDC wants to ensure that all States have options to advance
interstate and intrastate data sharing in a manner best suited for the
State and the health systems within a State.
The special conditions require recipients to maintain an active
connection to the RxCheck hub, and States remain free to use
proprietary solutions such as the PMP Interconnect--Gateway connection
for interstate data sharing and intrastate integration work. The award
conditions allow each State to select their preferred solution to
initiate interstate data sharing queries. A State that wishes to
initiate queries using PMP Interconnect is fully compliant with the
grant conditions if they initiate queries using PMP InterConnect. The
grant condition requires a State to receive and respond to requests
received using the preferred hub of the initiating State.
Question. What is the expected timeline for RxCheck to be fully
operational as an interstate data sharing hub for all 50 States, DC,
Puerto Rico, and the Defense Health Agency?
Answer. As outlined above, CDC is requiring its grantees to be able
to connect to RxCheck. We defer to BJA to address technical questions
regarding operability of RxCheck.
Question. How will HHS help States and their end-users (pharmacy
benefit systems, EHRs, HIEs, etc.) rebuild their integration
capabilities to accommodate RxCheck and PMP Interconnect?
Answer. CDC award conditions do not require States to change
preferred platforms for intrastate integration efforts. Rather, the
award conditions apply to interstate data sharing and require that a
State maintain a connection to RxCheck in order to respond to States
initiating interstate data sharing requests via RxCheck. Having largely
addressed interstate data sharing, many States are moving towards a
broader policy goal of integrating their PDMP with EHRs and HIEs. CDC's
interest is in working alongside Federal partners to support all States
by creating open-source pathways towards integration that are scalable,
financially sustainable, and affordable to all users, including under-
resourced communities and health systems.
CDC is committed to ensuring that States have access to both the
RxCheck hub and PMP Interconnect to support interstate and intrastate
integration. These are CDC priorities, in that they advance the
meaningful use of PDMPs by making them easier to use and more
accessible, regardless of vendor used. The aim is to maximize
interconnectivity of all innovative resources that exist within this
space. These special conditions may expand the interconnectedness of
States and bring on additional States as information sharing partners.
In response to fiscal year 2018 omnibus report language, CDC is
working with the Office of the National Coordinator for Health
Information Technology to enhance integration of PDMPs and EHRs. For
example, CDC/ONC are launching demonstrations in six healthcare systems
to enable effective integration into clinical workflow and will provide
technical assistance and resources to States to scale integration
efforts based on the results of the demonstration.
Question. How many States have connected to RxCheck and are live
(i.e. using RxCheck to send and receive interstate data queries)?
Answer. Twenty-six States are either live, undergoing testing, or
in the process of authorizing their memorandum of understanding (MOU)
and connecting with RxCheck. An additional seven States have expressed
interest in using RxCheck. BJA maintains a map that was most recently
updated in April 2019, which is located here: http://
www.pdmpassist.org/pdf/RxCheck_states_map_20190411.pdf.
Question. How many interstate data sharing requests are currently
being processed monthly through RxCheck?
Answer. CDC defers to BJA, which administers RxCheck, to address
this technical question.
Question. Does the CDC plan to provide funding for the ongoing
annual maintenance costs associated with connecting to RxCheck after
the 3-year grant period of the Overdose Data to Action funding is over?
Answer. Connection to the RxCheck hub is free. Although there is no
direct cost to connect to RxCheck hub, Overdose Data to Action award
recipients can use the first year of PDMP enhancement funds to assist
in complying with these special conditions if connection fees are
instituted by vendors. CDC will include a $215,000 enhancement in the
award to cover vendor fees associated with connecting to RxCheck.
Overdose Data to Action is a 3-year funding award. CDC is poised to
continue to support states with resources for opioid overdose
prevention, contingent upon Congressional intent and appropriation.
Question. Last fall, I joined several of my colleagues in a letter
urging the Department to utilize its existing authority and extend the
time window needed to fully develop medical residency programs. This
additional time, commonly referred to as ``cap flexibility'', can
greatly aid a program in the midst of recruiting residents and faculty
members needed to keep pace with a community's changing public health
needs.
Can you describe in detail how the Department intends to carry out
this authority as granted back in 1997, under Public Law 105-33?
Secretary Azar, research indicates that the location of a
physician's residency and/or fellowship program is predictive of their
ultimate practice location. This holds true in rural areas whereby
graduates are three times more likely to stay in the region than urban
residency program graduates. Knowing of this trend, can we get your
commitment to cap flexibility as an additional physician retention tool
tailored for areas facing workforce disparities?
Answer. We share your goal of improved support for hospitals'
efforts to train more residents in underserved areas. To this end, the
President's Fiscal Year 2020 Budget includes a proposal that would
consolidate Federal GME spending from Medicare, Medicaid, and the
Children's Hospitals GME program into a single grant program for
teaching hospitals. Under this proposal, the Secretary would have the
authority to modify the amounts distributed based on the proportion of
residents training in priority specialties or programs (e.g., primary
care, geriatrics) and based on other criteria identified by the
Secretary, including addressing healthcare professional shortages and
educational priorities. This program will be more responsive to rural
health workforce needs. Patients and providers would be well served by
these commonsense reforms. The new grant program would be operated
jointly by CMS and the Health Resources and Services Administration
Administrators.
hrsa
Question. Secretary Azar, how many hospitals have already been
helped so far through the HRSA project with the Delta Regional
Authority? Do you have any success story you can share at this time?
Answer. There are currently twelve hospitals receiving technical
assistance through the HRSA project with the Delta Regional authority.
It is anticipated that ten more hospitals will be selected to receive
technical assistance in the upcoming year, which will expand the
program's reach to all eight States in the Delta region.
Each of the twelve hospitals receiving technical assistance have a
broad range of challenges to address with some more severe than others.
While it does take time to see quantitative outcomes through this type
of project, there are two hospitals in Missouri that were on the brink
of closure and have remained open after receiving technical assistance.
The first hospital, the Iron County Medical Center, received a
Financial Operational assessment and Primary Care Option assessment
within three weeks of participating in this program. This quick action
allowed the hospital to avoid closure and instead seek debt relief
through Chapter 9 Bankruptcy, which will allow the hospital time to
build financial stability. Additionally, the Primary Care Options
assessment found consolidation opportunities that will add over
$500,000 to the hospital's bottom line.
Another example is the Pemiscot Memorial Hospital. Through the
technical assistance program, the hospital leadership developed and
implemented policies and procedures to ensure corporate compliance,
especially with regard to physician payment, as well as physician
contracts that now target quality and productivity. The hospital
leadership now has control of payment to physicians through sound
contracting and payment processes, which helps to ensure future
financial success of the organization. The hospital executive team
cites specific changes in culture and they are now driving performance
improvements with the Board of Director's support and engagement.
Question. Secretary Azar, both Mississippi and South Carolina are a
part of the President's proposed HIV initiative. HRSA's Centers of
Excellence in Telehealth also located in Mississippi and South
Carolina. How can telehealth be used to provide linkages to care for
HIV patients, especially for patients in rural States? How can HRSA use
its Centers of Excellence, especially those with existing sites in
FQHCs, to develop a model of using technology to reach those rural HIV
patients?
Answer. The HRSA Telehealth Centers of Excellence (COEs) are
located in academic universities in Mississippi and South Carolina
(University of Mississippi Medical Center and Medical University of
South Carolina, respectively) and have implemented a wide range of
telehealth projects. The programs can focus on the delivery and impact
of telehealth across a variety of areas, some of which include:
--Diagnosis based programs--diabetes care, hypertension, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), stroke, and HIV
--Care access--telemergency care; primary care, including federally
Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs); school based settings; and
correctional facilities
--Telehealth education--distance education for medical and nursing
students and clinicians
In addition to a varied program focus, the COE's integrate a wide
range of technology and modalities including direct-to-consumer, remote
monitoring, mobile carts and video conferencing. Also, as part of their
program goals, the COEs continue to partner with primary care sites and
rural community hospitals to incorporate telehealth programs and
networks to improve access to healthcare services in rural and
underserved communities, particularly those with high rates of poverty
and chronic disease. The Centers of Excellence can examine applications
and approaches to apply telehealth to rural HIV patients. In their role
as telehealth service testbeds, the Centers are able to test the most
promising ways to virtually bring the expertise of Ryan White treatment
centers into FQHCs which are not currently enabled for HIV treatment.
They can also examine telehealth as a way to incorporate pre-exposure
prophylaxis management or TelePrEP into FQHCs and will test
opportunities for compliance assessment and monitoring of patients in a
non-traditional treatment center, lowering stigma and increasing
convenience in access, as well as assess how the ECHO model may be used
for HIV training in FQHCs. These partnerships afford the COEs a unique
position to support a comprehensive approach to the care of patients
living with HIV.
Question. Secretary Azar, physician workforce is so important in my
State, where we have the worst physician shortage in the country.
Experts project a national physician shortage ranging between 40,800 to
104,900 by 2030. These projections are hitting underserved areas
throughout Mississippi particularly hard, causing an even greater
impact when one of our local hospitals closes. Separate from
consolidating graduate medical education programs, as outlined in the
Fiscal Year 2020 Budget Proposal, please describe the steps that agency
officials are taking to address this patient care crisis.
Answer. HRSA works to foster a healthcare workforce that is able to
address current and future needs. Below are some of the many steps HRSA
has taken through its programs to address the shortage of physicians in
rural and underserved communities.
--National Health Service Corps (NHSC) ($415 million in fiscal year
2020): The NHSC provides loan repayment and scholarships to
clinicians in exchange for their working in underserved
communities in urban, rural, and Tribal areas.
--Across the Nnation, NHSC clinicians serve patients in Health
Professional Shortage Areas (HPSAs)--communities with
limited access to healthcare. As of September 30, 2018,
there were 10,939 primary care medical, dental, and mental
and behavioral health practitioners providing service
nationwide via the NHSC.
--Teaching Health Center Graduate Medical Education (THCGME) program
($126.5 million in fiscal year 2020): Bolsters the primary care
workforce through support for new and expanded primary care and
dental residency programs. Unlike most residency programs that
train in hospitals, the THCGME Program was created to
specifically increase physician training in community-based
settings such as federally Qualified Health Centers.
--Since the THCGME program began, 880 new primary care physicians and
dentists have graduated and entered the workforce.
--64 percent of THCGME gradate physicians and dentists are currently
practicing in a primary care setting and approximately 58
percent are currently practicing in a medically underserved
community and/or rural setting. In comparison, the national
average of physicians going into primary care is only
approximately 33 percent.
--National Center for Health Workforce Analysis ($4.6 million in
fiscal year 2020): Through the National Center for Health
Workforce Analysis, HRSA collects and analyzes health workforce
data and information to inform targeted workforce investments.
______
Question Submitted by Senator James Lankford
Question. An Obama administration rule change that took effect on
January 11, 2017 expanded the non-discrimination clause of Title IV-E
of the Social Security Act, which has resulted in faith-based Child
Placing Agencies being faced with the dilemma of no longer considering
religious beliefs when placing children in homes at the risk of losing
funding and possibly their CPA license.
On January 23, the Administration issued an exception to South
Carolina as it relates to this rule, so that its faith-based child
welfare organizations can continue to help children and families across
the State. But as you know, there are many more faith-based adoption
agencies in the country. What is the plan moving forward in regard to
this rule or additional waivers?
Answer. The rule in question has been challenged in litigation and
it would be inappropriate to comment on it at this time. With respect
to future RFRA exceptions, the Department will consider requests from
fund recipients for exceptions from certain Departmental requirements,
as South Carolina and Miracle Hill so requested from the religious non-
discrimination provision of 45 CFR Sec. 75.300(c), or requirements from
any other HHS regulation they believe substantially burden their
religious exercise or reduce the scope of available foster and adoption
care providers. No case is prejudged and each request is considered on
its own merits in light of the facts and the law. The Department's
Office for Civil Rights may also consider complaints under its
authority that a Departmental requirement violates a person's or
entities' religious beliefs or moral convictions. Such conscience
complaints are also independently considered on the basis of their own
factual and legal circumstances.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Patty Murray
Child Care
Question. High-quality, affordable child care is crucial to
ensuring that parents can go to work, school, or enroll in job training
to increase their skills. It also helps children start school ready to
succeed and grows our economy. Yet, analysis from HHS' Office of
Planning, Research, and Evaluation shows that only 15 percent of
children eligible for child care assistance under Federal rules
receives it, whether through CCDBG or a related funding stream like
TANF or SSBG. If child care is such a priority for you and this
Administration, why doesn't your budget increase funding for CCDBG so
that more children and families can get the help they need?
Other than CCDBG, State expenditures on child care also come from
TANF and SSBG, whether directly or through transfers. How does your
Budget support families' child care needs, given that it eliminates
SSBG and cuts funding for TANF?
Answer. We agree that quality, affordable child care is important
for both the health of the economy as well as the well-being of our
Nation's children. We know that the need for quality child care options
is greater than the current supply and this budget reflects our
commitment to working with States to increase the supply of affordable
child care and ensure that children are cared for in safe settings that
support their development.
Some additional context may be useful regarding the HHS Office of
the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation's estimate that 15
percent of eligible children are served. It should be noted that this
figure:
--reflects the latest available data and does not take into account
potential changes in the number of children served as a result
of funding increases in fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019;
--does not take into account that not all eligible families apply for
child care subsidies and may have children enrolled in other
programs/services, they may not be aware of the availability of
subsidies, or they may have trouble navigating the subsidy
system;
--reflects the percent of eligible children served under Federal
eligibility rules, whereas the ASPE analysis also finds that
under State eligibility rules (which are narrower than Federal
rules), the percentage of eligible children served is
approximately 25 percent.
This budget proposes to maintain the large increases to the Child
Care and Development Block Grant (CCDBG) discretionary funding that
were included in the fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019
appropriations. States are already using these funds to increase
supply, improve payment rates, and meet other new requirements of the
Child Care and Development Fund (CCDF) program. Maintaining this
increase will ensure that States can continue making key changes to
improve their Child Care and Development Fund (CCDF) programs.
This budget proposal also includes a significant increase to Child
Care Entitlement (CCE), which when combined with CCDBG funding, is
estimated to serve approximately 1.8 million children and continue the
progress made since reauthorization to improve the supply and quality
of care and provide transparent information to both providers and
parents. This CCE increase offsets changes made in other parts of the
budget, including the Social Services Block Grant funding elimination
and TANF program changes, to maintain investments in child care.
There is also a proposed one-time investment of $1 billion in CCE
funding for a competitive fund aimed at building the supply of care for
underserved populations and to stimulate employer investment in child
care. The funding, available for obligation for 5 years, will be
awarded to States with the goal of building the supply of care by
helping certain categories/types of providers enter and stay in the
market. This would include home-based providers, providers serving
student parents, and providers offering care during non-traditional
hours.
HHS is committed to helping low-income working families meet their
child care needs, and this budget reflects this priority by supporting
the tremendous work that States are already doing parents and their
children.
asa
HHS Employees
Question. Last September, I wrote you a letter asking that HHS
bargain in good faith with its employees instead of declaring an
impasse and turning to the Federal Services Impasses Panel (FSIP) to
impose a contract that the employees had no real say in. Now it appears
that the FSIP has essentially sided with HHS and rolled back key
provisions that HHS employees and their union had fought for over
years--rolling back telework opportunities, shortening employee
appeals, restricting leave and limiting the amount of official time
available for use by union leaders.
Why has the Department proceeded with the anti-worker provisions
listed above? Why did HHS engage in classic ``surface'' bargaining, as
outlined in my September 2018 letter? Do you agree that imposing a
contract without employee input could have a significant impact on
employee morale?
Answer. Thank you for your questions concerning the Collective
Bargaining Agreement (CBA) between the Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) and the National Treasury Employees Union (NTEU). The
collective bargaining mandated by statute for the Federal sector is
quite complex and very labor intensive. That being said, HHS represents
the taxpayer and the acts as the fiduciary that is responsible for
maintaining the efficient and effective government.
HHS began bargaining with NTEU over the successor agreement in
2015. Initially, NTEU was not interested in discussing the ``ground
rules'' for the term agreement. After some time, NTEU negotiated on two
separate occasions for a total of four (4) hours and then requested
Federal Mediation Conciliatory Service Assistance. (FMCS) After four
(4) hours with a mediator, NTEU moved the ``ground rules'' to the
Federal Services Impasses Panel (FSIP) for final disposition, and FSIP
issued the ground rules order to the parties in a manner favorable to
NTEU.
The measures HHS proceeded with were not anti-worker. Our goal was
to negotiate an agreement that facilitated an efficient work process.
HHS was ready, willing and available to ``quid pro quo'' bargain at the
table, but it was clearly apparent that NTEU was not interested
innegotiating. In this type of situation, the only available option in
the Federal labor negotiating process is to seek FMCS assistance and
finally have FSIP intervene and issue a final order.
NTEU has filed a national grievance in which it raised four issues
related to bargaining over the term bargaining agreement. Recently, a
neutral arbitrator hearing this grievance issued an award in which he
found that HHS did not bargain in bad faith and did not violate rule,
law or regulation. The arbitrator also found that the facts did not
support any of the grievances, and he dismissed the grievance in full.
HHS is proud of our mission and our employees. As the second (2nd)
highest ranked large Federal agency, as rated by our employees in the
2018 Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey, it is quite clear that we are
employee and efficiency focused.
aspe
Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act
Question. Earlier this year, the President signed into law a bill I
co-wrote with former Speaker Paul Ryan called the ``Foundations for
Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018'' (Public Law 115-435).
What steps is the Department of Health and Human Services taking to
prioritize implementation of the bill's key provisions, including those
related to developing a multi-year learning agenda, tapping senior
leaders to fulfill the law's goals (i.e., the Chief Data Officer,
Evaluation Officer, and Statistical Officer), improving coordination of
data at the Department, and ultimately improving accessibility of
health and human services data?
Answer. The Department is currently evaluating the most appropriate
approach for implementing the Foundations for Evidence-Based
Policymaking Act of 2018 (Evidence Act). We are currently in the
process of implementing a leadership and coordinating structure for
implementation of all three titles of the Act in accordance with the
law and per recent guidance from the Office of Management and Budget.
The HHS Data Council was named as a best practice for coordinating
data in the Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking's
Recommendations, and is actively participating in the Department's
efforts to appropriately implement the Evidence Act. The HHS Data
Council has formed three subcommittees to examine the best approaches
to coordinate and share data for evidence-building purposes: models for
building and maintaining a data catalogue; data governance models as
well as issues pertaining to privacy, security, and confidentiality
across HHS; and the data science workforce needed to ensure a
coordinated approach to workforce capacity and issues. Additionally,
HHS will be using the Evidence and Evaluation Council for
implementation of developing multi-year evidence-building plans,
evaluation plans, and conducting a capacity assessment.
Question. The Department did not include a request for additional
resources to support implementation; how does the Department intend to
ensure the capacity exists to implement this new law?
Answer. The date the bill was signed into law did not provide
sufficient time to assess the impact of implementing the law. We will
be reviewing fiscal year 2022 HHS budget guidance as part of
implementation and we will work with the leadership and coordinating
structure mentioned above.
Question. What is the Department's timeline for designating the
senior leaders?
Answer. The Department anticipates designating the Evaluation,
Statistical, and Chief Data Officers later this summer.
HIV Initiative
The budget includes a new initiative aimed at ending our Nation's
HIV epidemic in the next decade through modest, but focused, increases
for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Indian Health
Service, and the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program. However, the budget's
deep cuts to the Medicaid program would gravely compromise efforts to
eliminate new infections. The President's renewed call for repealing
the Affordable Care Act and over $2 trillion in cuts to Medicaid and
Medicare would greatly setback access to healthcare for people living
with HIV, hobbling efforts to end the epidemic domestically. The bottom
line is ending the HIV epidemic requires affordable, comprehensive
health coverage and a robust and sustainable healthcare system, which
this Administration is working to undermine daily.
--Has HHS evaluated how many people living with HIV/AIDS will be
affected if this Administration is successful at striking down
the ACA and Medicaid expansion?
--How can communities fight the HIV epidemic if you cut billions from
Medicaid and large numbers of people living with HIV find
themselves unable to pay for care?
Answer. The Ending HIV Epidemic initiative is funded solely through
discretionary resources. The resources proposed in the budget will
cover testing, diagnosis, PrEP, and treatment for individuals who are
uninsured or under-insured. To the extent that reductions in HIV
infections and the related cost of the treatment of disease are
mitigated by these prevention efforts, we expect in actuality the cost
burdens to programs like Medicaid, which covers a broad range of
services for individuals living with HIV/AIDS, to be reduced.
Sexually Transmitted Diseases and HIV
Question. According to the CDC, the rates of sexually transmitted
diseases are at the highest levels ever recorded, with 2.3 million
cases of chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis diagnosed in 2017. If left
untreated, STDs can lead to infertility, newborn death, and an
increased risk of HIV transmission. I was also particularly alarmed to
see the rise in congenital syphilis where 40 percent of the cases
result in infant or newborn death.
--How does your Department plan to address this growing public health
problem, particularly without any request for increased funding
to prevent the spread of these diseases?
--Given that research studies indicate that having an STD makes it
easier to transmit HIV, how does your agency plan to address
STDs in the proposed initiative to end HIV?
Answer. As you noted, rates of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs)
are increasing rapidly in the United States. These increases are
leading to adverse health effects, including infertility, ectopic
pregnancy, stillbirth in infants, and increased HIV risk. In response
to this public health concern, the Department is initiating a process
to develop the first national action plan to address STDs.
The Office of HIV/AIDS and Infectious Disease Policy (OHAIDP) has
begun this process by launching an STD Action Plan Federal Steering
Committee. The Federal Steering Committee will help oversee the
development process and ensure that the final action plan will serve as
a solid foundation to improve national efforts to address the alarming
rise in STDs.
The proposed HIV initiative will incorporate prevention strategies
that build off the information we already know: STDs can increase the
risk of spreading HIV; some activities can put people at increased risk
for both STDs and HIV; and people who have STDs are more likely to get
HIV, when compared to people who do not have STDs.
joint ocr/samhsa
HHS Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
Question. HHS OCR fiscal year 2020 budget request for the Health
Information Privacy (HIP) Division was $1,562,000, which is $2,525,000
below the fiscal year 2019 Enacted Level. The budget request indicates
that OCR plans to fund 20 FTEs for the HIP Division or 2 below the
fiscal year 2019 level. The HIP Division is considered a high growth
area for OCR that is actively working to implement provisions of the
HITECH Act and the 21st Century Cures Act. Given that the rate of
health information privacy cases increased 12 percent from fiscal year
2017 and this trend is likely to grow, how will the HIP Division
continue to investigate and resolve industry compliance with HIPAA
privacy, security and breach notification regulations with a smaller
budget and less FTE support?
Answer. OCR's dedication to vigorous enforcement of health
information privacy laws remains unwavering. OCR has access to
carryover from HIPAA settlements that will enable OCR to continue
accomplishing its vital mission of enforcing our health information
privacy laws with the funds and authorities Congress has given it,
while furthering all other aspects of OCR's mission, including vigorous
civil rights and conscience and religious freedom enforcement.
ocr
Question. The HHS OCR Conscience and Religious Freedom Division
(CRFD), established in fiscal year 2018 in response to the President's
Executive Order to ``vigorously enforce Federal law's robust
protections for religious freedom'' is the only division in OCR that
features a substantial increase in the fiscal year 2020 budget request.
OCR did not meet its target for half of the performance measures listed
in its fiscal year 2019 overview of outputs and outcomes, including its
target for investigated complaints resulting in corrective action, the
number of covered entities making substantive policy changes, and the
management of civil rights administrative closures. The CRFD
discretionary budget request of $4,889,000 is $1,071,000 above the
fiscal year 2019 Enacted Level, and this funding would be used to
support an additional 6 FTEs as well as overhead costs. CRFD high
impact cases in fiscal year 2018 only constituted 6 percent of the
cases retained that year. Overall, OCR did not meet its target for half
of the performance measures listed in its fiscal year 2019 overview of
outputs and outcomes, including its target for investigated complaints
resulting in corrective action, the number of covered entities making
substantive policy changes, and the management of civil rights
administrative closures.
Given that OCR is projected to experience a 17 percent increase in
complaint receipts from fiscal year 2017 to fiscal year 2018 and half
of its performance measures were not met in the previous fiscal year,
how does the Office justify increasing funding for CRFD at the expense
of funding for other divisions like HIP, which investigates high
profile cases as a substantial part of its enforcement work?
Answer. HHS established the CRFD in order to ensure compliance with
Federal conscience protection laws in HHS health and human services
programs, including RFRA and the 25 Federal healthcare conscience and
anti-discrimination laws identified in the proposed rule related to
conscience protection released on January 26, 2018, as well as the need
to provide education and guidance on the existence of, requirements
imposed by, and rights created under, these laws. The need has been
confirmed by the significant number of complaints received by OCR since
the beginning of the Administration. The need is additionally sustained
by and comports with Executive Order 13798, ``Promoting Free Speech and
Religious Liberty'' (May 4, 2017), 82 FR 21675, which states that the
Administration will vigorously enforce the Federal law's robust
protections for religious freedom, as well as the Attorney General's
Guidance on Federal Law Protections for Religious Liberty (October 6,
2017), which interprets religious liberty protections in Federal law
for Federal agencies and provides guidance to Federal agencies in
conforming their programs to the requirements of such laws. OCR
established the Conscience and Religious Freedom Division pursuant to
Secretarial authorization as set forth in 83 FR 2802. This action
follows previous OCR reorganizations including the establishment of the
Health Information Privacy and Civil Rights Divisions. See 81 FR 95622
(2016); 75 FR 60757 (2010); 74 FR 39325 (2009); 69 FR 48243 (2004); 65
FR 19379 (2000); 57 FR 14723-01 (1992). CRFD carries out its mission
through case investigation and enforcement, policy development,
education and outreach, and compliance efforts. CRFD provides the
organizational structure in OCR to elevate conscience and religious
freedom to equal footing with OCR's civil rights and health information
privacy programs. CRFD conducts OCR's nationwide investigation and
enforcement activities under HHS's conscience and religious freedom
authorities. The centralization of investigation and enforcement
activities of conscience and religious freedom issues in Headquarters
is similar to the model OCR used when it began administering its new
health information privacy responsibilities in the early 2000s. This
model maximizes OCR's ability to build expertise and capacity in
handling complex, sensitive, and novel enforcement and policy questions
of first impression.
OCR stood up the division in the second quarter of fiscal year 2018
and hired its first Deputy Director in the third quarter of fiscal year
2018. Consequently, fiscal year 2019 is the first year for which OCR
has set targets for its conscience and religious freedom cases.
Question. CRFD anticipates that its fiscal year 2018 performance
may not necessarily be indicative of future fiscal years, CRFD does not
have historical data on which to base its fiscal year 2019 and fiscal
year 2020 targets. Unlike CRD and HIP, no other Division in OCR handles
case outreach, policymaking, processing, and investigation for laws
assigned to the Division. While OCR's civil rights and health
information privacy divisions have a many years of institutional
knowledge to draw from, CRFD must dedicate the resources to build that
knowledge base through experience and enforcement of conscience and
religious freedom authorities, often in contested matters of first
impression.
According to the its fiscal year 2020 budget request justification,
in fiscal year 2019 OCR will be on track to make substantial progress
toward its staffing goals to hire career staff in CRFD equivalent in
total to four FTEs. If a total of four FTEs are required to support
CRFD, why does the budget request increase reflect the addition of 6
FTEs? What associated overhead costs are accounted for in this
increase?
Answer. In fiscal year 2019, OCR is staffing CRFD primarily through
contract support. OCR is working to bring on-board an appropriate
number of Federal staff. It is important to note that FTE is a measure
of work-hours, and not a count of employees. Two full-time employees
brought on board April 1 in fiscal year 2019 would count as only one
FTE in fiscal year 2019--but as two FTE in fiscal year 2020. Overhead
costs include benefits such as Social Security contributions, costs of
phones, computers, and space, and other such costs.
South Carolina Child Welfare Agencies Waiver
Question. This past January, Secretary Azar granted a waiver from
non-discrimination requirements to the State of South Carolina (SC),
with respect to Miracle Hill and any other faith- based subgrantee in
the SC Foster Care Program. In the March 14th Senate Finance Committee
hearing, Secretary Azar testified that Miracle Hill is required to
refer individuals with whom they cannot work to the State placement
foster care authority or to another foster care provider. However, the
waiver States that the referral is required ``on the understanding that
Miracle Hill, and any other subgrantee making use of this exception,
does not object on religious grounds to making such referrals and,
therefore, the condition does not implicate additional RFRA concerns.''
Under this waiver, will child welfare agencies be required to refer all
families with whom they are not willing to work?
Answer. Yes. Under the exception Miracle Hill is permitted to work
with foster parents who share Miracle Hill's religious beliefs but is
required to refer potential foster parents with whom they do not
partner with to other providers.
Question. How is Secretary Azar's testimony not in conflict with
the language in the waiver itself?
Answer. Secretary Azar accurately described the exception during
his testimony. Specifically, Secretary Azar testified,
[W]e support as many providers as possible being engaged. And
faith-based providers are the bedrock of some of our most
difficult placements in terms of disabled, hard-to-place
children. They always, historically, have been. And that's why
the Roman Catholic Diocese of Charleston as well as the
Coalition for Jewish Values supported the accommodation that we
provided at the request of the Governor of South Carolina. It
was at the Governor's request to provide this exemption, this
waiver, to allow them to continue to work with co-religionists.
. . . In fact, they are required--if they cannot work with
individuals who come forward--this Miracle Hill organization--
they would be required to refer those individuals to the State
foster care authority or to other foster care providers, of
which there are many in the State of South Carolina who would
be willing to work with them. Our focus is on the kids and
child welfare. We need more people as foster parents--not
fewer.
The exception permits Miracle Hill to work with foster parents who
share Miracle Hill's religious beliefs and requires Miracle
Hill to refer potential foster parents with whom they cannot
work to other providers.
Question. Does the exception to 45 CFR 74.300 [sic] that HHS
granted to South Carolina apply to all religiously motivated
exclusions?
Answer. No. The exception applies only to similarly situated
religious organizations that are operating under South Carolina's Title
IV-E Foster Care Program (the ``SC Foster Care Program'') meaning
entities that use similar religious criteria in selecting among
prospective foster parents and, consistent with their beliefs, refer
potential foster parents that do not adhere to the religious
organization's religious beliefs to other providers. As the letter
dated January 23, 2019, from Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary
Steven Wagner to Governor Henry McMaster states,
The exception applies with respect to Miracle Hill or any other
subgrantee in the SC Foster Care Program that uses similar
religious criteria in selecting among prospective foster care
parents. The exception applies on the condition that Miracle
Hill, or any other subgrantee making use of this exception, be
required to refer potential foster parents that do not adhere
to the subgrantee's religious beliefs to other subgrantees in
the SC Foster Care Program, or to refer them to the SC Foster
Care Program staff themselves, if the SC Foster Care Program
staff is equipped to refer those persons to other willing
subgrantees. This condition is added on the understanding that
Miracle Hill, and any other subgrantee making use of this
exception, does not object on religious grounds to making such
referrals and, therefore, the condition does not implicate
additional RFRA concerns.
Question. For example, does it apply to religiously motivated
exclusions of same-sex couples or does HHS deem Miracle Hill's
religiously motivated exclusion of same-sex couples impermissible while
agreeing with their ability to discriminate on the basis of religion?
How does HHS plan to assure that the needs of LGBTQ-identified youth,
who represent 4 out of 5 children in in foster care, will be addressed
and that they are protected from harassment, discrimination and forms
of conversion practices when being placed by an agency that professes a
deeply held belief against being LGBTQ?
Answer. The waiver granted by HHS applies to the religious non-
discrimination provision of 45 CFR Sec. 75.300(c) with respect to
Miracle Hill's desire to recruit and work with co-religionists as
potential foster parents. HHS has not granted waivers to other
provisions of 45 CFR Sec. 75.300 and it would not be appropriate to
speculate on hypotheticals or prejudge any particular factual and legal
circumstance that has not been presented to the agency.
In granting the exception requested by the State of South Carolina,
HHS acted to preserve the participation of faith-based service
providers for the State's foster care program. As the letter granting
the exception itself states, ``this exception does not relieve the SC
Foster Care Program of its obligation to comply with any other
requirements of 45 CFR Sec. 75.300(c), of other paragraphs of 45 CFR
Sec. 75.300, of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 671(a)(18), or of any provisions of
civil rights statutes, including Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
1964, Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, the Age
Discrimination Act of 1975, and section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act
of 1973 that may apply.'' \2\ HHS will continue to assure that all
eligible children are served without unlawful discrimination, including
children who identify as LGBTQ.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 42 U.S.C. Sec. 2000d et seq., 20 U.S.C. Sec. 1681 et seq., 42
U.S.C. Sec. 6101 et seq., and 29 U.S.C. Sec. 794, respectively.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Children's Bureau at the Administration for Children and
Families, Department of Health and Human Services, funded the National
Quality Improvement Center (QIC) on Tailored Services, Placement
Stability and Permanency for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender,
Questioning, and Two-Spirit (LGBTQ2S) Children and Youth in Foster Care
in 2016. This 5-year, $10 million grant was developed to improve the
safety, well-being and permanency of LGBTQ2S children and youth through
the development and implementation of: safe spaces in child welfare and
provider facilities; tailored assessments and services in affirming and
culturally sensitive environments; identification of data collection
procedures that ensure confidentiality; placement stability supports to
children, youth, and caregivers, including birth families in
reunification cases; permanency innovations for those not reunified
with families of origin; and increased LGBTQ competence and response by
agency staff, foster and non-foster family caregivers, and service
providers in congregate care settings.
Question. In the President's fiscal year 2020 Budget there is a
line item entitled ``Protect the religious liberty of child welfare
providers'' (page 124). In February, the Washington Post reported that
administration officials stated their intention to include this in the
budget to allow federally funded agencies to ``reject LGBTQ parents,
non-Christians, and others.'' What are the details of this proposal and
how does it comply with Federal non-discrimination laws and
requirements? What will be the impact on the 443,000 children currently
in foster care?
Answer. The Department believes faith-based providers are the
bedrock of some of our most difficult placements in terms of children
with disabilities and, historically, always have been. In the
President's Fiscal Year 2020 Budget there is a line item entitled
``Protect the religious liberty of child welfare providers'' (page
124). This proposal is consistent with the Secretary's testimony and
the Department's grant of an exception to the State of South Carolina.
In light of the foster care crisis resulting from insufficient numbers
of foster families, and the concurrent moves by some States to close
foster care providers on the basis of the providers' religious beliefs,
the Administration believes Congress should protect adoption and foster
care providers from discrimination or from burdens imposed on their
exercise of their faith that may eliminate them from contributing to
the number of foster placements made in a State. Such an action by
Congress would increase the scope of available foster and adoption care
providers and help alleviate the present crisis.
uac
ORR--Family Separations
Question. A report released by HHS's Office of the Inspector
General in January 2019 found that thousands of children may have been
separated prior to implementation of zero tolerance, but were not
tracked because there was no integrated data system between The
Department of Homeland Security and HHS. While HHS has since updated
its data system, the Inspector General found that DHS is providing
``limited information about the reason for these separations'' when the
child is transferred to HHS's care.
Secretary Azar testified in the House LHHS Appropriations fiscal
year 2020 hearing that he has asked for more information from DHS on
the cause for any family separations. Has the information from DHS
improved? If not, how are you pushing back on DHS to make sure your
caseworkers have all the necessary information to make an appropriate
determination on the child's placement?
Answer. When U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) determines
that it is necessary to separate an alien child from his or her parent
or legal guardian, the child is referred to HHS' Office of Refugee
Resettlement (ORR). CBP generally provides ORR with the child's I-213,
as well as general information regarding the reasons for the
separation. CBP also generally provides ORR with biographical
information about the separated parent/legal guardian. Additionally,
CBP may provide additional information in a general ``notes'' section
of their data push to HHS ORR. When additional information is needed,
ORR staff can request it through email or phone communication.
Question. What changes has ORR made in its data system since June
2018 to better identify and track children that were apprehended with a
family unit and subsequently referred to the UAC program?
Answer. In July 2018, ORR added a ``YES/NO'' checkbox to the UAC
Portal for ORR staff to complete when adding UAC referrals from CBP.
This checkbox enables ORR to pull and track CBP-reported data on UACs
who were separated from a parent or legal guardian in the UAC Portal.
In general, ORR tracks and accounts for all UAC referred to ORR.
Question. What changes have been made to integrate the DHS and HHS
data systems?
Answer. DHS and HHS do not have integrated data systems. HHS (ORR)
receives referrals from DHS (CBP) through a data ``push'' from CBP's
electronic systems of records into ORR's Portal, and possibly also
following a phone call, or through an email. CBP provides information
on separated UAC in a general ``notes'' section of the CBP data push.
Question. Is HHS coordinating with DHS to ensure they have the
identified the same children as ``separated''?
Answer. Yes. HHS and DHS regularly exchange data regarding
separated children and adults, and work to determine whether
reunification may be appropriate in a particular case.
Question. In addition to sharing general information about
separations, is DHS sharing with HHS the location and contact
information for the separated parent/legal guardian so that care
providers can ensure timely communication, if appropriate?
Answer. Yes. DHS and HHS regularly share information regarding
separated children and parents/legal guardians. This information
includes the location of the parent/legal guardian. If necessary, ORR
case managers can also locate a detained parent's whereabouts in the
ICE Detainee Locator (found on the ICE website), contact their local
ICE Field Office Juvenile Coordinator, or contact the ICE Parental
Interest Unit to initiate communication between the child and the
parent (whether detained or not).
Question. Under what circumstances are family separations happening
today?
Answer. DHS is the only agency which can describe the circumstances
in which alien children are separated from their parents, as well as
the processes or systems involved in such a decision. HHS does not
separate children and is not involved in the decision to separate
children from parents. At the same time, HHS has some information on
the circumstances that result in family separations, as it is required
to submit monthly reports to Congress on this matter. Please see May
2019 Report here: https://www.hhs.gov/programs/social-services/
unaccompanied-alien-children/report-to-congress-on-separated-children/
index.html.
Question. I understand DHS has written criteria on when a
separation should occur, including on when it would be in the best
interest of the child. Did DHS consult HHS in developing these
criteria? Has HHS seen this document, and could you please share it
with the Committee?
Answer. HHS does not develop DHS policy. DHS is the only agency who
can speak to developed written criteria on when separation should
occur. HHS defers to DHS to share all DHS policies and procedures.
Historically, separations of an alien minor from an adult parent or
legal guardian (or an alien claiming to be the minor's parent or legal
guardian) occurred in certain circumstances, such as (1) if DHS is
unable to determine a custodial relationship, (2) when DHS determines
the minor may be at risk with the adult (including for urgent medical
issues), or (3) if the parent or legal guardian is transferred to
criminal detention (as the result of a criminal charge or conviction).
Current DHS policy regarding family separation is in accordance
with the preliminary injunction in Ms. L v. ICE and the Trafficking
Victims Protection Reauthorization Act. , CBP may separate an alien
child from their parent when they enter the United States if the parent
or legal guardian:
--poses a danger to the child,
--is determined to be unfit,
--has a criminal history,
--has a communicable disease,
--or is transferred to a criminal detention setting (other than for
prosecution for
--improper entry (8 U.S.C. Sec. 1325)).
Outside of these circumstances, CBP generally keeps family units
together in its short-term holding facilities.
Question. What efforts is HHS undertaking or planning to undertake
to continue facilitating family reunification for the remaining
separated families, especially for the parents or adults who have
already been deported back to their countries of origin? Please provide
a detailed timeline.
Answer. Of the 2,667 minors identified as potentially separated and
certified as children of the original Ms. L class, all but one child
are either reunified with parents and legal guardians, or discharged
under appropriate standards--most through discharge to family member
sponsors based on parents' waiving reunification. The one child still
in ORR care is still waiting for a parent to provide an election to
reunify or waive reunification.
Within 24 hours of arriving at a UAC care facility, children and
youth are given the opportunity to communicate with a verified parent,
guardian, or relative (when contact information is available), whether
they reside in the United States or abroad. If a minor's parents are in
Federal custody, the child's case manager will engage with the parents'
case managers and Federal law enforcement officials to verify their
relationship, so that they may communicate with one another.
UACs are allowed to make a minimum of two telephone calls per week
(10 minutes each) to family members or sponsors, in a private setting.
Some care providers facilitate video calls (through Skype, for example)
between tender age children and their families. UACs are also allowed
unlimited telephone access to their legal representatives. A minor may
also speak with her or his consulate official, case coordinator, and
child advocate. (Child advocates are third parties who make independent
recommendations regarding the best interests of a vulnerable child.)
For children with parents who are in ICE custody, ORR programs
facilitate the twice-weekly calls with parents. For UACs who are tender
age or otherwise nonverbal, program will utilize Skype and other video
call technology.
ORR headquarters staff help locate detained parents in ICE custody
and pass that information on to the program to ensure the communication
channels are open.
ORR's care providers encourage visitation between UACs and family
members (unless there is a documented safety concern) and have policies
in place to ensure safety and privacy of children and staff. Care
providers must have an alternative public place for visits, and visits
must be supervised by staff in a way that ensures safety but respects
the UAC's privacy and reasonably prevents the unauthorized absence of
the child or youth.
Care providers also ensure that all mail, letters, packages,
baggage or any other items delivered to the care provider and addressed
to the minor are promptly delivered and that UACs have access to
postage, and if possible to email, in order to send letters to family
members, sponsors, legal representatives, and others.
orr--sponsor information sharing
An April 13, 2018, HHS and DHS agreement ``requires HHS to share
the immigration status of potential sponsors and other adults in their
households with ICE to facilitate HHS's background checks.'' As we
know, initiating these background checks resulted in a deterrent effect
on sponsors coming forward and children were staying longer on average
in ORR care. On December 18, 2018, HHS announced that it would stop
requiring fingerprinting of all household members of the sponsor in
order to be able to release UAC to sponsors more quickly. The fiscal
year 2019 DHS spending package prohibits DHS from using fingerprinting
information shared from ORR about certain UAC sponsors and household
members for purposes of immigration enforcement or deportation. And, in
March 2019, ORR further announced that it would temporarily suspend the
fingerprinting requirements for certain Category 1 sponsors.
Question. What procedures are in place to comply with the fiscal
year 2019 DHS prohibition?
Answer. As of April 18, 2019, ORR has not instituted any new
policies related to the DHS prohibition contained in the Consolidated
Appropriations Act of 2019 (PL 116-6), and we defer to DHS for any
procedures it implemented to comply with this provision. HHS notes that
the prohibition could affect the UAC program in that some potential
sponsors may be less apprehensive in coming forward to sponsor a child.
However, the prohibition does not require a change to current ORR
release policies.
Question. What sort of facts must be gathered to verify any
potential risks to the minor?
Answer. The process for the safe and timely release of a child from
ORR custody involves many steps, including: the identification of
sponsors; the submission by a sponsor of the application for release
and supporting documentation; the evaluation of the suitability of the
sponsor, including verification of the sponsor's identity and
relationship to the child, background checks, and in some cases home
studies; and, planning for post-release.
ORR care providers use information collected about and from the
child in conjunction with the sponsor assessment process to determine
whether to conduct a home study. Home studies are required under
certain circumstances by the Trafficking Victims Protection
Reauthorization Act of 2008 (TVPRA) and ORR policy. In circumstances in
which a home study is not required by the TVPRA or ORR policy, the Case
Manager and Case Coordinator may recommend that a home study be
conducted if they agree that the home study will provide additional
information required to determine that the sponsor is able to care for
the health, safety and well-being of the child.
Question. In a home study, what requirements must be met?
Answer. A home study assesses the potential sponsor's ability to
meet the child's needs, educates and prepares the sponsor for the
child's release, and builds on the sponsor assessment conducted by the
care provider staff to verify or corroborate information gathered
during that process. The home study is conducted as a collaborative
psycho-educational process in which the home study case worker
identifies areas where additional support, resources, or information
are needed to ensure a successful sponsorship, and provides
corresponding psycho-educational assistance. The final recommendation
must present a comprehensive and detailed assessment of the sponsor's
ability to care for the needs of the child and address any additional
information that emerges during the course of the home study regarding
the sponsor, the sponsor's household or the child.
Question. Have any released children been returned to ORR care as a
result of the enforcement actions?
Answer. Children can be re-referred to ORR custody for a variety of
reasons, including enforcement actions. ORR's database, the UAC Portal,
does not have a data point that captures the reason for re-referral and
ORR would need to conduct a lengthy case-by-case analysis to determine
the reason behind each re-referral.
Question. What, if any, guidance has ORR provided to grantees to
ensure that potential sponsors receive accurate information on how
their information can and cannot be used?
Answer. Potential sponsors sign an Authorization for Release of
Information, which states that their information may be shared with
Federal, State, or local law enforcement agencies. Potential sponsors
are also provided with a Privacy Notice that explains to whom and under
what circumstances their information may be shared with other parties.
The Authorization for Release of Information that is signed by sponsors
as part of the application process includes language referencing the
restrictions on DHS's ability to use a sponsor's information for
immigration enforcement purposes. ORR grantee case managers explain
these documents to the potential sponsor in a language they can
understand and make themselves available to answer any questions the
potential sponsor may have about these documents and the sponsorship
process as a whole. These documents are also available in Spanish, the
language spoken by the vast majority of potential sponsors. ORR is in
full compliance with section 404 of Public Law 116-26.
The Authorization for Release of Information and Privacy Notice,
which are part of the Family Reunification Packet provided to all
potential sponsors, are available on the ORR website at https://
www.acf.hhs.gov/orr/resource/unaccompanied-childrens-services.
For more details on the sponsorship process, including how ORR
assesses potential sponsors, background check requirements, the
application process, and home studies, please see the ORR Policy Guide,
Section 2: Safe and Timely Release from ORR Care, which can be found on
the ORR website at https://www.acf.hhs.gov/orr/resource/children-
entering-the-united-states-unaccompanied.
orr--asylees
On page 38 of fiscal year 2020 Justification for Congress by the
Administration for Children and Families (ACF), ACF lists the
precipitous rise of eligible asylee arrivals from 25,149 in fiscal year
2016 to 30,257 in fiscal year 2017 to 39,988 in fiscal year 2018. The
increase in asylee arrivals seem likely to continue rising in the
future with the Administration continuing to report large numbers of
pending asylum cases (e.g., USCIS reported that as of January 31, 2019,
they have 325,277 pending affirmative asylum cases).
Question. How many asylees do you project will become eligible for
ORR services in fiscal year 2020 and fiscal year 2021? Please explain
how you arrive at those projections?
Answer. For fiscal year 2020, ORR is predicting 45,600 aslyees will
be eligible to access ORR benefits. For fiscal year 2021, ORR is
predicting 48,000 asylees will be eligible to access ORR benefits. ORR
arrived at these estimates by analyzing information provided by U.S.
Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) on the number of pending
asylum claims and information provided by ORR grantees on the number of
asylees served.
Question. How will ORR change and expand its outreach and services
to successfully engage with this growing asylee population?
Answer. ORR recently updated the ORR website with a new factsheet
specifically for asylees. There is a section of the ORR website that is
devoted to asylees and helping eligible people access benefits. The
fact sheet and additional information specific to asylees is available
here: https://www.acf.hhs.gov/orr/resource/asylee-eligibility-for-
assistance-and-services-0.
In addition, ORR has provided annual asylee zip code distribution
to State Refugee Coordinators (SRC) to facilitate more targeted
outreach in support of services. SRCs have indicated this outreach has
proved very effective in making the connection to asylees in need of
services.
ORR is also working closely with USCIS to improve outreach and
service coordination. ORR Regional Representatives are engaging
regularly with USCIS Community Liaisons to facilitate orientations at
local asylum offices on services available and improve connections to
refugee resettlement service providers.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Richard J. Durbin
Question. HHS has been in discussions with the National Treasury
Employees Union (NTEU) to reach a new collective bargaining agreement
for HHS employees. What steps has HHS taken to address concerns raised
by NTEU in the negotiation process? How many times did the agency meet
with NTEU for bargaining and why did HHS refuse NTEU's requests for
additional meetings?
In developing proposals and contract language for bargaining, did
HHS consider the impact of proposals on employee retention and
recruitment? What evidence does HHS have that proposed contract changes
will accomplish the goal of reducing agency costs and administrative
burden? Did the HHS bargaining team consult with HHS management and
executive personnel in developing the proposals? Please cite any
studies or data supporting HHS' rationale for developing new proposals
and contract language to include in negotiations.
Answer. Thank you for your questions concerning the Collective
Bargaining Agreement (CBA) between the Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) and the National Treasury Employees Union (NTEU). The
collective bargaining mandated by statute for the Federal sector is
quite complex and very labor intensive. That being said, HHS represents
the taxpayer and the acts as the fiduciary that is responsible for
maintaining the efficient and effective government.
HHS began bargaining with NTEU over the successor agreement in
2015. Initially, NTEU was not interested in discussing the ``ground
rules'' for the term agreement. After some time, NTEU negotiated on two
separate occasions for a total of four (4) hours and then requested
Federal Mediation Conciliatory Service Assistance. (FMCS) After four
(4) hours with a mediator, NTEU moved the ``ground rules'' to the
Federal Services Impasses Panel for final disposition, and FSIP issued
the ground rules order to the parties in a manner favorable to NTEU.
HHS acted as a fiduciary that strives to maintain the efficiency
and effectiveness of the Federal Government and the taxpayers that
entrust us with their tax dollars. HHS was ready, willing and available
to `quid pro quo'' bargain at the table, but the NTEU was not
interested. After two eight hour sessions, the FMCS determined that the
parties were at Impasse and released them, both were then free to seek
the assistance of the FSIP. The only available option in the Federal
negotiating process is to seek FMCS assistance and finally have FSIP
intervene if the parties cannot reach agreement. The FSIP in this case
then ordered the parties to these negotiations to the table for 30 days
with the assistance of the FMCS regional director. HHS and NTEU reached
agreement on resolving five additional articles but could not reach
agreement on any of the others. During that 30-day period, HHS even
offered to discuss the six (6) additional articles that the FSIP
eventually remanded for further negotiation between the parties, but
NTEU refused.
NTEU has filed a national grievance in which it raised four issues
related to bargaining over the term bargaining agreement that they
believed were violations. Recently, a neutral arbitrator hearing this
grievance issued an award in which he found that HHS did not bargain in
bad faith and did not violate rule, law or regulation. The arbitrator
also found that the facts did not support any of the grievance and he
dismissed the grievances in full.
HHS is proud of our mission and our employees. As the second (2nd)
highest ranking large Federal agency, as rated by our employees in 2018
Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey, it is quite clear that we are
employee and efficiency focused.
Question. In 2016, a report came out that Medicare, Medicaid, and
private insurers wasted $3 billion each year on cancer drugs are
literally thrown in the trash. This is because many expensive drugs are
produced in single-use vials, with the dosage based off a patient's
size and weight. The problem is that PhRMA companies produce them in
excessively large vials with more medication than needed, and the
doctor discards the rest. In 2016, I included report language directing
CMS to study this drug vial waste and provide recommendations--despite
including language each year since, your agency has refused to begin
the study. Despite refusing to do the study, your fiscal year 2020
budget request identifies this very problem, and proposes to shame drug
wasters with public reports.
Secretary Azar, why has CMS refused to conduct this study? Will you
commit to ensuring this study gets done this year?
Answer. CMS agrees drug vial size and wasted medication is a
serious issue, and CMS is currently working on a study that will
examine this important issue. Since January 1, 2017, providers and
suppliers have been required to flag discarded drugs and biologicals
for CMS on their Part B claims. Collecting data was the first, vital
step CMS needed to take to be able to understand and provide evidence-
based analysis on this issue. As noted, the President's Fiscal Year
2020 Budget also includes a proposal that would require CMS to make
public which Part B drugs have the highest reported drug wastage using
data gathered from these claims. Publicly reporting this information
will allow for a better understanding of which drugs would benefit from
different packaging to reduce wastage.
Question. Too often in our country, new moms and infants--
especially women and babies of color--are dying from preventable health
problems. Nationwide, more than 700 women die every year as a result of
pregnancy--more than 70,000 others experience severe, near-fatal
complications. In Illinois, 73 women die every year due to pregnancy-
related complications--70 percent of these deaths are deemed
preventable. Not only are we losing new moms, we are also losing their
babies. Annually, more than 23,000 babies die in the U.S., many due to
preventable factors, such as pre-term birth and low birth weight.
Secretary Azar, I have introduced a bill--the MOMMA's Act--to expand
Medicaid coverage to new moms for a full year post-partum, versus
current law of 60 days. I pay for this expansion by increasing the
Federal tobacco tax and levying new taxes on e-cigarettes.
Do you support this? What else can and should HHS be doing to
address this public health crisis largely affecting women and babies of
color?
Answer. HHS is home to a range of agencies whose work touches the
healthcare of pregnant women, mothers, and infants, as protecting
maternal and infant health is one of our healthcare system's most
important responsibilities.
As the single largest payer for maternity care, Medicaid plays an
important role in perinatal and maternal health and has a significant
opportunity to improve maternal and infant health outcomes. The
President's Fiscal Year 2020 Budget includes a number of proposals
aimed at improving maternal mortality and morbidity rates in the U.S.,
including allowing States to extend Medicaid coverage to pregnant women
with substance use disorders for a full year postpartum.
Access to high quality prenatal care, reducing preterm births, and
delivering high quality postpartum care lead to improved birth outcomes
and decreases in maternal mortality. CMS measures the key drivers of
maternal morbidity and mortality. For example, the measures in the
Medicaid and CHIP Child and Adult Core Sets assess the quality of care
women receive at each step in their lifecycle and include quality
measures associated with major drivers of pregnancy- related mortality
and severe maternal morbidity. In particular, CMS identified a
Maternity Core Set of 12 measures for voluntary reporting by State
Medicaid and CHIP agencies. This Core Set, which consists of eight
measures from CMS's Child Core Set and four measures from the Adult
Core Set, is used by CMS to measure and evaluate progress toward
improvement of maternal and perinatal health in Medicaid and CHIP.
Reporting of the Core Sets is currently voluntary for States. With the
passing of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 (Public Law 115-123),
reporting of the Child Core Set, including maternal and infant health
measures, will become mandatory beginning in 2024. Additionally, CMS
has emphasized the importance of maternal infant health by including
postpartum care and first 15 month well-child visit quality measures in
the Medicaid and CHIP Scorecard.
The President's Fiscal Year 2020 Budget also proposes to use CMS's
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (Innovation Center) to test
interventions to improve maternal mortality and morbidity. The
Innovation Center is currently working on the recently released
Integrated Care for Kids (InCK) and Maternal Opioid Misuse (MOM)
payment and service delivery models. These models were designed to
expand access to healthcare services for vulnerable Medicaid and CHIP
beneficiaries, in particular those affected by the Nation's opioid
crisis, and to improve quality of care and reduce expenditures for
beneficiaries.
CMS has launched several initiatives and pilot programs to improve
the well-being of women and children. In 2012, CMS, the Health
Resources and Services Administration, and the Administration for
Children and Families launched the Strong Start for Mothers and
Newborns (Strong Start) initiative to reduce preterm births and improve
outcomes for pregnant women and newborns. The Strong Start initiative
was comprised of two strategies. The first was a public- private
partnership and awareness campaign to reduce the rate of early elective
deliveries. The second was a 4 year initiative testing the
effectiveness of three enhanced prenatal care models--Birth Centers,
Group Prenatal Care, and Maternity Care Homes--among pregnant Medicaid
and CHIP beneficiaries at high risk for preterm births. Strong Start
funded 27 awardees and 211 provider sites across 32 States, the
District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. Birth Centers were the most
successful of the models, and CMS determined that women who received
prenatal care in Strong Start Birth Centers had better outcomes and
lower costs compared to similar Medicaid beneficiaries not enrolled in
the initiative.
In 2014, CMS launched a 3-year Pilot Mobile Health Program to
engage pregnant and postpartum women enrolled in Medicaid. The program
delivers evidence-based health education messages and links these women
to needed community-based resources, using a free text messaging
service, Text4baby, as the core intervention. The pilot was implemented
with Medicaid agencies in California, Louisiana, Ohio, and Oklahoma.
These Medicaid agencies work to integrate Text4baby into their
processes to complement their States' current maternal and infant
health activities. In the first year, progress included a substantial
growth in partnerships to support outreach. Additional information
about the program and early results can be accessed at the following
link: https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/quality-of-care/downloads/
pilot-mobile-health-program.pdf.
Additionally, Section 1115 demonstration projects offer States
additional freedom to test and evaluate innovative solutions to improve
the quality, accessibility, and health outcomes of pregnant and
postpartum women and infants in the Medicaid program.
Several States have used section 1115 demonstration authority to
implement other types of initiatives aimed at improving maternal health
outcomes. A summary of those demonstration program initiatives are
highlighted below.
--California's Medi-Cal 2020 demonstration includes an initiative
called the ``Improved Perinatal Care Project'' that consists of
several multi-disciplinary and multi-stakeholder statewide
initiatives aimed at improving the health of women and
children, and to ensure these health services are delivered
safely, efficiently, and equitably. Through the Delivery System
Reform Incentive Payment (DSRIP) component of the
demonstration, financial incentives are authorized for quality
improvement outcomes.
--New York Medicaid Redesign Team (MRT) demonstration includes
several optional projects focused on maternal care under: (1)
Domain 3 (Clinical Improvement) focused on increasing support
programs for maternal & child health; and, (2) Domain 4 (sub-
domain Healthy Women, Infants, and Children) related to the
State's Prevention Agenda, which aims to reduce maternal
morbidity and mortality. Through the Delivery System Reform
Incentive Payment (DSRIP) component of the demonstration,
financial incentives are authorized for quality improvement
outcomes.
--Rhode Island's Comprehensive Demonstration includes a ``Family Home
Visiting Services Program'' that provides evidence-based
prenatal home visiting services through two partnerships. The
first is with the Nurse-Family Partnership (NFP) who serves
Medicaid beneficiaries who are first time, pregnant women who
enroll before 28-weeks gestation; and once enrolled can remain
eligible for the program until their child is 2 years of age.
The second is with Healthy Families America (HFA) who serves
Medicaid beneficiaries that are pregnant (does not have to be a
first time pregnancy) or are parents of children under 3 months
of age; and once enrolled can remain eligible until their child
is 4 years old and the parent remains a Medicaid beneficiary.
--New Mexico's Centennial Care 2.0 demonstration includes a home
visiting pilot program that is operated in collaboration with
New Mexico Children, Youth and Families Department (CYFD) and
New Mexico Department of Health (DOH). This pilot provides
evidence-based, early childhood home visiting services focused
on pre-natal care, post- partum care and early childhood
development.
--Maryland's Healthchoice demonstration includes an Evidence-Based
Home Visiting Services Pilot that provides visiting services by
licensed practitioners or certified home visitors to promote
health outcomes, whole person care, and community integration
for high-risk pregnant women and children up to 2 years old.
Services are provided through two partnerships:
--Nurse Family Partnership (NFP) reinforces maternal behaviors that
encourage positive parent child relationship and maternal,
child, and family accomplishments and services are provided
until the child reaches 2 years old.
--The Healthy Families America (HFA) HFA model targets parents
facing issues such as single parenthood, low income,
childhood history of abuse, SUD, mental health issues, and
domestic violence.
--Illinois Behavioral Health Transformation demonstration includes an
evidence-based home visiting services pilot program that
provides postpartum home visiting services and child home
visits to postpartum mothers who gave birth to a baby born with
withdrawal symptoms and Medicaid eligible children up to 5
years old who were born with withdrawal symptoms.
Question. In 2018, youth use of e-cigarettes increased by 78
percent among high school students and 48 percent among middle-school
students--today, nearly 4 million children are using e-cigarettes. This
dramatic uptick is due to products like JUUL and kid-friendly flavors--
fruit medley, fruity pebbles, choco milkshake, smurf, gummy bear . . .
81 percent of kids vaping started with a flavored product. After a
rocky start, outgoing FDA Commissioner Gottlieb proposed a number of
important steps to address youth vaping. Importantly, he wants gas
stations and convenience stores selling e-cigarette flavors to check
IDs before customers enter the stores. Secretary Azar, will this ID
check requirement be effectuated under the next FDA Commissioner in a
timely manner?
Answer. HHS is very concerned about the use of e-cigarettes among
children, which is one of our biggest public health challenges. This
disturbing and accelerating trajectory of use in youth, and the
resulting path to addiction, must end. We cannot allow the next
generation of young people to become addicted to nicotine because of e-
cigarettes.
The dramatic rise in youth e-cigarette use has prompted a series of
escalating actions in both enforcement and public education. In March
2019, FDA issued a draft guidance entitled ``Modifications to
Compliance Policy for Certain Deemed Tobacco Products.'' Finalizing the
compliance policy is one of the most critical public health steps that
we can take to curb youth vaping and address youth use of flavored
cigars, and the Department and FDA are committed to finalizing the
draft guidance in a timely manner.
Evidence shows that youth are especially attracted to flavored e-
cigarette products, and that minors are able to access these products
from both brick-and-mortar retailers, as well as online, despite
Federal restrictions on sales to anyone under 18. We also continue to
be concerned about cigar use among youth--flavored cigars in
particular--which our enforcement work shows are also being illegally
sold to minors. We're proposing to prioritize enforcement of flavored
ENDS products (other than tobacco-, mint-, and menthol-flavored) that
are offered for sale in ways that pose a greater risk for minors to
access the products. For instance, we'll consider whether the products
are sold under circumstances, whether at retail or online, without
heightened age verification.
Our proposed policy provides examples of circumstances that we'll
consider--for example, if flavored ENDS products are sold in locations
where minors can enter at any time (e.g., the entire establishment or
an area within the establishment); or, for online sales, if the
products are sold without an appropriate limit on the quantity that a
customer may purchase within a given period of time, and without
independent, third-party, age- and identity-verification services that
compare customer information against third-party data sources, such as
public records. We're also considering, among other things, whether
there are new technologies that can help prevent youth access at retail
locations and intend to consider the use of those tools when we
finalize the guidance.
Our pledge to reduce youth use of e-cigarettes is deeply rooted and
has broad support within the Trump Administration. Nobody wants to see
children becoming addicted to nicotine. Our dedication to this effort
will endure and our commitment to advancing our comprehensive framework
will continue. Our policies have been announced and advanced through a
careful and deliberate process that involved the formulation of a broad
consensus among those whose efforts are needed in making sure that
these rules and guidance come to fruition. We won't tolerate a whole
generation of kids becoming addicted to nicotine as a tradeoff for
enabling adults to have unfettered access to these same unreviewed
products, and we'll continue to put the full scope of our regulatory
tools against this mounting public health crisis.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jack Reed
Question. Increasing funding for the Low Income Home Energy
Assistance Program (LIHEAP) has been a bipartisan priority in the
Senate. As such, I have been disappointed that this Administration has
continued to propose eliminating this vital program, which helps low-
income households and seniors with their energy bills. The number of
households eligible for LIHEAP already exceeds the program's capacity,
and for many who do receive energy assistance, the purchasing power of
the grant has decreased over the past several years. As such, I was
deeply concerned to learn that although we increased LIHEAP funding by
$50 million in fiscal year 2019 to help meet the needs of more
Americans, HHS made the decision to transfer $37 million of LIHEAP
funds to cover funding shortfalls in another program. Diverting
critical LIHEAP funds to another program will only further strain these
limited resources. Secretary Azar, the decision to reprogram LIHEAP
funds was made in the midst of the winter heating season. Please
explain the rationale behind your decision to reprogram these funds. Do
I have your commitment that you will not reprogram any LIHEAP funds in
fiscal year 2020 and will instead distribute them immediately to States
so that they can be used for their intended purpose?
Answer. HHS weighs heavily the factors in whether to transfer any
program's funding to meet other exigent HHS needs. There have been
years, such as fiscal year 2018, where HHS had been able to avoid
transferring funding from LIHEAP to other HHS needs. In fiscal year
2019, HHS determined that the 1 percent of LIHEAP funding served a
critical gap in funding needed by our Office of Refugee Resettlement.
HHS will continue to use cautious and prudent judgment in weighing any
potential transfer of LIHEAP funding in future years.
Question. CDC reported in June 2018 that the suicide rate has risen
30 percent since 1999, but that data is still over 2 years old. What
programs at CDC are helping to alleviate the suicide crisis and what
could be done to improve data collection regarding suicide?
Answer. Suicide is a serious public health problem. Many States and
communities want to do more to prevent suicide and look to CDC
expertise and leadership for assistance. For example, in the last year,
CDC has been asked by multiple States to provide epidemiologic
assistance or Epi-Aids to respond to suicide clusters. CDC works to
collect and disseminate data about suicide, provide leadership and
technical assistance to states to prevent suicide, including a resource
document--Preventing Suicide: A Technical Package of Policies,
Programs, and Practices--which outlines 7 key strategies for suicide
prevention.
CDC assists States and communities in tracking and monitoring
suicide injuries and deaths and identifying factors that may have
contributed to suicides through the National Violent Death Reporting
System (NVDRS). The NVDRS is CDC's key source of data on suicide and is
critical to the Nation's efforts to prevent violence. NVDRS is the only
State-based surveillance system that pools information from multiple
data sources into a usable, anonymous database in order to provide a
complete picture on the circumstances of all types of violent
deaths?including homicide and suicide (as well as opioid-related
suicides). In 2018, CDC supported NVDRS programs in all 50 States,
Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia for a national level
surveillance system; CDC will provide this same support in 2019 and the
President's Fiscal Year 2020 Budget proposed to continue that level of
support.
NVDRS informs prevention efforts in States and communities to guide
decisions about preventing violence and monitor progress over time. For
example, Colorado conducted an analysis of State data to better
understand suicide deaths among first responders. Colorado's data
showed that suicide victims who were first responders were more likely
to have been veterans, compared to the general population of suicide
victims in their State. These findings helped Colorado direct their
outreach services, and led them to promote resources focused on
positive mental and physical health for first responders, active
military personnel, veterans, and their families.
In fiscal year 2020, CDC proposes to:
--Support 52 recipients to collect data as part of the NVDRS system
and provide technical assistance to help recipients implement
the system, monitor and report data, and use these data to
inform prevention efforts.
--Increase the use of NVDRS data for characterizing suicide at
different levels (national, State, and local) and in various
populations (ethnic, racial, rural, sexual minorities, etc.).
--Work with data providers to identify ways to improve data
collection and timeliness.
Question. The National Suicide Prevention Lifeline answered over
2.2 million calls in 2018. By comparison, the Veterans Crisis Line is
currently funded at $90 million and answers approximately 2.2 million
calls per year. Why has the Administration neglected to ask for
increased funding for the National Suicide Prevention Hotline from the
current $12 million funding level, when SAMHSA has said that it would
need approximately $50 million per year in order to simply keep up with
the current level of calls? Advocates argue that the funding need is
closer to $80 million to account for implementation of text chat, as
well as the possibility of increasing calls due to greater public
education around the hotline.
Answer. HHS has worked diligently to implement the Garrett Lee
Smith Youth Suicide Prevention program. The Department has also made
efforts to implement the Zero Suicide program which focuses on adult
suicide prevention. In a time of tight budget constraints, SAMHSA's
suicide prevention efforts are fully funded in the Fiscal Year 2020
Budget at the same total amount of funding as in fiscal year 2019. The
SAMHSA programs that received increased funding in the fiscal year 2020
Budget above the fiscal year 2019 enacted level were related to opioid
funding, school safety, and funding for individuals with serious mental
illness.
HHS fully agrees with the need to adequately resource the National
Suicide Prevention Lifeline and the fiscal year 2020 budget contains
the increase in appropriations for the Lifeline that was enacted in
fiscal year 2019. The $50 million per year figure that is referenced in
the question is an estimate that SAMHSA included in its report to the
Federal Communications Commission as part of our responsibilities under
the National Suicide Hotline Improvement Act. That figure estimates the
costs to accommodate a 100 percent increase in total Lifeline call
volume, assuming that the rate of growth of calls to the Lifeline since
2010 continues at approximately 15 percent. The chart below from the
administrators of the Lifeline was also provided to the FCC.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jeanne Shaheen
advertising cuts for the affordable care act
Question. The President's 2020 budget request for the Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS) references a ``commitment to making the
Federal Government more efficient and effective.'' I have trouble
reconciling that objective with the Department's actions to make a 90
percent cut to the advertising and outreach budget for the Affordable
Care Act's (ACA's) Health Insurance Marketplaces. Advertising and
outreach is an important component for increasing enrollment in the
Marketplaces, particularly for younger and healthier people.
Recent reporting from the Huffington Post \3\ indicates that prior
to cutting the funding, senior staff for Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) Administrator Verma were presented with
information suggesting that the advertising and outreach investments
had been effective in increasing enrollment in prior years--and that
the cut to the marketing funding would likely result in at least
100,000 fewer people obtaining coverage on the ACA's Marketplaces.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Cohn, Jonathan and Young, Jeffrey, ``Emails Show Trump
Administration Was Told Obamacare Ad Cuts Could Hurt Enrollment,''
Huffington Post, December 14, 2018.
Available online at: https://www.huffpost.com/entry/trump-verma-
obamacare-advertising-cut_
n_5c115061e4b084b082ff8dba.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Do you stand by earlier assertions \4\ from HHS that ``no
correlation has been seen between Obamacare advertising and either new
or effectuated enrollment''?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Id.
\5\ Pradhan, Rachana and Diamond, Dan, ``Trump wants to bypass
Congress on Medicaid plan,'' Politico, January 11, 2019. Available
online at: https://www.politico.com/story/2019/01/11/trump-bypass-
congress-medicaid-plan-1078885
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Answer. The Administration remains committed to providing a
seamless enrollment experience for HealthCare.gov consumers while
focusing resources on cost-effective, high-impact outreach efforts.
Data from the Health Insurance Exchanges 2019 Open Enrollment Report
shows that plan selections for Exchange plans in the 50 States and D.C.
remained steady at 11.4 million, a small decrease from the same time
last year. Additionally, demographic data provided in the report also
demonstrate stability on the Exchanges. The percentage of young adults
between the ages of 18 and 34 who selected a plan through
HealthCare.gov remained unchanged from the prior year, at 26 percent.
Consistent with the 2018 Open Enrollment Period, the consumer
satisfaction rate at the call center during the 2019 Open Enrollment
Period remained at an all-time high--averaging 90 percent--throughout
the entire Open Enrollment Period and, for the second year in a row,
CMS did not need to deploy an online waiting room during the final days
of Open Enrollment. As a result, HealthCare.gov consumers were able to
shop and pick a plan with minimal interruption throughout the entire
enrollment period.
Similar to the 2018 Open Enrollment Period, the Administration
committed resources to this year's Open Enrollment Period and increased
outreach efforts as the plan selection deadline approached. For
instance, CMS sent over 700 million reminder emails and text messages
to consumers, as well as 3.2 million outreach emails to help
Navigators, agents and brokers assist consumers. In addition, I, along
with other senior Administration officials, including the CMS
Administrator, encouraged people to enroll through television and radio
interviews broadcast to more than 195 stations across the country.
The Department of Health and Human Services has found efficiencies
within the operating budget of the Exchanges and reduced the amount
spent on consumer information and outreach with no harm to consumers
and no reduction in customer service. To save Federal dollars and
provide more tailored opportunities for consumers to shop for coverage,
CMS continues to expand enrollment options for individuals through the
private sector, including online and in- person agents and brokers as
well as enrolling directly with health insurers.
One of this Administration's priorities is to deliver affordable
coverage options to the men and women left behind by the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA). We believe it is important
that all Americans have access to high quality, affordable health
coverage that meets their needs and the needs of their families.
Unfortunately, the PPACA is not working for far too many Americans,
particularly those middle-class Americans who cannot receive subsidies
and are shut out from access to affordable coverage options. That's why
under this Budget, we propose ways that will empower States while
giving choice and control back to consumers.
nerve block and non-opioid alternatives to post-surgical pain
Question. As part of the ``SUPPORT for Patients and Communities
Act,'' Congress included Section 6082 to encourage you to review
Medicare payment systems that may incentivize the use of opioids over
proven non-opioid alternatives--such as continuous peripheral nerve
blocks and other treatments. I know HHS took a small step forward last
year with limited coverage of an injectable alternative, but it seems
like a lot more can and should be done here.
Are you considering any further changes to Medicare's payment
systems in order to incentivize doctors and healthcare providers to use
alternative methods over opioids?
Answer. The Administration has made historic investments to address
opioid misuse, abuse, and overdose, but significant work must still be
done to fully turn the tide of this public health crisis. The
President's Fiscal Year 2020 Budget supports HHS's five-part strategy
to:
--Improve access to prevention, treatment, and recovery services,
including the full range of medication-assisted treatments;
--Better target the availability of overdose-reversing drugs;
--Strengthen our understanding of the crisis through better public
health data and reporting;
--Provide support for cutting edge research on pain and addiction;
and
--Improve pain management practices.
As you noted, based on recommendations from the President's
Commission on Combatting Drug Addiction and the Opioid Crisis, CMS
reviewed its payment policies for certain drugs, specifically non-
opioid pain management treatments, which are bundled into larger
surgical payments in the hospital outpatient setting and ambulatory
surgical centers. In response to this recommendation as well as
stakeholder requests and peer-reviewed evidence, for calendar year
2019, CMS finalized a policy to unbundle and pay separately for non-
opioid pain management drugs that function as a supply when used in a
covered surgical procedure performed in an ambulatory surgical center.
In addition, CMS sought feedback in the Calendar Year 2019 Hospital
Outpatient Prospective Payment System (OPPS) and Ambulatory Surgical
Center (ASC) proposed rule on whether other non-opioid alternatives for
acute or chronic pain, such as drugs and devices, have demonstrated
decreases in opioid prescriptions and whether they warrant separate
payment under the OPPS and ASC payment systems. CMS is continuing to
analyze this issue as the agency implements section 6082 of the SUPPORT
for Patients and Communities Act, which requires review and adjustments
to payments under the OPPS and ASC payments systems to avoid financial
incentives to use opioids instead of non-opioid alternatives for pain
management.
medicaid block grants
Question. I was concerned by recent reporting indicating that the
Administration is trying to bypass Congress and change how Medicaid is
financed by giving block grants or per capita caps to States. This
reporting suggests that CMS is ``drawing up guidelines'' under which
State Medicaid programs ``would get spending limits, along with more
flexibility to run the low-income health program that serves nearly 75
million Americans.'' \5\
Can you explain the nature of the reported guidance that would
allow States to implement a block grant or a per capita cap, including
the statutory authority you rely on to make such a change?
Answer. The Administration is committed to empowering States and
consumers to reform healthcare. Medicaid costs to States and the
Federal Government are growing at an unsustainable rate and States do
not have the flexibility they need to address the underlying drivers of
these trends. The President's Fiscal Year 2020 Budget supports a two-
part approach to move away from Obamacare, starting with enactment of
legislation modeled closely after the Graham-Cassidy- Heller-Johnson
bill that include Market Based Health Care Grants. In Medicaid, this
includes allowing States a choice between a per-capita cap or a block
grant, and repealing Obamacare's Medicaid expansion, to modernize
Medicaid financing and refocus the program on those it was originally
intended to serve. The second part of the Budget proposal includes
additional reforms to address unsustainable healthcare spending trends
and builds upon the Graham-Cassidy- Heller-Johnson bill to make the
system more efficient. This includes proposals to align the growth
rates for the Market-Based Health Care Grant Program and Medicaid per
capita cap and block grant with the Consumer Price Index for All Urban
Consumers (CPI-U). This proposal would result in an estimated $1.4
trillion in Medicaid savings over 10 years.
This Administration believes strongly in the important role that
States play in fostering innovation in program design and financing. We
also believe that when States are held accountable to a defined budget
they will be empowered to design individual, State-based solutions that
prioritize Medicaid dollars for traditional Medicaid populations and
support innovation. That is why the Administration has been looking
into offering States the option under current authorities to innovate
with respect to Medicaid financing; however, our guidance on this topic
is still under development.
diabetes research
Question. I am troubled by the proposal in the HHS budget that
would cut funding for the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) by more than 12 percent. Diabetes research
from NIDDK is critical in driving forward the development of new
treatments that improve the lives of people with diabetes.
Given that diabetes is the most expensive chronic condition facing
our country, can you explain why the Department felt it was a good idea
to reduce vital funding for diabetes research?
Answer. NIH's research plan will assure that the most valuable
research is funded. The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) leads NIH's research efforts in diabetes
and, together with other relevant Institutes and Centers at NIH, will
continue to support basic, translational, and clinical research on
diabetes and its complications under the funding levels requested in
the President's Budget, such as the programs described below. Diabetes
is certainly an important health problem facing our country today and
NIH will continue to support research in this area, including research
to further the development of new prevention and treatment approaches
for type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes, and gestational diabetes mellitus
(GDM). In addition to increasing the risk of complications of vision
loss, kidney failure, and amputation, diabetes doubles the risk for
many other diseases, including heart disease, many forms of cancer, and
some forms of dementia, underscoring the extensive health impacts of
this condition.
For example, research on GDM has shown that the disease increases
risk of complications during pregnancy and birth for both mother and
children and increases future type 2 diabetes risk for the mother and
future obesity and type 2 diabetes risk for the offspring. These
findings underscore the importance of research on GDM to improve these
short- and long-term outcomes. Toward this goal, NIDDK is establishing
a research consortium to recruit pregnant women in their first
trimester to examine their blood glucose levels throughout pregnancy
and characterize the development of abnormal glucose levels. Knowledge
from this research is expected to lead to improved approaches for
screening for GDM and inform the development of future clinical trials
of interventions to decrease adverse outcomes for mothers and their
children of future clinical trials of interventions to decrease adverse
outcomes for mothers and their children.
NIDDK will also continue to support studies through the Diabetic
Foot Consortium. The goal of this research consortium is to validate
biomarkers for diabetic foot ulcers that could be used to predict
healing outcomes, guide treatment decisions, and monitor healing and
response to treatment. The availability of biomarkers could foster the
development of new therapies that can improve foot ulcer healing and
prevent amputations.
To continue to drive the development of new therapies, NIDDK also
supports the ongoing development of novel preclinical models, including
efforts to produce an ``islet on a chip.'' This chip incorporates or
mimics diverse elements that support islets in the body, such as blood
vessels, and thus better represents human islet physiology than
conventional two-dimensional islets cultured on plastic dishes, for
example. This model system has the potential to be transformative in
terms of advancing studies in human islet biology, validating diabetes
biomarkers, and performing drug and toxicity testing of diabetes
therapies.
NIDDK will continue its support of research toward developing
improved glucose management technologies for people with type 1
diabetes. For example, NIDDK plans to continue to support advanced
artificial pancreas clinical trials, as well as research conducted by
academic medical centers and small businesses to develop next-
generation diabetes management technologies. The goal of the research
is the development of multiple devices so that people with diabetes and
their healthcare providers can choose the technology that is right for
them.
NIDDK is also supporting the Glycemia Reduction Approaches in
Diabetes: A Comparative Effectiveness Study (GRADE) clinical trial,
which is comparing the effects of four different glucose-lowering
medications when combined with metformin, the standard first-line
therapy for type 2 diabetes. The results of this trial may provide
better guidance to practitioners in the choice of medications and help
with developing a personalized treatment program for individual
patients.
NIDDK is committed to advancing research in type 1, type 2, and GDM
and to finding ways to improve the lives of individuals living with
these diseases and their complications.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Tammy Baldwin
onc
Question. ONC recently released a proposed rule to implement a
number of the provisions in the 21st Century Cures Act to improve the
interoperability of health information.
The proposed rules seek to improve electronic health record (EHR)
quality by allowing providers to share screen shots to illustrate their
concerns with certain systems. Enhancing transparency is essential to
improving the quality and safety of patient care. However, we must
guarantee that this does not unintentionally expose proprietary
information that bad actors in other countries could exploit for their
own gain or even malicious intent.
Secretary Azar, how do we strike the appropriate balance here
between HIT transparency and access to data while protecting US
innovation and security?
Answer. The 21st Century Cures Act (Cures Act) requires that health
IT developers participating in the ONC Health IT Certification Program
not prohibit or restrict communications regarding usability,
interoperability, security, user experience, applicable developer
business practices, and the way the technology is used when it comes to
their certified health IT. This statutory prohibition recognizes that
the sharing of these types of information is extremely important to
address matters such as patient safety, system security
vulnerabilities, and product performance. One resounding complaint we
have heard from patient safety advocates is that health IT developers
use gag clauses to inhibit the flow of essential information that could
improve safety across systems. An Institute of Medicine (IOM) report
found that such clauses discourage users from sharing information about
patient safety risks, significantly limiting the ability of users to
understand how health IT products impact patient safety. The report
stressed the need for health IT developers to enable the exchange of
information regarding user experiences, including the sharing of
screenshots.\6\ Further, during a series of Senate HELP Committee
hearings, stakeholders emphasized the lack of transparency around the
performance of health IT in a live environment, noting that it can
undermine a competitive marketplace, hinder innovation, and prevent
improvements in the safety and usability of the technology.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ IOM (Institute of Medicine), Health IT and Patient Safety:
Building Safer Systems for Better Care (2012). Available at http://
www.nationalacademies.org/hmd/Reports/2011/Health-IT-and-Patient-
Safety-Building-Safer-Systems-for-Better-Care.aspx.
\7\ HELP 6/10/15 pg. 12; Available at https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
pkg/CHRG-114shrg25971/pdf/CHRG-114shrg25971.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The ONC proposed rule's approach to implementing the statutory
requirements endeavored to address these concerns, while also taking
into account market interests, such as innovation. The ONC proposed
rule proposes to permit developers to limit the sharing of information
about their products for both legitimate and reasonable circumstances.
Specifically, ONC's proposed rule would permit, under defined
circumstances and when certain conditions are met, health IT developers
to prohibit or restrict communications that would infringe their
intellectual property rights and third party intellectual property
rights included in their health IT. However, ONC proposed that a health
IT developer would not be able to prohibit or restrict communications
that would be a ``fair use'' of any copyright work comprised in the
developer's health IT. This would be true for screenshots in
particular. Faithful reproductions of health IT screenshots are an
important means for making accurate and coherent communications about
the subject matters identified by the Cures Act, including safety and
security concerns. ONC will consider all public comments submitted on
the proposed rule in order to ensure that the final rule strikes an
appropriate balance in carrying out statutory mandates with
consideration of stakeholders' interests.
The ONC proposed rule is also designed to support the increased
electronic exchange of health information and help combat the practice
of information blocking. It would inject competition and innovation
into the healthcare delivery system by addressing both technical
barriers and business practices that impede the secure and appropriate
sharing of data. The proposed rule includes a certification condition
calling for certified health IT developers to use secure, standards-
based APIs that facilitates patients' use of smartphones for accessing
medical records at no cost. It also would support clinicians' ability
to partner with third-party software developers that offer unique and
competitive services. This would facilitate patient access to their
electronic health information on their smartphone, growing a nascent
patient- and provider-facing app economy. The proposed rule would
foster innovation and competition on how patients and their providers
can securely use and share their health data, rather than competition
on data control.
In recognition of the breadth of ONC's proposals and the importance
of these rules on the healthcare industry, ONC extended the comment
period for an additional 30 days. ONC will be considering public
comments on all aspects of its proposals, and those comments will
inform the final rule.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Christopher Murphy
Question. Your budget states that you expect an increase in the
number of certified trafficking victims in fiscal year 2020, an
increase in the number of potential trafficking victims that are
identified by the trafficking hotline, and an increase in the number of
incoming communications received from victims and survivors of human
trafficking by the hotline. Can you explain why you decided to cut
funding for the Anti-Trafficking in Persons Programs even though your
budget predicts an increase in the demand of services?
Answer. The Department is committed to providing services for
eligible victims of trafficking. The Budget balances the need for
fiscal responsibility with the need to provide these services by
including $17 million, $10 million below the fiscal year 2019 Enacted,
to provide services for both foreign national and domestic (United
States citizen and lawful permanent resident) victims of human
trafficking. Funds are used to screen and identify victims and to
provide them with services including case management, emergency
services, and medical services. Funds also support a National Human
Trafficking Hotline and raise awareness to prevent human trafficking.
ACF provides services to victims of trafficking in coordination with
the Department of Justice's Office of Victims of Crime. The fiscal year
2020 Budget for that Office includes $83 million for both foreign and
domestic victims of trafficking.
Question. The SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act included
``Sec. 1001. At-risk youth Medicaid protection'' to prevent a State
from terminating a young person who is otherwise eligible for Medicaid
because he or she is in the juvenile justice system. This allows a
young person to continue treatments and other healthcare coverage
immediately following release.
What is the status of Medicaid guidance to States to effectuate
this statutory change? What type of coordination will this require
between States, territories, and the District of Columbia, and the
judicial system? How will the Federal Medicaid Program enforce this
protection for otherwise eligible youth as they leave the juvenile
justice system?
Answer. CMS continues to make great strides in implementing the
SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act. Section 1001 prohibits States
from terminating, and permits States to suspend, Medicaid eligibility
for juvenile enrollees who become inmates of public institutions.
States also are required to redetermine those enrollees' Medicaid
eligibility before their release and restore their coverage upon
release if they are eligible. States would be required to process
Medicaid applications submitted by or on behalf of juvenile enrollees
who are inmates in public institutions who were not enrolled in
Medicaid before becoming inmates and ensure that Medicaid coverage is
provided when they are released if they are found to be eligible.
CMS is currently working on guidance to assist States in adopting
section 1001 of the SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act.
More broadly, the Administration has also made historic investments
to address opioid misuse, abuse, and overdose, but significant work
must still be done to fully turn the tide of this public health crisis.
The President's Fiscal Year 2020 Budget supports HHS's five-part
strategy to:
--Improve access to prevention, treatment, and recovery services,
including the full range of medication-assisted treatments;
--Better target the availability of overdose-reversing drugs;
--Strengthen our understanding of the crisis through better public
health data and reporting;
--Provide support for cutting edge research on pain and addiction;
and
--Improve pain management practices.
fda
Question. In 2016, the FDA proposed to ban electrical stimulation
devices (ESDs) used for self- injurious or aggressive behavior because
they present an inhumane and substantial risk to public health and they
have been used on children with intellectual and developmental
disabilities. This regulatory step was the result of deliberative
discussion and consideration about the harmful nature of these devices.
The proposed rule stated that the FDA determined that ESDs presented a
number of psychological and physical risks, including depression, fear,
panic, aggression, pain, burns and errant shocks from device
misapplication or failure. Moreover, ESDs have been associated with
additional risks such as suicidality, chronic stress, acute stress
disorder and hypervigilance. I, along with a number of my Senate
colleagues, wrote to then Commissioner Robert Califf to support this
proposed ban. In addition, two dozen leading disability organizations
and advocates also wrote in support of finalizing the proposed ban.
Three years later the FDA has yet to issue a related final rule.
What is the status of the proposed ban of ESDs used to treat self-
injurious or aggressive behavior?
Answer. In the Fall 2018 Unified Agenda, FDA published notice of
its intent to finalize the proposed rule Banned Devices; Proposal to
Ban Electrical Stimulation Devices Used to Treat Self-Injurious or
Aggressive Behavior (81 FR 24385), which would ban both new electrical
stimulation devices (ESD) and devices already in distribution. The
Unified Agenda, which was published on October 17, 2018, contains the
top regulatory priorities of Federal agencies for the American public.
FDA carefully reviewed the comments submitted to the public docket in
connection with the proposed ban and associated issues and intends to
issue a final rule in 2019. FDA has determined that these devices
present substantial and unreasonable risks of illness or injury that
cannot be corrected or eliminated by labeling or a change in labeling.
Medical device safety is a key priority for the FDA, and we have sought
to assure that the decision regarding these devices is in the best
interests of patients.
Question. The SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act included a
provision Sen. Capito and I authored, ``Sec. 7081. Program to support
coordination and continuation of care for drug overdose patients.'' The
program would provide those struggling with substance use disorders
access to specially trained coaches who are in recovery themselves who
can serve as a mentor, support for families, and help patients navigate
treatment options. In Connecticut there is successful model that places
recovery coaches in the emergency department. What is the status of
implementation of that section?
Answer. Because section 7081 was formulated as a free-standing
provision rather than as an amendment to the Public Health Service Act,
SAMHSA could fund the grants only if Congress added that program's
authorization to the statutory language for SAMSHA's appropriations.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Joe Manchin, III
community services block grant
Question. I was very disappointed to see that the President's
Budget completely eliminated funding for the Community Services Block
Grant. This block grant provides more than 7 million dollars to West
Virginia to serve more than 110,000 low-income West Virginians. And, in
2017, this funding helped my State leverage $4.35 from State, local,
and private sources for every $1 in Federal funding. This funding is
used to provide meals for seniors, fund early-childhood education,
strengthen career training, and provide services for our veterans. The
flexibility in this grant gives West Virginia to target the resources
to those who need it the most.
Secretary Azar, in recent years, West Virginia has struggled with
budget deficits. We simply cannot replace these Federal dollars with
State funding. What do you propose telling the children, veterans, and
seniors who rely on the services that this block grant helps us
provide?
Answer. Continuing a proposal from the fiscal year 2019 President's
Budget, the fiscal year 2020 budget request does not include funding
for the Community Service Block Grant (CSBG). In a constrained budget
environment, difficult funding decisions must be made to ensure that
Federal funds are being spent as effectively as possible. The CSBG
program does not use performance-based fundingdistribution formulas,
and CSBG accounts for only 5 percent of the total funding received by
eligible local agencies.
state councils on developmental disabilities
Question. Secretary Azar, I was disappointed to see that the
President's budget completely eliminates funding for the State Councils
on Development Disabilities. West Virginia has approximately 33,000
people with a developmental disability, and we have the 3rd highest
rate in the country of children needing special education. This funding
is critically important to my constituents and to our efforts to ensure
that every West Virginian is able to achieve independence, economic
self-sufficiency, and inclusion in the community.
Secretary Azar, with our State budget issues, the State of West
Virginia cannot fill in where Federal funding goes away. Won't cutting
these resources actually lead to greater costs in the future because
without these supports individuals with developmental disabilities will
have a harder time becoming independent and contributing to our
economy?
Answer. The fiscal year 2020 President's Budget continues funding
for State Councils on Developmental Disabilities at $56 million. We
agree that the State Councils on Developmental Disabilities program
provides lifelong, significant support, by funding investment and
innovation tailored to improving the quality of life of those with
developmental disabilities. We are aware of the impact of the cuts and
are eager to work with State Councils on Developmental Disabilities
grantees to identify efficiencies in the operations of the councils to
maximize funding for service provision.
Minden, West Virginia
Question. Secretary Azar, as you may know, Minden, West Virginia
has been listed as a Superfund site by the EPA since 1984 because the
small rural community was contaminated with PCBs by an industrial
facility related to coal mining. I am gravely concerned about the
reports stating that cancer rates are significantly higher in Minden
than the rest of Fayette County and the rest of the State. The National
Toxicology Program ranks PCBs as ``reasonably anticipated to be human
carcinogens'' and the EPA has classified PCBs as a probable human
carcinogen. Both designations indicate that there is substantial
likelihood that extended exposure to PCB contaminated sites could
result in cancer. Yet, the EPA has found that PCB exposure from the
superfund site is not responsible for these high cancer rates or for a
cancer cluster in this small, rural Appalachia town. That is why it is
so critical that we conduct additional research to fully understand the
potential causal connection between PCB exposure and cancer rates.
Secretary Azar, will you commit to directing the National
Toxicology Program at NIH and the Agency for Toxic Substances and
Disease Registry at CDC to promptly prioritize further research on PCB
exposure and the link to cancer?
Further, will you commit to ensuring that these agencies have the
resources that they need to conduct this critical research?
Answer. Starting in the late 1980s and again more recently, ATSDR,
an independent agency within HHS, has worked collaboratively with the
West Virginia State and local health departments in providing support,
under its statutory mandate to address chemical exposure concerns in
the Minden community.
In 1989, the WV Bureau of Public Health requested that ATSDR
conduct a public health assessment at the Shaffer Equipment Company
site in Minden. ATSDR published a report reviewing environmental
sampling and health outcome data related to exposure to PCBs. In
addition to the 1993 public health assessment, ATSDR has participated
in several public meetings to inform and educate the community about
the health effects of PCBs, including two recent meetings hosted by EPA
in 2017 and 2018. ATSDR has also summarized and published information
on PCBs for health professionals, and has created fact sheets for the
public to answer frequently asked questions regarding PCBs.
Currently, ATSDR is working on a new public health assessment
report evaluating the most recent EPA environmental data on exposures
in the Minden community and including updated cancer statistics and
community health reporting. ATSDR will continue to provide updates to
the Senator as the public health assessment progresses.
rural health care and medicaid cuts
Question. Secretary Azar, I am concerned about the impact that the
President's budget request would have on access to rural healthcare.
The budget proposes replacing Medicaid with a new Federal-State
partnership that establishes per-person caps or fixed grants at reduced
funding levels, and eliminates the Medicaid expansion. Let me share
some numbers with you:
In my State of West Virginia, uncompensated care reached $692.27
million in 2013.The following year, after Medicaid expansion was
enacted, the State's uncompensated care dropped 38.3 percent to $427.44
million.
That's because almost 200,000 West Virginians gained insurance
coverage either on the exchanges or through the Medicaid expansion--
suddenly these rural healthcare providers were being reimbursed for
services instead of absorbing the cost.
I have heard from rural hospital CEOs, physicians, and other
healthcare providers in West Virginia that these cuts would be
devastating to rural hospitals and clinics in my State. Many of them
would have to close leaving my constituents hours away from the closest
emergency room.
Secretary Azar, what is your plan to ensure that rural healthcare
providers are able to continue to serve my constituents in rural West
Virginia if those West Virginians lose their Medicaid coverage or
private health insurance?
Answer. Approximately 60 million people live in rural areas,
including millions of Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries. HHS
recognizes the many obstacles that rural Americans face, including
living in communities with disproportionally higher poverty rates,
having more chronic conditions, being uninsured or underinsured, as
well as experiencing a fragmented healthcare delivery system with an
overworked and shrinking health workforce, and lacking access to
specialty services.
I share your concerns about preserving access to care in rural
communities. The Federal Office of Rural Health Policy was created in
1987 to examine healthcare issues impacting rural communities,
including: access to quality healthcare and health professionals;
viability of rural hospitals; and the effect of HHS's proposed rules
and regulations, including Medicare and Medicaid, on access to and
financing of healthcare in rural areas. The President's Fiscal Year
2020 Budget requests $189 million for the Federal Office of Rural
Health Policy for grants to enhance healthcare delivery in rural
communities, conduct research on rural healthcare issues, and provide
technical assistance, such as training and dissemination of best
practices to rural communities and stakeholders. The President's Fiscal
Year 2020 Budget includes proposals that target critical rural health
activities and services such as Telehealth, Rural Health Policy
Development, and Black Lung Clinics, and the Rural Communities Opioids
Response Program (RCORP). The President's Fiscal Year 2020 Budget
requests $120 million for RCORP, which supports treatment and
prevention of substance use disorder, including opioid abuse, in the
highest-risk rural communities.
CMS developed the Rural Health Strategy (issued in May 2018) to
focus on areas where the agency can better serve individuals in rural
areas and avoid unintended consequences of policy and program
implementation for these communities. The strategy applies a rural lens
to new and ongoing activities of the Agency and informs the pathway by
which CMS can achieve its rural health vision through intra-agency
collaboration, stakeholder engagement, and the elevation of programs
and policies that will advance the State of rural healthcare in
America.
This Administration believes strongly in the important role that
States play in fostering innovation in program design and financing.
States, as administrators of the program, are in the best position to
assess the unique needs of their respective Medicaid-eligible
populations, including those in rural areas, and to drive reforms that
result in better health outcomes. The Budget returns control over
healthcare back to the States, including replacing the Federal dollars
currently spent on Medicaid expansion and premium tax credits with
Market-Based Health Care Grants for States over 10 years. These reforms
will put Medicaid on a more sustainable path for the future.
CMS works with State Medicaid agencies and other State partners to
advance rural health strategies for Medicaid eligible individuals,
including people with disabilities, dual-eligible beneficiaries, and
people with substance use disorders. We are also committed to ensuring
that States have the flexibilities they need to administer their
programs to fit their unique needs. CMS also has an established Rural
Health Council, which is focused on improving access to care for those
living in rural areas, supporting the economics of providing care in
rural areas, and ensuring that new healthcare innovations also fit
rural markets.
food and drug administration's regulation of premium cigars
Question. Secretary Azar, I commend you and your agency for your
willingness to address and consider actionable steps in the
comprehensive plan on tobacco that was announced last year. I am
encouraged by the FDA's willingness to engage in a review and dialogue
with industry on issues pertaining to the regulation of premium
cigars--small business retail shops in my district remain very
concerned about the regulations. Despite the agency's recent actions to
solicit and review information on premium cigars and ultimately
consider changing how it regulates the product, several current or
pending requirements for premium cigar products remain in place. This
includes the August deadlines for costlywarning labels on packaging and
advertising. Even by FDA's own estimates, this will cost industry,
including many small businesses, millions of dollars.
If FDA is currently in a process that may change its approach to
the premium cigar category, why does it not delay or suspend these
deadlines and requirements, until it ultimately comes to a final
decision?
Answer. As part of the Agency's comprehensive plan for regulation
of nicotine and tobacco, in March 2018, FDA issued an advance notice of
proposed rulemaking (ANPRM) to provide an opportunity for the public to
provide new information for the Agency to consider with respect to
``premium'' cigars. In particular, the Agency sought comments and
scientific data related to how a ``premium'' cigar might be defined and
the patterns of use and resulting public health impacts from these
products. The Agency is currently considering over 32,000 comments
received in response to the ANPRM. In the meantime, all cigars remain
subject to regulation based on FDA's previous determination that there
was no appropriate public health justification to exempt ``premium''
cigars.
Although the warning label requirements for cigars took effect last
August, they are currently not being enforced pursuant to an order of
the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia in Cigar
Association of America v. FDA, No. 16-1460 (D.D.C.). In that case, the
court sustained the cigar warning requirements against First Amendment
and other challenges, but enjoined FDA ``from enforcing the health
warning requirements for cigars and pipe tobacco set forth in 21 C.F.R.
Sec. Sec. 1143.3 and 1143.5 until 60 days after the final disposition
of Plaintiffs' appeal.'' Cigar Ass'n of Am. v. FDA, 317 F. Supp. 3d
555, 563--64 (D.D.C. 2018), appeal pending, No. 18-5195 (D.C. Cir.)
(scheduled for argument October 24, 2019).
FDA intends to comply with the court's order in Cigar Association
of America and will not enforce the health warning requirements for
cigars and pipe tobacco set forth in 21 C.F.R. Sec. Sec. 1143.3 and
1143.5 until 60 days after the final disposition of Plaintiffs' appeal.
In addition, the agency does not intend to enforce the labeling
requirements under sections 903(a)(2) and 920(a) of the FDCA for cigars
and pipe tobacco while the injunction remains in effect.
In addition, with respect to assistance for small businesses, FDA
is committed to providing assistance to regulated entities, including
small businesses. FDA's Center for Tobacco Products has a dedicated
Office of Small Business Assistance, which has responded to hundreds of
questions since the deeming regulation published and continues to
respond to questions from industry, including small businesses.
opioid-related infectious diseases
Question. Secretary Azar, as you know, West Virginia has been
devastated by the opioid epidemic. This means that we have also seen a
significant increase in opioid-related infectious diseases. To put this
in perspective, on an average year the United States sees roughly 1,600
Hepatitis A cases, and West Virginia sees just 8 of those. Again,
that's 8 total cases annually in West Virginia. Now today, in 2019,
West Virginia is now at over 2,400 Hepatitis A cases. That's an over
300 percent increase. In your budget, you requested significant cuts to
programs like the National Institute on Drug Abuse. Research conducted
at the National Institute on Drug Abuse helps to support communities
suffering from the consequences of drug abuse, including outbreaks of
HIV and Hepatitis A.
Secretary Azar, can you tell me how cutting funding to programs
like the National Institute on Drug Abuse will help in preventing
further opioid-related infectious disease outbreaks?
How is the Department of Health and Human Services responding to
serious outbreaks like the one we're having in West Virginia?
Answer. The Budget prioritizes biomedical research to confront the
opioid crisis by targeting resources across the Department. NIH invests
in the highest priority biomedical research to prevent, treat, and cure
the Nation's most challenging diseases and conditions. Opioids and pain
research within NIH receives $1.3 billion in fiscal year 2020 to
develop long lasting preventive and therapeutic solutions to the
opioids crisis that can be implemented across the country--solutions
that will prevent opioid-related infectious disease outbreaks.
State and local health departments typically lead the
investigations of local outbreaks of hepatitis A. When requested by the
health department, CDC can support health departments in these
investigations by
--communicating with public health officials from States with
reported cases and providing technical assistance;
--gathering data reported by States on confirmed cases and evaluating
and monitoring these data from a national perspective;
--providing support on vaccine supply and distribution and vaccine
response strategy development;
--testing clinical specimens from suspected hepatitis A cases when
requested by States;
--providing technical assistance and answering questions related to
molecular and serologic laboratory testing;
--providing rapid assistance on the ground during outbreak
investigations, often through a formal request by the State
health department;
--alerting clinicians, healthcare facilities, and public health
officials around the country about current outbreaks and
providing vaccine policy and clinical guidance for healthcare
providers; and
--providing information to public and healthcare providers through a
variety of media.
the budgeting for opioid addiction treatment (lifeboat) act
Question. In 2017, more than 70,000 people died from heroin or
prescription opioid overdose--that's about 130 people every day. That's
more people dying annually from drug overdose than car crashes or HIV/
AIDS ever have in a single year in U.S. history. Unfortunately, a major
barrier that those suffering from opioid addiction face is insufficient
access to substance abuse treatment. In fact, between 2009 and 2013,
only 22 percent of Americans suffering from opioid addiction
participated in any form of addiction treatment. That is why I
introduced the LifeBOAT Act. This bill would require pharma companies
to pay a small fee--1 cent per milligram--on their opioid products. It
would then direct this funding to Substance Abuse Prevention and
Treatment Block Grant.
Secretary Azar, will you support this commonsense proposal?
Answer. While I cannot comment on this particular legislation, I
certainly agree that opioid manufacturers, distributors, and
prescribers all have a role to play in ensuring that patients do not
fall victim to addiction. And when the system fails, patients need
immediate access to sustained, evidence-based addiction treatment. I
respectfully defer to Congress on the most appropriate way to fund such
treatment.
Question. We must increase funding for the many West Virginians and
Americans who are struggling to recover. How do you propose we pay for
treatment facilities to keep people from dying?
Answer. As stated previously, I respectfully defer to Congress on
the most appropriate way to fund treatment facilities.
jessie's law
Question. In 2016, we lost a young woman with great potential named
Jessica Grubb. Jessie was a great student, a loving daughter and
sister, and an avid runner. She was also recovering from an opioid
addiction. When she had surgery for an infection related to a running
injury, both Jessie and her parents told her doctors and hospital
personnel that she was a recovering addict and not to be prescribed
opioids. Unfortunately, Jessie's discharging physician did not know
that she was a recovering addict and sent her home with a prescription
for 50 oxycodone pills. That night, she overdosed and passed away in
her sleep. That is why I introduced Jessie's Law to require HHS to
establish standards for hospitals and medical professionals for
prominently displaying substance use disorder history--just like any
deadly allergy--in a person's medical record when that information is
provided by the patient. This bill passed in the SUPPORT for Patients
and Communities Act last fall.
Secretary Azar, will you commit to me that your agency will
immediately begin working on these standards and disseminate them as
quickly as possible to medical professionals all over the country? This
is just a commonsense step that will ensure that hospitals and medical
professionals have access to the information that they need to provide
medically appropriate care and keep us from losing more people like we
lost Jessie Grubb.
Answer. The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration is working diligently to address the issues of sharing
information among practitioners for the better care and treatment of
individuals. We believe strongly that information must be readily
accessible to providers in order to best provide holistic evidence-
based care to individuals living with substance use disorders. As such,
my Department is working to revise the existing regulations around 42
CFR Part 2 to remove barriers to coordinated care and permit additional
sharing of information among providers. Our aim is to eliminate issues
that led to the unfortunate consequence in this case. Once this
revision is completed, the Department will provide clear training and
technical assistance as well as clear guidelines on its implementation.
In the meantime, we have launched a Privacy TA Center which produces
training and technical assistance to all practitioners, individuals,
and families on the sharing of patient information and confidentiality
regulations.
the jessica grubb's legacy act
Question. Secretary Azar, as you know, the 42 CFR Part 2
regulations govern the confidentiality and sharing of substance use
disorder treatment records within our healthcare system. Unfortunately,
at a time when we are working toward greater care coordination, this
regulation has acted as a barrier to communication between healthcare
providers serving individuals with substance use disorders. I
introduced the Jessica Grubb's Legacy Act in honor of a young woman
that we lost too soon to an opioid overdose because her medical records
did not adequately indicate her past addiction and--while in recovery--
was sent home from a surgery with 50 oxycodone pills. This bill would
simply align the privacy standards for substance use disorder treatment
records with HIPAA--the privacy standard that governs all other
physical and mental healthcare records. It would preserve patient
privacy, but ensure that medical professionals have access to the vital
information that they need to properly coordinate the care of their
patients with substance use disorders. As the agency that oversees 42
CFR Part 2, SAMHSA has said that they are encouraged that Congress is
examining ``the benefits of aligning Part 2 with HIPAA'' because ``
healthcare providers must have secure access to patient information,
including substance use disorder information, in order to provide
integrated and effective care.''
Secretary Azar, will you commit to working with me to pass the
Legacy Act (S. 1012) to align Part 2 with HIPAA and ensure that those
recovering from substance use disorders are able to receive quality,
coordinated healthcare?
Answer. The Department takes the sharing of patient information
very seriously. We understand the need for physicians to be well
equipped with the information they need to provide their patient the
best possible care. The unfortunate case which prompted Jessie's law is
a reminder of the need for physicians to have proper access to
information. As such, HHS is working to revise the 42 CFR Part 2
regulations to make it easier to share information while still ensuring
patient confidentiality. The fiscal year 2020 Budget proposes that
legislation be enacted to address this issue and enable HHS to more
closely align the privacy regulation at 42 CFR Part 2 with the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act. I have asked my staff to
review your proposal, and provide me advice.
opioid funding for the hardest hit states
Question. Secretary Azar, my State of West Virginia has been
devastated by the opioid epidemic. We are the hardest hit State in the
Nation and have the highest overdose death rate. Our State also faces
the largest per-capita economic burden in the country: the opioid
epidemic is costing our economy an estimated $8.8 billion per year,
forcing us to dedicate the largest share of our GDP of any State to
costs related to the crisis: 12 percent. This is a staggering cost for
a small State like ours. That is why I pushed for and was glad to see
the 15 percent set aside for the hardest hit states--those with the
highest mortality rates like West Virginia. However, recent studies
have shown that rural counties are still not getting their fair share.
The study found a number of rural counties, including 40 of 95 in one
State, received no direct Federal funding.
Will you commit to working with me to ensure that rural counties
with high mortality rates related to opioid overdoses get the share of
the Federal resources that they need to address this crisis, including
of Federal funding not subject to the 15 percent set aside requirement?
Answer. I agree that rural communities are an area where resources
to address the opioid crisis are especially needed. The Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) has several programs
that address this need. First, the Substance Abuse Block Grant allows
States to identify areas of concern and address them in ways that make
sense for their States and communities. West Virginia, for example, has
identified prescription drugs as an area of focus for 2019. Another
grant program, First Responders--Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery
Act (FR-CARA), educates and trains first responders and members of
other key community sectors to administer naloxone, an emergency
treatment for opioid overdose. These grantees are also establishing
processes, protocols, and mechanisms for referral to appropriate
treatment and recovery communities. Of the 48 FR-CARA grants awarded,
20 were set aside and awarded to entities serving rural communities
with high rates of opioid abuse. Other opioid- related grant programs,
including State Opioid Response, Strategic Prevention Framework--
Prescription Drugs, and Improving Access to Overdose Treatment, are
awarded to both rural and non-rural communities. In an effort to
distribute funds to communities, as well as States, SAMHSA has
initiated a new funding opportunity, which will focus on community-
driven efforts to advance substance abuse prevention, allowing
communities and counties to apply for funds directly. We expect rural
counties to be in the recipient pool for these funds. Finally, SAMHSA
funds 13 Rural Opioid Technical Assistance grantees, which develop and
disseminate training and technical assistance for rural communities on
addressing opioid issues affecting these communities. The grantees
facilitate the identification of model programs, develop and update
materials related to the prevention, treatment and recovery activities
for opioid use disorder (OUD), and ensure that high-quality training is
provided.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Patrick J. Leahy
unaccompanied children
Question. There are allegations of sexual abuse against thousands
of immigrant children at facilities run by private entities contracting
with the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). These private
entities are engaged in fundamentally governmental functions--housing
and caring for children in the custody of the Federal Government.
However, these private entities are not subject to any of our Federal
transparency laws like the Freedom of Information Act, which apply to
government agencies engaged in the same functions.
Do you support a proposal to apply the requirements of the Freedom
of Information Act to private entities that contract with HHS to house
and care for children in the agency's custody? If not, why not?
Answer. ORR care provider facilities must report all allegations of
sexual abuse, sexual harassment, or inappropriate sexual behavior
immediately but no later than four hours after learning of the
allegation. Care providers report to the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI) any allegations of sexual abuse that are subject to
Federal reporting laws or could constitute violations of Federal law.
Sexual abuse is defined at 34 U.S.C. 20341 and in ORR regulations at 45
C.F.R. 411.6. Sexual abuse can include allegations such as touching of
the buttocks or allegations of sexual assault, whether it was a minor-
on-minor or staff-on-minor allegation.
Information about sexual misconduct is reported to ORR, the FBI,
and HHS/OIG via a sexual abuse significant incident report (SIR). Care
providers must submit an addendum to the sexual abuse SIR within 24
hours of learning of incorrect, incomplete, or new information,
including any information about a pending or complete investigation.
ORR maintains SIRs and addendums, along with other records pertaining
to each child in ORR custody, in an electronic database. The records in
this database are already subject to FOIA.
In fiscal year 2016 and 2017, care providers reported 612
allegations of sexual abuse to the FBI. Of those 612 allegations, 105
allegations involved a staff member at an ORR-funded care provider
facility. In October 2017 through July 2018, care providers reported
412 allegations of sexual abuse to the FBI. Of those 412 allegations,
49 allegations involved a staff member at an ORR-funded care provider
facility.
child sponsor information
Question. The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2019 contains a
provision prohibiting the Department of Homeland Security from using
information obtained from HHS about sponsors or potential sponsors of
unaccompanied children to apprehend, detain, or remove such
individuals--unless that information reveals that the individual is a
danger to the child.
What has HHS done to implement this provision of the law since the
passage of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2019 (Public Law116-
6)? Has any guidance or memoranda been distributed within HHS regarding
implementation of and compliance with this prohibition? If so, please
provide the Subcommittee with copies of any such guidance or memoranda.
If not, why not?
Answer. As of April 18, 2019, ORR has not instituted any new
policies related to the DHS prohibition contained in the Consolidated
Appropriations Act of 2019 (PL 116-6), and we defer to DHS for any
procedures it implemented to comply with this provision. HHS notes
that, the prohibition could affect the UAC program in that some
potential sponsors may be less apprehensive in coming forward to
sponsor a child. However, the prohibition does not require a change to
current ORR release policies.
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
Senator Blunt. The subcommittee stands in recess.
[Whereupon, at 12:00 p.m., Thursday, April 4, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene subject to the call of
the Chair.]