- SYRIA: WHICH WAY FORWARD?
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
SYRIA: WHICH WAY FORWARD?
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
FEBRUARY 6, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-109
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
28-540 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas
KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama
AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
Amy Porter, Chief of Staff
Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director
Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------
Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida, Chairman
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
WITNESSES
The Honorable Robert Ford, senior fellow, Middle East Institute
(former United States Ambassador to Syria).....................
7
Mr. Faysal Itani, senior fellow, Atlantic Council................
15
Mr. Charles Lister, senior fellow, director of counter-extremism
and counter-terrorism, Middle East Institute...................
23
Mara Karlin, Ph.D., associate professor of the practice of
strategic studies, School of Advanced International Studies,
Johns Hopkins University (former Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Strategy and Force Development)....................
37
LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING
The Honorable Robert Ford: Prepared statement....................
9
Mr. Faysal Itani: Prepared statement.............................
17
Mr. Charles Lister: Prepared statement...........................
26
Mara Karlin, Ph.D.: Prepared statement...........................
39
APPENDIX
Hearing notice...................................................
62
Hearing minutes..................................................
63
The Honorable Theodore E. Deutch, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Florida: Statement submitted for the record
by Kassem Eid, a Syrian chemical weapons survivor..............
64
The Honorable David Cicilline, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Rhode Island: Material submitted for the record...
66
The Honorable Daniel Donovan, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York: Prepared statement......................
74
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........
75
SYRIA: WHICH WAY FORWARD?
----------
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 6, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:05 p.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. The subcommittee will come to order.
Thank you to all the members who are here already. After
recognizing myself and Ranking Member Deutch for our opening
statements I will then recognize other members seeking
recognition for 1 minute.
We will then hear from our witnesses. And without
objection, witnesses, your prepared statements will be made a
part of the record and members may have 5 days in which to
insert statements and questions for the record, subject to the
length limitation in the rules.
The chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes.
Near the seventh anniversary of the Syrian Civil War we
still find ourselves calling for a clear and coherent strategy
on the U.S. role in Syria and in helping bring the conflict to
an end. The last administration repeatedly refused to engage
with any real purpose in Syria, failing to follow through on
red lines, and in effect, surrendering the field to Russia, to
Iran, to Turkey to dictate Syria's future on their own terms.
By now the reasons behind President Obama's reluctance to
take a stronger stance against Iran in the region and beyond
and his desire to reach a nuclear accord with a state sponsor
of terror are well known. His Middle East rebalance or as he
famously put it, ``sharing the neighborhood,'' no doubt also
factored heavily into his Syria policy. Tragically, there has
been a disastrous cost of inaction. Hundreds of thousands
murdered, millions of refugees displaced. Violent turmoil
spilling across borders and threatening our allies Israel and
Jordan and Assad now firmly ensconced exacerbating Syria's
political and humanitarian crises.
Even worse, the regime in Iran flush with cash from the
nuclear deal and emboldened by the Obama administration's focus
elsewhere has solidified its so-called Shi'ite crescent of
influence from Tehran through Baghdad and Damascus to Beirut
and left a greatly strengthened terrorist group Hezbollah on
Israel's doorstep. Considering these costs and a clear lack of
U.S. willingness to engage many people were encouraged by
Secretary Tillerson's recent speech in which he described the
administration's vision for a way forward in Syria. Even if it
lacked great detail at least it was a signal of intent by his
administration to engage in Syria.
The Secretary laid out five broad but commendable
objectives. An enduring defeat of ISIS and al-Qaeda, a stable,
unified independent Syria under post Assad leadership,
diminishing Iranian influence, the return of refugees and
internally displaced people, and a Syria free of weapons of
mass destruction. As many people have noted, accomplishing
these objectives would require significant resources, resources
that the Secretary failed to commit to or detail in this lofty
speech.
Without these details it is difficult to see how we are
going to meet the challenges ahead. Our NATO ally Turkey, who
notoriously failed to stem the flow of foreign fighters and
cash and weapons across its border for years is now engaged in
operations against U.S. backed Kurdish and Arab forces in
Syria's northwest, forces that have been essential in our fight
against ISIS. And Russia, who appears determined to undermine
the United States, wherever and whenever possible, has both
coordinated with Turkey on its operations and commandeered the
U.N. peace process in Geneva, an exercise that was always
doomed as long as Russia was leading it.
Meanwhile, Iran continues taking advantage of the chaos
leveraging its tens of thousands of militia fighters to
displace Sunni inhabitants, manipulate the region's
demographics, and consolidate its own territorial gains.
Through it all, it is the Syrian people who are suffering the
most in what promises to be an extremely difficult rebuilding
process. The administration has begun to talk about this
process in terms of stabilization assistance, a necessary piece
of any strategy.
In delivering this assistance we must ensure that nothing
we provide benefits Assad or his cronies, and it may be more
beneficial to focus on the kind of humanitarian soft aid that
will allow Syrian communities to reduce their dependence on
Damascus.
With so many challenges and complications after years of
inaction and allowing others to fill the leadership vacuum we
cannot afford another strategy, while praiseworthy with its
broad strokes, that has missing details, missing commitment,
missing resources.
Our excellent panel today is designed to provide members
with the full spectrum of assessments on the administration's
plan, as well as their own understanding of U.S. interests and
policy recommendations for Syria. And I am hopeful that this
hearing can provide at least some clarity on a way forward that
we so desperately need.
And with that I am so pleased to yield to my friend and
ranking member, Mr. Deutch of Florida.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Madam Chairman, thank you for
convening today's hearing, and thank you to our witnesses for
joining us. I would like to take a moment right at the outset
to acknowledge a special guest we have in our audience today.
Kassem Eid was a victim of the Assad regime's horrific 2013
sarin gas attack in Ghouta near Damascus. Thankfully he
survived but hundreds of innocent men women and children did
not. Kassem, thank you for being here, and we appreciate your
being with us very much. Thank you.
Madam Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Without objection.
Mr. Deutch [continuing]. Submit the statement into the
record.
Thanks, Kassem, as well for being one of the many living
witnesses to the barbarism of the Assad regime who have been
brave enough to share your stories with us here. You helped the
American people and those around the world understand the
brutal reality of life in Syria today.
Three years ago a former Syrian military photographer known
as Caesar testified before our committee with tens of thousands
of photos documenting the Assad regime's systematic torture and
murder of its citizens. We have since passed a bill bearing his
name, the Caesar Syria Civilian Protection Act to hold the
Assad regime and its international backers accountable for the
ongoing atrocities in the now 7-year long war, a war that has
displaced more than half the country and killed more than 1/2
million people.
While this conflict is not only a dire humanitarian crisis
it is a deeply consequential geopolitical conflict and we
cannot, we cannot ignore the impact of either. The Syrian
refugee crisis is destabilizing neighboring countries and
creating debates in European parliaments. Thousands of foreign
fighters have flocked to Syria. Terrorist organizations like
ISIS and al-Qaeda have found safe haven, and foreign powers
including Iran, Russia, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and the United
States have all backed competing forces. What may have begun as
a civil war has morphed into a complex array of geopolitical
power struggles and proxy conflicts.
Assad is only still in power today because when he was at
his weakest Iran, Hezbollah, and Russia sent in fighters on the
ground and war planes in the sky. And while this administration
is rightly focused on defeating ISIS, we have urgently been
asking the administration for clarity on its greater strategy
for the future of Syria.
As the U.S. Light Coalition has liberated nearly all ISIS-
held territory we need to know what comes next. Last month,
Secretary Tillerson finally articulated that strategy in a
speech at Stanford's Hoover Institute. He set out five
objectives that the chair referenced. Number one, defeat ISIS
and al-Qaeda. Number two, ensure a stable and unified post
Assad Syria. Number three, diminish Iranian influence. Number
four, help refugees begin to return home in Syria. And number
five, prevent WMDs in Syria.
These goals are laudable, and they are important, but the
speech contained little in the way of concrete strategies to
actually achieve these goals. And since this administration's
rhetoric has been routinely incompatible with its actions, we
still need more clarity.
I am obviously not suggesting that this is easy. We have
been having some version of this conversation for more than 7
years. We are discussing a crisis that former CIA Director
Brennan called the most complex, complicated issue that he ever
had to deal with. But I am concerned. I am concerned that
current American policy has left us on the outside looking in.
Russia is already filling the void as the new power broker
for the future of Syria. Russia, Turkey and Iran brokered
deescalation zones in Syria that have not been deescalatory,
and have disturbing long-term implications. They are policed by
the Syrian Army with support from the Russian military,
Hezbollah militants, and Iranian IRGC commanders. These are the
very groups who have murdered hundreds of thousands of Syrian
civilians, who are responsible for attacks on Americans, and
who are actively fomenting sectarian violence throughout the
region.
At the same time, Turkish-U.S. relations are on life
support as tensions flare over our support for Kurdish groups.
Turkey views the YPG Kurdish group that we support as a part of
the PKK terror group and has therefore launched a military
invasion into northern Syrian. This is a dangerous recipe for
two NATO allies.
So with these confusing and competing elements in the Syria
conflict we are fortunate to have an impressive panel to help
us unpack this crisis, help us fill in the void for Secretary
Tillerson.
In order to achieve his desired end states in Syria what is
actually needed? How can we continue to ensure this complex
humanitarian emergency is addressed. What can we on this
committee do to hold the administration's feet to the fire to
ensure a coherent and a consistent policy in Syria? I look
forward to hearing from our witnesses, and I thank you, Madame
Chair. I look forward to our witnesses' testimony.
I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Deutch. Mr.
Kinzinger of Illinois.
Mr. Kinzinger. Well, thank you Madame Chair, and thank you
all for being here, Mr. Ford, Mr. Lister, not to put the other
two away, but you guys have done great leadership on these
issues, and I appreciate it and I look forward to hearing from
you. It is going to be a good hearing.
Look, this is 100 percent predictable where we are at right
now. We predicted this years ago when this all started. What
happens when you put down red lines and don't follow through,
what happens, you know, there is a valuable role for the United
States to play in terms of overthrowing dictators. Dictators
don't work anymore in an era of information because people
don't like to be oppressed. Despite what some people think,
they just don't and they are going to throw off the shackles of
oppression. And in that process we have an opportunity to help
make a world of freedom or to let the Russians come in and do
it.
And I think--I am going to speak obviously more when my
question time comes up, but I think it is important to note in
all of this that Bashar al-Assad, of course, has blood on his
hands and he should be put in front of a war crimes tribunal if
not killed.
And secondly, Russia and Iran bear the same responsibility
because this man was about out of office, and they came in and
stiffened his spine and his regime. His regime will fail
because dictatorships fail ultimately, but the question is how
much blood in between now and then.
And I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Adam.
Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank you Madam
Chairman and Ranking Member Deutch for holding this hearing
today and thank you to each of the witnesses for being here
today, for your work on these issues, and for providing your
perspective today.
Syria has been an unfolding tragedy since 2011 with
estimates that 1/2 million people have been killed and more
than 11 million people either internally displaced or refugees
in other countries. The human suffering brought by this
conflict has been staggering, and the willingness of the Assad
regime and ISIS terrorist to inflict pain on the Syrian people
for their own purposes is astonishing.
However, I want to use my minute today to highlight the
brutal attack that is under way against the Kurdish people of
Afrin. And I know the chairman just mentioned this in the
northwest region of Syria across the border from Turkey. This
assault began on January 20 of this year by Turkey purportedly
against Kurdish PKK terrorists. However, it has become quite
clear that there has been a devastating impact on civilians
including by Turkish bombing campaigns, as well as by
terrorists associated with the Free Syrian Army.
I recently met with Dr. Idris Othman, a constituent of mine
from Rhode Island who is originally from Afrin, who provided
pictures and reporting directly from the field where he himself
still has family who are under threat by these attacks, and I
ask Madame Chair unanimous consent that this report compiled by
the Kurdish red crescent in Syria be submitted for the record.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Without objection.
Mr. Cicilline. I urge my colleagues to take the time to
review these documents. The images are chilling. We cannot
stand by on the sidelines as these atrocities continue. I hope
that we can work together, Madam Chairman and Mr. Deutch, to
bring light to this situation of the Kurdish people in Afrin
and ensure that the United States is engaged to protect
civilian lives and convey to our NATO ally Turkey that they
must abide by international norms and conventions, which
require that they protect civilians and allow humanitarian and
medical assistance. And with that I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much. Ambassador Wagner,
we have had two excellent opening statements. I don't want to
put the responsibility on you----
Mrs. Wagner. Put me on the spot----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen [continuing]. But you are recognized.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you. Thank you very much, Madam
Chairman. Welcome, witnesses.
I thank you for drawing attention to the ongoing crisis in
Syria. I am beyond disheartened to hear of reports of the Assad
regime's continued use of chemical weapons. Last week the
administration announced that Syria is developing more
sophisticated delivery mechanisms for chlorine and other
chemical weapons in direct violation of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Agreement.
Last year, the Trump administration conducted an air strike
on a Syrian air field 2 days after the regime killed innocent
civilians and children in a chemical attack. It is imperative
that the administration responds with strength and resolve to
the latest chemical weapons reports. I thank you, Madam
Chairman, and I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Well, you surpassed it. Thank you very
much, and amen to everything you have said.
Mr. Schneider of Illinois.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Madam Chairman, ranking member,
for having this hearing, to the witnesses for joining us today.
Now in its seventh year a solution to the conflict in Syria
remains elusive as President Assad continues his brutal
assaults on his people. As ISIS is pushed out from the
territory it controlled new challenges in scenes of conflict
emerge. We are not at the end of this story but only beginning
another chapter.
Meanwhile, there are four countries United States, Russia,
Iran, and Turkey vying for influence in the Syrian conflict.
Given the severity of this conflict and the impact on the
Syrian population it is imperative that the United States makes
its goals clear and shows it is committed to the resources
necessary to achieve these goals. A goal without a full
commitment is a pathway to failure.
What I hope to gain from today's discussion is a clear-eyed
assessment of the administration's goals and strategy for the
conflict in Syria and whether the current strategy is leading
us down a path of success or a path of failure.
I look forward to our discussion, and I yield back the
balance of my time.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much and I think that we
should tell our colleagues about a wonderful op-ed that appears
in today's the Hill with a coauthor of--who are those two
people?
Mr. Schneider. I was very honored and pleased to coauthor
with the chairman an op-ed about the need to protect the
election.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Well, thank you so much. Our staffers
work so hard in putting these hearings on, and I am so
delighted to introduce our lineup today because they have so
much background and differing points of views and ways that
they are looking at this situation. So thank you to all the
hard working folks behind us.
But I am delighted--I am not snubbing the remaining
members, they said that they will hold their fire for the
questions.
So Ted and I are delighted to welcome back Ambassador
Robert Ford, a good friend of our subcommittee, former United
States Ambassador to Syria from 2011 to 2014. Ambassador Ford
served 37 years in the State Department and the Peace Corps,
having been stationed in Algeria, Iraq, Bahrain, Morocco,
everywhere. In recognition of his outstanding work and
distinguished career Ambassador Ford has received too many
awards and recognitions to name, including the Secretary of
State's Distinguished Service Award. Thank you for your
service, Mr. Ambassador. We look forward to your testimony.
Next Ted and I welcome Faysal Itani, senior fellow at the
Atlantic Council where he focuses his research on the Syrian
conflict. Prior to this position, Mr. Itani was a risk analyst
advising governments, corporations, and international
organizations operating in the Middle East. Thank you, Faysal,
and we look forward to your testimony.
We welcome back Mr. Charles Lister, senior fellow and
director of extremism and counterterrorism program in the
Middle East Institute. Prior to this, Mr. Lister was a visiting
fellow at Brookings Institution in Qatar and a senior
consultant to Syria track two dialogue initiative. Thank you,
Mr. Lister, for joining us again.
And welcome back to Dr. Mara Karlin, associate professor of
the practice of strategic studies at Johns Hopkins School of
Advanced International Studies. Dr. Karlin has served in
national security roles under five U.S. Secretaries of Defense
and most recently she served as Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for strategy and force development. What a stellar
group of panelists. Thank you, Dr. Karlin, for your service as
well. We all look forward to hearing your testimony, and we
will start with Ambassador Ford.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE ROBERT FORD, SENIOR FELLOW, MIDDLE
EAST INSTITUTE (FORMER UNITED STATES AMBASSADOR TO SYRIA)
Mr. Ford. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. It is nice to see
you again, and it is nice to see Congressman Deutch again. I
have come down from Vermont to talk to you today, and it is a
pleasure to be with this committee.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. This is like the south, right?
Mr. Ford. Yes, it is warm here. It is a delight to be here
with the other members of the committee, and I am really
honored to be here with terrific colleagues. It is a great
panel. And I think your hearing on Syria is very well timed
because the Syrian war, which has been going on now for 7
years, but it is entering a new phase. It is really in a new
phase. And I think it is a great time to look at what has
happened and to reassess.
So let me just quickly say a few things about the way I
look at the Syrian war. First, I think it is time to think
carefully about core American national interests in Syria, core
American national interests.
First, obviously regional stability. We are concerned about
the threat that Iran could pose to our friends, notably Israel
and Jordan. And I want us to focus on that for a minute. We
have left American forces in eastern Syria. The Iranians are in
western Syria. Our forces are about 350 miles from the
Iranians, and it is not likely the Iranians are going to leave
Syria because we have troops 350 miles away. It is a mistake to
think Russia is going to push them out. The Russians won't.
So I think we need high level consultations between the
United States and especially Israel and Jordan to develop a
menu of responses about how to deter Iran. And I am happy to go
into more detail on that.
Second core interest, preventing terrorists in Syria from
reaching out and attacking our allies or attacking us. We are
building up a local security force in eastern Syria. I think it
behooves this committee, I think it behooves the Congress. You
have received requests for 430 million for this force in the
fiscal year 2017 budget request, and you have received another
$500 million request in the fiscal year 2018 request. I think
you need to ask what are the benchmarks and what are the
timelines for setting that force up?
When I was in Iraq 15 years ago and we were setting up
Iraqi security forces, with great difficulty, we could never
define and we could never obtain the benchmarks and timelines.
If we can't then we are in some kind of indefinite commitment.
So I think you must ask for benchmarks and timelines.
Third, Congresswoman Wagner mentioned the use of chemical
weapons. I think it is important to reestablish deterrence
against Syrian Government use of chemical weapons. But we also
must understand the Russians are going to veto anything we try
at the United Nations. Whatever steps we take to deter come
outside the United Nations Security Council.
Fourth core interest, it is less of a core interest
frankly. Ideally, we would see a better government in Syria. It
is a low bar with Bashar al-Assad's Government. We see a better
government that respects human rights that can be held
accountable and that treats refugees well. I noticed that
Secretary Tillerson said American forces will stay in Syria
until there is a national political agreement. I have to tell
you, I was very surprised to see that. That is a big change in
American policy.
And I have to tell you, having worked on this for 4 years,
long years, the Geneva process is dead. It is moribund at best.
Geneva cannot be some kind of a diplomatic strategy. It is
going nowhere. So I think, again, it behooves the Congress to
ask what is the diplomatic strategy if you want to tie the
presence of U.S. forces in Syria to a broader political
solution, what is your diplomatic strategy to get to the
political solution? Geneva is a city. Geneva is not a benchmark
on a diplomatic strategy.
Two other bits of advice for the Congress. First, we are
now engaged in a stabilization effort in eastern Syria. I have
to tell you, I don't really understand the difference between
stabilization and nation building. I think the Congress needs
again to ask for better definitions, benchmarks, and timelines.
And finally on refugees, the refugee situation is terrible.
It is desperate. I think we need more resources devoted to
refugees, especially communities in places like Lebanon and
Jordan. We don't want those refugee camps to become future
recruitment grounds for extremists.
But I am going conclude with this last thought. Madam
Chairwoman, I think it is time to reconsider whether or not we
continue to fund United Nations humanitarian assistance
programs inside Syria. Bashar al-Assad is gaming the system. He
is blocking aid to desperate communities in opposition held
areas, the few that are left, and we are basically subsidizing
Assad by funding the United Nations humanitarian aid programs.
I think that too needs a real reconsideration.
Madam Chairwoman, thank you very much. I look forward to a
good discussion.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ford follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Wow, you ended with quite a bombshell
over there. Thank you, Ambassador.
Mr. Itani. Thank you, Faysal.
STATEMENT OF MR. FAYSAL ITANI, SENIOR FELLOW, ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Mr. Itani. Madam Chairwoman, ranking member, members of the
subcommittee, I am honored by this invitation to speak to you
about a way forward for U.S. policy in Syria. Now you have my
written statement already, and it is quite detailed. What I
will try to do now is bring out some of the key points I want
to get across, after which I am very eager to hear your
questions and feedback.
I personally believe that the five goals mentioned by the
administration are valid goals. They are worthy goals. But I
also believe that with the exception of one of them they cannot
be achieved through the means that Secretary Tillerson
outlined. In other words, I think our policy suffers from a
very serious mismatch of means and ends. That is the shortest
way to put it. The stated ends have been mentioned, but I want
to repeat them for the sake of my analysis.
Number one, the lasting defeat of the Islamic State and al-
Qaeda supposedly in the entire country. Facilitating the return
of refugees. Depriving the regime of weapons of mass
destruction, that is actually what it is. And the last two
which are the most ambitious, which is weakening Iran and Syria
and ending the Civil War in Syria by securing Assad's departure
from power.
Now, to achieve all this, I want to highlight the three
tools that were mentioned. The first tool was limited U.S.
military deployment whose duration was tied to the achievement
of these five goals. The second are the stabilization
operations, which I presume mean restoring basic security and
services. And third is aggressive diplomacy and finally a U.N.-
backed election process that would get rid of Assad.
I believe these tools can accomplish one of the five goals,
which is to keep ISIS down in eastern Syria so long as we are
there. After that I am not sure what happens. And as for the
others, al-Qaeda does not operate where we are in Syria or
anywhere adjacent to us. It operates in areas that are
contested by Turkey, the regime, Russia, Iran, and a slate of
other actors. And those are things we explicitly said we don't
want to get involved in, so much for al-Qaeda.
Large scale refugee resettlement is not going to happen in
Syria without an actual aggressive reconstruction project in
the areas we control. Secretary Tillerson has explicitly, and
others, have ruled that out actually already. And Assad, you
know, Assad is not going to give up his weapons of mass
destruction, much less willingly leave power unless there is a
military threat to his rule, he is forced out. He is not going
to do it through negotiations, and he is not going to do it
through elections. Iran cannot really be meaningfully weakened
in Syria without a military escalation either. The Iranians are
deeply committed, and they have been building assets and
equities including tens of thousands of loyal fighters in Syria
over the past few years.
Now, the common military thread that runs through this--the
common rather missing thread that runs through this, is
military action or military force. I recognize that after 7
years of war partly because we made mistakes, partly because
the situation evolved that is no longer very feasible or is
much more unattractive than it ever was.
So if we leave that aside it means we have set goals in
Syria that we actually cannot meet full stop. And that is a
dangerous situation for us to tie ourselves in if we have
troops on the ground in Syria and we have committed to those
outcomes.
Now, one way out of this, if military force is not an
option, is to revise the goals. And I believe we should do that
at the very least. Those goals should be much more humble. The
first goal is to protect the territory we hold. I think the
United States Government needs to be very clear and the White
House needs to be very clear that these troops are going to
come under attack eventually. We are not going to be allowed to
sit down in northeastern Syria as long as we want and dictate
the methods and the timing of the conflict.
Second, so long as we are there and we hold this piece of
land we need to engage in meaningful governance development and
reconstruction beyond basic needs. Why? Because refugees are
not going to come back otherwise. Because that is actually a
potent counterterrorism tool if it works and is done right. And
because I still believe that there is some value in propping
something up in part of Syria that is semisuccessful and isn't
Assad. I think that still has some value for the long-term
future of the country.
Goal number three should be supporting our local partners
against ISIS. And yes, that does include the Kurds that have
fought with us, but it also includes, and should include, a
more powerful influential era of component.
And that feeds into what I think ought to be our fourth
goal as difficult and unsavory as it is, which is our
restoration of our relationship with Turkey. And that doesn't
mean letting the NATO ally do whatever it wants, but it does
mean putting Syria's diplomatic effort into getting involved in
the conflict between them and the Kurds and diffusing that and
from that point using that as a starting point for repairing
our alliance. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Itani follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much.
Mr. Lister?
STATEMENT OF MR. CHARLES LISTER, SENIOR FELLOW, DIRECTOR OF
COUNTER-EXTREMISM AND COUNTER-TERRORISM, MIDDLE EAST INSTITUTE
Mr. Lister. Madam Chairwoman, Mr. Ranking Member, members
of the committee, thank you very much for this opportunity to
speak to you today.
Nearly 3 weeks ago Secretary of State Rex Tillerson laid
out a vision in which U.S. interests would be secured by
achieving five grand objectives in Syria. Unfortunately, his
speech raised many more questions than it provided answers.
Today there is simply no available path to achieve the stated
objectives and no actual strategy has emerged.
Nearly 7 years of conflict has produced countless threats
to American interests, including multiple wars, militarizing
hundreds of thousands, fueling terrorism on an unprecedented
level, normalizing chemical warfare, sparking huge refugee
flows that have cripple neighbors and destabilized Europe. It
has propelled Russia back to the Middle East and empowered
Iranian expansionism like never before.
Contrary to conventional wisdom, Syria is also not winding
down. The country remains mired by multiple conflict fault
lines, none of which are close to resolution. The intensity of
fighting may have receded, but the mechanism used for doing so
known as deescalation zones whereby Russian design intended to
allow continued lower level violence. As a result, the regime
has continued to indiscriminately bomb and methodically
recapture strategically important territory strengthening its
hand further.
The Trump administration's cessation of support to the
entire vetted opposition last summer was a vitally important
cog in this Russian design. By lending its support to a Russian
initiative designed to strengthen the regime, the Trump
administration has directly abetted Assad's survival, Iran's
expansion and threat to Israel, and continued civilian
displacement.
With ISIS' caliphate all but gone Syria's various root
causes of conflict are now re-erupting. Fighting is
intensifying, and battle fronts are reopening. Within this
environment the U.S. should consider four policy avenues.
First, northeastern Syria. Here, we must significantly
expand stabilization in areas liberated from ISIS. The task
ahead is huge, and it is already taking too long. We must
urgently raise more funds for stabilization and reconstruction
to encourage refugee and IDP returns to establish a form of
governance superior to the regime and to prevent further
extremism.
Doubling down here does carry risks. Our SDF partners
remain dominated by the YPG, which is unavoidably linked to the
PKK, a designated terrorist organization and a direct threat to
our NATO ally Turkey. While it might be impossible to sever the
YPG's links to the PKK it ought to be possible to limit its use
of PKK symbols and rhetoric and to expel non-Syrians from its
ranks.
The U.S. should also engage with Ankara and the YPG to
negotiate a mutually acceptable detente potentially within a
broader Turkey PKK ceasefire. The U.S. should also continue to
train and Arabize the SDF at ground and command levels. This
strategy also risks confrontation with pro-regime forces who
will perceive our troops and the SDF as threats and against
whom they will inevitably seek to conduct repeated probing
attacks. The U.S. should respond to these clearly and
defensively.
Second, terrorism. Although we dealt a hammered blow to
ISIS, it remains active in several areas of Syria. We must
sustain our mission and neutralize any signs of ISIS
reemergence. We must also clearly accuse the regime of its
shortcomings in confronting ISIS and where provable highlight
its new role in providing it with space to operate anew.
While we fought ISIS, al-Qaeda and like-minded groups have
thrived. Former al-Qaeda affiliate HTS now commands roughly
15,000 fighters and dominates the northwest. HTS is focused on
localism and controlling territory makes it a dangerous spoiler
whose existence presents a safe haven for global jihadists.
Alongside HTS then is an even more dangerous reality, a tight-
knit covert circle of two to 300 veteran al-Qaeda loyalists
dedicated to the global antiwest cause. This looks worryingly
similar to the al-Qaeda Taliban relationship before 9/11.
HTS' real vulnerabilities lie in its lack of popularity and
credibility. So confronting it is about out competing its
ability to exert ground influence. There are things we can do
to better equip locals to sweep the rug from under HTS' feet
and to create conditions in which kinetic opportunities may
later become available.
Third, Iran. Although diminishing Iranian influence is
unrealistic, the U.S. can constrain its ability to gain further
and contain its threat to Israel and Jordan. To achieve the
latter we should build a network of self-defense forces in
southwestern Syria using our preexisting relations with vetted
southern opposition groups. These forces would defend against
any Iranian move closer to Israel and Jordan while also
blocking further regime consolidation.
We should also continue escalatory sanctioning of Iranian-
affiliated bodies and figures involved in illegal and terrorist
activities in Syria. Militia groups links to the Quds force
should be designated and excluded from internationally
negotiated ceasefires. We should also consider joining Israel
in conducting strikes on flagrant threats or strategic weapons
transfers by Iran to groups like Hezbollah.
Fourth, chemical weapons. The U.S. has positioned itself as
an arbiter and enforcer here since 2013 with mixed record.
Continued chemical weapons use must be met with measured but
escalatory consequences, particularly against Syria's Air Force
and chemical weapons research facilities. More sanctions should
also be deployed and further chemical use exploited as leverage
within broader political dynamics.
To conclude, if anyone believes that Bashar al-Assad is the
key to stabilizing Syria they have learned literally nothing
from the country's recent history. Accepting today's status quo
will also not stabilize Syria. Trumpeting grand goals without
the means to achieve them guarantees failure, and giving up all
together only ensures an eventual need to return to confront
the threats that will result.
While there is indeed no panacea for Syria there are
options available to protect our existing stakes, to defend
against threats and to shake interim solutions and arrangements
that protect our vital interests.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lister follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
STATEMENT OF MARA KARLIN, PH.D., ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF THE
PRACTICE OF STRATEGIC STUDIES, SCHOOL OF ADVANCED INTERNATIONAL
STUDIES, JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY (FORMER DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR STRATEGY AND FORCE DEVELOPMENT)
Ms. Karlin. Chairman Ros-Lehtinen, Ranking Member Deutch,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to discuss Syria with you today.
In 2012, 1 year into the Syria uprising, I testified before
the subcommittee and I said the following: The United States
knows what it does not want in Syria, but getting to what it
does want the end of the Assad regime will be messy, difficult,
and unsatisfying. The outcome in Syria is not evident today,
but I can say with some confidence how it will not end. It will
not end with Bashar al-Assad voluntarily stepping aside or
choosing exile. It will not end with him making sufficient
reforms to enable a transparent and free Syrian state. Let me
be clear, continued oppression and violence in Syria will
continue.
Looking back, it appears that grim assessment may have even
been too bright. The situation in Syria today is a tragedy of
epic proportions, which can make it difficult to take a sober
view. Nevertheless, such a view must acknowledge three crucial
dynamics going forward.
First, Assad won his war to stay in power. Granted, he
rules a challenging, fragile, and fragmented Syria, one where
violence will not cease in the coming years, nor will efforts
to unseat him.
Second, the situation in Syria is a proxy war and a much
larger geostrategic game, and any assessments of the dynamics
and attendant policy recommendations must take that into
account. Much like Lebanon's Civil War a nasty internecine
conflict with countless casualties that lasted 15 years, the
situation in Syria today is further complicated by a dizzying
array of actors pursuing divergent interests in partnership
with competing groups. The roles of states like Russia, Iran,
and Turkey and their increasing collaboration stand out.
And third, the easy part is over. A number of disparate
parties involved in the Syria conflict internal to Syria
regionally and globally largely agreed that ISIS must be
crushed. While in some ways the next phase of countering ISIS
militarily as it goes underground and politically to ensure a
capable successor does not fill its place will be tougher. This
emphasis on militarily defeating ISIS enabled these powers to
put tricky issues like reconciliation, rebuilding, and
governance on the back burner. So the fundamental debate for
Washington today is whether to focus on counterterrorism or
broader geopolitical affairs in Syria.
In recent years the United States overwhelmingly and
deliberately prioritized Syria as a counterterrorism problem.
This narrow focus by its very nature informed how the United
States conducted its role in the conflict and with whom it
chose to cooperate. It facilitated a very successful counter
ISIS effort, but this approach had other implications, namely
that the United States effectively tolerated Assad's continued
rule and largely condoned Russian and Iranian efforts.
My uppermost concern is security. As ISIS continues to lose
territory the battle space in Syria is shrinking, increasing
the risk of confrontation among entities there. The U.S.
military's mission in Syria has been alternately described by
senior U.S. officials as present and focused on bringing
stability, dangerously vague terms.
Is it focused only on finishing the fight against ISIS? How
much will it go after al-Qaeda remnants? To what extent is it
there to push back on Iran, to fight the Assad regime? To
train, equip and advise violent nonstate actors as they seek to
do so? What about the Russians?
Like the U.S. Marines sent back to Beirut in 1982 with a
similarly unclear mission, the residual U.S. force presence in
Syria may be just enough to get us into trouble but unlikely to
accomplish very much. We need clarity, not just for the
American people but frankly for our adversaries, our
competitors and our partners in Syria, too.
Whom is the U.S. military willing to fight? For whom is it
willing to put American lives on the line? Research I conducted
for my book, ``Building Militaries in Fragile States,'' suggest
findings that are translatable to U.S. collaboration with
violent nonstate Syrian actors. Efforts to train and equip
these groups are fundamentally political, not technical
exercises. Building an effective fighting force requires more
than supplying training and equipment, which has been and will
continue to be insufficient to meet our declared political
goals.
A narrow approach distance from key political issues waste
time, effort, and resources. It is fundamentally flawed. These
forces depend heavily on legitimacy, so transforming them
requires the United States to become deeply involved in their
sensitive military affairs.
Supporting violent nonstate actors in Syria requires U.S.
policymakers to have a clear-eyed assessment of the goals and
likely outcomes of U.S. military assistance. Simply put, the
United States must be cautious of our tactical and operational
actions driving policy and blinding us to the geostrategic
picture.
As the subcommittee's members examine the way forward in
Syria, I urge you to ask the following questions of the
Departments of State and Defense. Does U.S. policy toward Syria
prioritize counterterrorism or larger geopolitical challenges?
What is the U.S. military doing in Syria? Why and on what
basis? What is its mission, rules of engagement, red lines, and
how are these being communicated to Russia, Iran, the Syrian
regime, Hezbollah and other violent nonstate actors, including
U.S. partners. And what is the nature of the U.S. military's
relationship with and commitment to violent nonstate actors in
Syria.
In conclusion, I thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you today. I look toward to answering any questions you
may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Karlin follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Dr. Karlin, and thank you to
all of our excellent panelists. And we will begin the question
and answer period of our hearing. And our side will begin by
with Mr. Mast of Florida.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, chairwoman.
You know, some great comments from all of you. Great
analysis on the unlikelihood of a peaceful transfer of power
from Bashar al-Assad, and that is where I want to begin is from
that point. Assuming we can get to that point at some time in
the future, what would it take to have a post Assad Syrian
Government that would back U.S. regional policy goals in the
Middle East, that would back support for Israel, that would
oppose Iran, and that would oppose Hezbollah?
This is open to any of you. What do you think--what
groundwork do you think we need to be laying in place for that?
Don't all jump at once.
I will ask Dr. Karlin because I thought you had a great
analysis. I would love to hear from you.
Ms. Karlin. Thank you. You are asking a really difficult
question. I think that is why you met some looks on our side.
Look, 6, 7 years ago when this conflict broke out this was
a real point of debate. A lot of people said maybe you could
just push Assad to the side. People around him might have a
different vision for Syria. I, as I noted, was rather
skeptical, as were potentially some of my fellow panelists.
Bottom line, you are talking about not just taking Assad out of
the picture, and that is not going to happen willingly, but
everyone around him.
I think the vision that you are outlining is what one
should aspire to, but it is decades and decades off, and were I
to think about policy prescriptions to try to get us there,
they would probably start with kind of very local state
building enterprises.
Mr. Mast. So I am going to move just a little bit in that
direction of getting to that goal and ask if you could look at
the forces that are operating throughout that region, whether
it be Iran, whether it be Hezbollah, whether it be the Assad
forces, whether it be Russia, how would you rank them in terms
of threat against the United States of America, and which one
of those dominos would you look to be knocking on first?
Mr. Itani. Thank you for the question. To start with, the
kind of Syria you are talking about, one that would be friendly
to Israel, hostile to Iran and Hezbollah, the quick answer to
that is any Syria that arises out of a political deal with the
opposition is not going to be friendly to Hezbollah and Iran,
definitely not. That is the easy part.
For it to be friendly to the Israelis, I don't think there
are any Arab countries as such that are really friendly to the
Israelis, maybe Jordan to a certain extent. Syria is not going
to be that way, but that doesn't mean it is going to be part of
the Iranian regional chess board in strategy and a front line
against the Israelis like it is right now. I think the Syrians
are preoccupied and will be preoccupied with other things to be
honest with you. So that is my quick answer to your question.
Mr. Ford. Congressman, let me just directly address your
question. It is easy for me to imagine that Iranian
revolutionary guard backed militias in Syria, as well as Syrian
intelligence services would attempt unconventional attacks
against U.S. personnel on the ground in Syria. In fact, I
expect it, frankly. They may choose the time based on other
issues whether in Iraq or elsewhere. I doubt very much that the
Russians themselves will launch a direct attack on American
forces in Syria. But all three countries, Iran, Syria, and
Russia want American forces out of Syria.
Mr. Mast. Mr. Lister, you spoke a good deal on the Kurds.
My question is open to all of you in terms of a more national
Kurdistan in its entirety. Do you believe that that would be a
draw for Kurds across the region coming from Turkey into a
Kurdistan coming from Iraq, coming from Syria, and do you think
it would draw all Kurds from the region and provide a
stabilizing force in terms of centralizing Kurds throughout the
region?
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And we will allow just a short answer so
we can get to the other panel members.
Mr. Lister. With time on our side I am sure other people on
the panel probably want to say something on this, too. My
personal position is much as the project that has been
established in Kurdish majority areas of northeastern Syria has
been an attractive proposition to Kurdish populations elsewhere
in the region in Turkey and Iraq and elsewhere.
There are certain nationally unique dynamics that are in
place, as well, so no, I don't think if the United States or
any other country was to establish some kind of Kurdistan in
Syria that it would become something that Kurds from all across
the region would suddently start flowing to. I don't think so.
Having said that, it has demonstrated that when there is a
threat to certain regions in Syrian Kurdish areas, such as in
Afrin right now, we have seen Kurds from Iraq and Kurds from
Turkey travel to Syria to defend Afrin. But when I say
``Kurds,'' we have got to be really careful here about not
generalizing. It is specifically Kurds who are supportive of
the YPG and the broader PKK vision for breaking down national
boundaries, having no state borders, and launching this new
kind of idealogical vision for governance.
You are not seeing supporters of Kurdish national parties
in Iraq, in Turkey, or in Syria joining along with us. In fact,
they all stand in opposition to it. So it is not a unifying
Kurdish vision.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, chairwoman.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much.
Mr. Deutch of Florida.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thanks to the
witnesses for the great testimony. I think I heard unanimous
recognition and concern from the panel of Iran's increased role
in Syria, and despite the administration's strong rhetoric on
Iran the Trump administration's strategy so far appears to have
been to clear territory from ISIS and then troublingly to let
Russia, Iran, and Hezbollah fill the void.
Ambassador Ford, you pointed out that American forces are
350 miles from the Iranians. Dr. Karlin, you mentioned in your
testimony that with the help of Hezbollah Iranian power
projection across the Middle East has skyrocketed. You also
said Iran has demonstrated an unwavering commitment to its
mission in Syria, increasingly purchasing another strategic
border with Israel. All of this is really concerning.
One of the objectives for Syria according to Secretary
Tillerson is to diminish Iranian influence. Mr. Itani, you
talked about the mismatch of means and ends. I don't know if
that is one place where that is true.
And, Mr. Lister, you talked about striking weapons
transfers perhaps to send a message. The question is, really
what should the administration be doing to push back against
Iranians' projection of power, and could Syria be co-opted by
Iran and its proxies as we have seen in Lebanon where Hezbollah
has increased its political and military stranglehold on that
country?
Mr. Lister. I would start by answering the latter part of
your question, and I would say we are pretty much already in
that direction. I would say one reason why the Russians seem to
be rushing their own political efforts is because they realize
that on the ground they are fighting a losing battle in terms
of the Iranian influence.
Without getting too granular I would point you to a number
of incidents that have happened in the last week or 2 where the
Turkish military with Russian permission has entered areas of
northern Syria in order to establish a deescalation outpost.
Each time they have done that with Russian permission, they
have been attacked by Iranian-backed militias. There are very
clear divergency here between Russia and Iran on the ground.
They are seeking the same objectives, but the tactical
decisions are different.
So I think we are already shaping in that direction. Iran
is using the Hezbollah model in Iraq already, and they are
doing exactly the same thing in Syria. And I do think that is a
danger.
Is that something the United States can roll back? No, it
isn't. As I said in my oral testimony, I think it is something
we can seek to contain. And if protecting Israel is as serious
an interest as the Trump administration says it is, then there
are certain things that we can do to be able to deter and
contain that threat.
Mr. Deutch. All right. So, what should be we doing?
Ambassador Ford, there is obviously much discussion among
policymakers about Iran's desire to build a land bridge from
Tehran to Beirut. Right? Everyone wants to talk about the land
bridge, how far have they established the land bridge. You said
in your testimony the Iranians don't need a land bridge from
Iran to Lebanon for many years, they just use the Damascus
Airport.
So the question is what can we do if we are 350 miles from
the Iranians, and you suggested that ultimately they pose a
threat not just to Israel but ultimately our troops are likely
to be on the receiving end of some sort of attacks by Hezbollah
or IRGC, what do we do? What does the administration do to
match its rhetoric?
Mr. Ford. Well, two things, Congressman. First, we need to
recognize that short of going all out war into Syria, and by
the way with a risk of dramatic escalation with the Russians in
that process, we are not going to be able to get the Iranians
to leave Syria. When I was Ambassador there in 2011 there was
an Iranian presence. Not much bigger now, but the Iranians have
long been there, and they don't need as I have said in my
written testimony they don't need a land bridge, they don't
need a road. They fly things into Damascus Airport. I don't
think it is the policy of this administration to shut down
Damascus Airport. Were we to do so, it might change the
calculations in Tehran. I do think there are two things we need
to----
Mr. Deutch. Ambassador Ford, I am sorry, but I want to
follow up on that. Are there--I understand that it is not the
policy to shut down the airport. Are there any deliveries that
Iran would be making that should, as Mr. Lister suggested, that
should prompt our military to take action?
Mr. Ford. Well, first more than just us sleeping in, the
Israelis often strike themselves, and a retired Israeli Air
Force general commented within the last 6 months after his
retirement that the Israelis had struck hundreds of times. So
the Israelis are already operating this way.
It makes sense to me to have intense behind closed doors
discussions with the Israelis about what they need because
this, after all, is first and foremost their problem. I can
imagine a series of things that we could do. That might be if
the purpose is to deter Iran from attacking Israel then perhaps
we should have troops in Israel instead of eastern Syria.
Perhaps we need to rethink what kind of peacekeeping forces up
on the Golan, separating Israeli defense forces from these
militia fighters that we are talking about and the Syrian Army.
Change the mandate of the United Nations force. Replace the
United Nations force with something else we negotiate with the
Russians and with other members of the international community.
Maybe we need to do what Charles suggested and set up a proxy
force. What I am saying is that the presence of U.S. forces far
away is not going to address this problem.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Ambassador Ford.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much.
Mr. Itani. If I may, may I add something?
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Well, we would love to hear from you,
Faysal. But, you know, we are in recess, but they already
buzzed that we are going to be in session in just a few minutes
and we have got Mr. Kinzinger, Mr. Cicilline, Mr. Donovan, Mr.
Connolly, Mr. Chabot, and Mr. Lieu, so perhaps if we can keep
our question and answer period less than 5 minutes that would
be great.
Mr. Kinzinger. I will do my best.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. Go to it.
Mr. Kinzinger. First off, again, thank you all for being
here.
In my opening statement I said that this was predictable. I
kind of lied. I think it has gotten way worse than what we even
predicted. We knew it was going to be bad. But I remember back
in 2013 colleagues from both sides of the aisle, both sides
share blame, in this came and said we can't do anything in
Syria or it is just going to--you know, look at Libya. And,
frankly, as bad as Libya is it is better than Syria right now
sadly.
But we are in the sixth year of this now, and, Mr.
Ambassador, I am sure you are obviously very familiar with the
number of refugees, and one of my biggest concerns I think when
we look at--it is entirely possible in 30 years if you go
forward people will look back at this time period as actually
World War III. It will be a low grade version of that, it is
not like I or II in terms of the intensity, but it is a
worldwide conflict.
And one of my biggest concerns is not just alleviating the
issue in Syria. That is a problem. But beyond that it is
thea deg. 7- and the 8-year-olds in refugee camps
right now that are seeing a world that has left them behind
that aren't getting educated, that aren't learning, that aren't
shown that they have hope and opportunity, and that is the best
recruiting ground for the next generation of ISIS or the next
generation of al-Qaeda.
They will be easy recruits, frankly. And so if we look at
this as a generational struggle, which I do, I think for the
rest of my life we will be fighting radicalism. We have to I
think take this issue very seriously.
So, Mr. Ambassador, given your experience what type of
impact can we have going forward in Syria and the surrounding
countries to ensure that we give these kids a chance at a
better life, what kind of programs and stuff. And if you want
to keep it fairly brief I know that is a long question, but I
do have one other issue I want to get to.
Mr. Ford. Very briefly, Congressman Kinzinger, the United
Nations and the partner agencies that work with it, whether it
be Save the Children or the International Rescue Committee,
others, Doctors Without Borders it is a long list, they can do
a lot. They can do a lot if they have the resources, but the
resources have been on a downward slope lately.
There is an element of donor fatigue, and that is why I
said I think we need to increase that assistance to refugees.
It costs money, I understand that, but precisely for the reason
you mentioned about not having these refugee communities as
future recruitment grounds, it has to be done. If the Americans
lead on this, lead on this, we will get other countries to
follow.
Mr. Kinzinger. And I wish we could budget differently
because I think investing in a kid's education is way cheaper
than a 500-pound GBU in the future.
And let me ask on the chemical weapons. So on the broader
issue just worldwide holding the counter proliferation we
obviously know the Assad regime destroyed some of their
weapons, but I believe they are reproducing sarin gas, or are
using chlorine gas, we know this.
I think the President bravely took out a Syrian airfield,
but it is not enough. Obviously it didn't send a strong enough
message to Assad and to the Russians that we are serious about
this, and, you know, we are finding out that they are doing
this again to another extent.
So I think we need to bring the full force of the United
States and the world community to bear on this issue, and it
doesn't mean necessarily overthrowing the Assad regime, though
I would love to do that. Even if we ground Assad's Air Force
permanently, crater his runways, take out his helicopters and
make it clear that the delivery of chemical weapons the cost to
you will be far greater than any benefit you can gain
psychologically or otherwise would be good.
So both for the Ambassador and Mr. Lister in your opinion
what would be the appropriate response to his continued use of
chemical weapons in defiance of the President?
Mr. Ford. Just very briefly, Congressman.
It is imperative, if we want to stop the Syrian Government
from using chemical weapons, that we make them feel pain
militarily. And targeting the Syrian Air Force is certainly one
place they would feel pain especially because with their troop
shortage, they need air power more than some other governments
in their civil wars.
Mr. Kinzinger. And I think, Mr. Lister, I will let you
answer. But let me just say, I think it is clear. We are not
saying if we respond for his use of chemical weapons we are
going to go and solve the Syrian conflict. We are not saying
that. What we are saying, though, is we are going to destroy
his ability to violate world norms since World War 1.
Mr. Lister.
Mr. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Adam. But I just
worry about----
Mr. Kinzinger. Go ahead.
Mr. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much.
Mr. Kinzinger. You owe me 40 seconds.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. You are a gentleman and a scholar.
Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
As I indicated in my opening statement, I am very concerned
about Turkey's recent attacks in Afrin. I want to acknowledge
Dr. Othman, one of my constituents, who has been working very
hard to raise this issue who continues to have family in Afrin.
And this has resulted in civilian deaths. I have introduced in
the record some photographs of children that were struck and
killed. It has resulted in the displacement of 16,000 people,
and the administration has said very little about this ongoing
offensive. And what they have said has been very restrained.
And so, Dr. Karlin, I would like to start with you. Can you
speak a little bit about the dynamics here? What is Turkey
trying to achieve? Why is the administration allowing an
offense against some troops that we have trained and that have
been so helpful in our fight against ISIS? What is the impact
of this on our allies' ability to make progress against ISIS?
And shouldn't we be doing more to protect Kurdish civilians and
particularly since they have been such great partners with us
in this fight against terrorism?
Ms. Karlin. Thank you for this question, sir.
For Turkey, Kurdish issues are existential. And the
challenge here, of course, is there are two different apertures
through which you can view what is going on. You can view it in
terms of countering ISIS, right? A very Middle East perspective
by which you would say, we should work with any violent
nonstate actor that can effectively weaken ISIS. And, indeed,
we have seen that the Kurdish groups in Syria are pretty good
at this. You can view it through another aperture, which is
NATO, counter Russia, Article V. A much bigger geopolitical
view. From that perspective, indeed, as you are going forward,
then your cooperation with these groups might actually need to
decline. It all depends on which priority.
I think one of the challenges right now, and I would urge
as you are speaking to the State and Defense Departments, that
you engage them on this issue, is how do we actually see the
Syria conflict going forward? Is it still a counter terrorism
problem, or is it a broader problem where we are dealing with
Russia where we are actually looking at issues with Europe
whole, free, and at peace, with looking at NATO as an entity?
Or it is quite possible, you know--and there is an academic
debate, what happens if two NATO allies both declare Article V
on one another? That is entertaining in an academic sense. It
is actually quite dangerous in a practical sense. So it is, as
you can imagine, understandably very difficult for these groups
to have a real effect these days when they are under attack by
the Turks.
But it is also important from a Washington perspective that
we figure out going forward what is our real priority. And I
might add from a defense perspective, this is an area in
particular we are thinking about, because the Defense
Department divides these regions up. And I will just note that,
in recent weeks, I have continually heard statements from the
commander of Central Command as opposed to the commander of
European Command about how to think about what is going on
there. That invariably is conveying a certain perspective.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. And I just want to go to Mr.
Itani. You mentioned in your written testimony that
deescalating this Turkish-Kurdish situation is a critical
priority. How do we do that?
Mr. Itani. So trace how we got to this point, and then
rewind it a bit. We started by aligning with a group that they
see as their mortal enemy. Fine, rightly or wrongly, I could
see the military rationale. Now the ISIS threat has become less
urgent. So this is a chance, an opening, for us to shift things
around a bit and recalibrate the relationship. It doesn't mean
letting them do what they are getting away with in Afrin, I
think that is wrong too.
But the truth of the matter is we are letting them get away
with it because they let us get away with all the other stuff.
So we don't really have any more leverage as long as we haven't
changed or indicated that we want to change the balance of
power in the North. Once we indicate that, then I think we are
in a position to broker and put mutual pressure on the Kurds
and the Turks to reengage in peace talks.
Not too long ago, this was a serious prospect, and then it
crumbled very quickly. But I think ultimately, if we want to
make our presence in Northeast Syria tenable, we need to get
the Turks at least as passive accepters of the situation.
Mr. Cicilline. I will yield back that additional 40
seconds. But I hope that we do that, you know, consistent with
the obligation that we have to the Kurds who have been so
helpful in this fight.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Donovan of New York.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Chairman.
One of the disadvantages, or what some people take
advantage of, being so low on the totem pole here, is most of
the questions have already been asked.
But let me just follow up on two things. Adam asked about
the stockpile of chemical and biological weapons. Mr.
Ambassador, you were talking about taking out their military.
With the proliferation of these chemicals and biological
warfare elements in places like North Korea, they could easily
be purchased as well.
Besides taking out the military, do economic sanctions to
strangle Syria's ability to purchase these horrific weapons,
are they also successful.
Mr. Ford. I want to be clear what I said Congressman. I do
not believe we can take out the stockpile. We can't. The only
thing we can do is establish deterrence against the use of that
stockpile.
Frankly, Syria has so many sanctions on it imposed by both
Congress and by administrations dating back to the 1970s, when
I was the American Ambassador and I looked at this, it was a
real spaghetti. So Syria's ability to buy things legally
through the regular market is already severely hindered. That
is why they do so much of their trade with Russia and Iran.
I think the real question with respect to the chemical
weapons issue is how do we sustain deterrence against their use
by the Syrian Government.
Mr. Donovan. And because I think they might be calling the
votes now, let me just ask you a follow-up also on the Syrian
children that Adam brought up.
You spoke about donor fatigue. And we find that throughout
the world. I think America is a passionate and a compassionate
Nation who likes--who wants to come to the aid of people who
are in need but wants to see where that need is going to end at
some point. I know this is difficult.
Is there an end to this.
Mr. Ford. There is certainly no end in the immediate
prospect. I want to underline that. I think all of us have said
that. There is no end in the immediate prospect. I think over
time the problem will grow less severe for two reasons. Number
one, as some parts of the country grow more peaceful--I didn't
say democratic, I said peaceful--some refugees will go back
home. Farmers will go back to their lands because it will be
safe for them to farm again, hopefully. As cities are gradually
painfully slowly rebuilt, some people will go home. Not
everybody. But there will be less of a demand.
The second factor will be especially in countries like
Turkey and Jordan, what steps will they take to integrate the
remaining refugees into their broader society. That will be
exceptionally difficult, especially for Jordan and also for
Lebanon. In fact, right now both countries are trying to kick
Syrian refugees out, which is against international
humanitarian law, in any case.
The Turks have gone some distance, and I saw a report that
Jordan is beginning to give work permits to some Syrian
refugees. And it is going to be that kind of thing.
But, Congressman, frankly, this is going to take years and
years and years.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you.
Madam Chair, I yield the remainder of my time.
Mr. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Donovan.
Mr. Schneider of Illinois.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Madam Chairman. And I will be
quick. I wish we had much more time, because this is one of the
most impressive, most intelligent panels I can recall.
You have all touched on the fact that--or touched on the
United States' goals, strategy, and reflected on our capacity
for commitment to persist until we achieve our goals. But I was
wondering in the context, and I may ask you just to submit this
answer in writing, because it is a big question.
But Russia, Turkey, Iran are in this space with their own
goals, strategy, and different commitments to stay to succeed.
And they are not going to act--not let us take our steps
without reacting accordingly. So how will they respond to us?
And I will leave that question, because I know we are in
urgent--and say if you have a chance to respond, I would be
grateful.
And I yield back.
Mr. Ros-Lehtinen. I think that it is still all right.
Mr. Schneider. Okay. Then I will ask you for your answers.
Dr. Karlin.
Ms. Karlin. Yes, sir. Thank you for that very big question,
which I will not do service to in 30 seconds. That said, so I
think the Iranians right now are looking with a very curious
eye. You have a more declared antagonistic posture from the
administration. And I think in Tehran they are trying to figure
out how will this actually get manifested right now. So they
will be watching very closely what are the steps the United
States takes?
So in regard to Congressman Deutch's question earlier about
the sorts of things one might do, well, there are--to the
extent the United States wants to be more serious. We could do
things like naming and shaming the Iranians for the sorts of
steps they are taking. We could start pushing on flight
searches like we did just after the 2006 Israel-Hezbollah war.
We could even take steps like we did in Iraq where we started
to arrest their affiliates. We saw this in 2007 in Iraq with
Hamid the Mute.
So I think the Iranians right now are waiting to watch. I
think the Turks and, you know, we understand the situation
obviously with Turkey which really has been turning away from
the NATO model. We have seen it with their arms' purchases with
the Russians, et cetera. I think the Turkish view is very much,
Hey, America, what is your priority? Is it NATO or not.
And as we are seeing I think from a lot of our European
allies, they want it to be NATO. Understandably, that is valid.
For Russia this is a bigger game. And if you read the national
defense strategy that Secretary of Defense Mattis published
about 2 weeks or so ago, the big emphasis in there is that the
U.S. military's focus in the future is countering Russia and
countering China. And so Moscow wants to know does that mean in
Europe? Does that mean in the Middle East?
Thank you, sir.
Mr. Schneider. Mr. Lister.
Mr. Lister. I would just say very briefly, I think--I would
kind of be quite cynical about framing a solution or an interim
solution to Syria that is nationwide. One of the reasons why I
framed some of my opening comments in terms of looking at
specific pockets of the country is because I think that is the
only way we can approach it. And in that sense, answering your
question would require me to look at, well, the Northeast and
where does Turkey and Iran and Russia stand. In the Southwest
where do all those country stand? But that is how I think that
the United States should be looking at this.
I don't think we have the means, and I also don't think we
have the will to try to figure out a nationwide strategy for
Syria. And I don't think one really necessarily exists. In
fact, I don't think one necessarily exists for Russia and Iran
either.
So I think that is the starting point. I can submit
something in writing to you in more detail----
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. That would be very much
appreciated.
Mr. Lister [continuing]. To treat the different dynamics
individually and thus individually with different
countries.
Insert? deg.
Mr. Schneider. Okay.
Mr. Itani, Ambassador Ford.
Mr. Ford. Very briefly, Congressman.
I think Russia, Iran, and Turkey all--all--do not want a
sustained U.S. military presence in eastern Syria that builds
up a Syrian Kurdish militia, and they will all work in their
different ways to impede that, which is why I think it is
especially important for the Congress to demand of the
administration what are the benchmarks for progress so that
these local forces we are setting up are self-sufficient. What
are the timelines? And if the administration can't provide
that, then it is incumbent upon the Congress to decide if you
are comfortable with an indefinite and vague U.S. military
mission in Syria.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. And I will yield back the balance
of my 20 seconds.
Mr. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank yo so much.
And now Ambassador Wagner.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and thank you,
witnesses.
Dr. Karlin, I appreciated your review of Secretary Mattis'
2018 national defense strategy. You summarized that
prioritizing preparation for potential conflicts with China and
Russia will come at the expense of fighting today's wars
against violent nonstate actors.
How do you think the Secretary ranks the Syrian conflict in
his list of priorities? And to what extent do you think the
Pentagon has the tools it needs to implement a serious policy
in Syria beyond defeat of ISIS?
Ms. Karlin. Thank you, ma'am.
I think, based on at least what I have seen publicly from
the Defense Department, the conflict in Syria is no longer
ranked terribly high. I think the view is that the future is
about high-end conventional conflicts, potentially with China,
potentially with Russia. It is regaining the United States'
qualitative military edge which has been waning in recent
years. And so I think the view is very much focused on
countering ISIS and then, as that wrap ups, shifting the U.S.
focus.
To the extent there is an issue on the table for the
administration--for the Pentagon beyond Russia and China, I
would say it is probably Afghanistan as we have seen with the
troop surge. But that would really limit it.
In terms of the tools, I think one of the challenges that
we see going forward is much of the challenge in Syria is going
to be much more a whole-of-government sort of approach, so it
is less kind of Defense Department hard kinetic tools. It is
more the ability to work in terms of developing areas and
potentially even diplomacy depending on how one can build
statelets of sorts through which to start to exert some sort of
influence.
Thank you.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you very much.
Ambassador Ford, thank you for your service in Syria. How
can the U.S. regain leverage for peace talks and address the,
should I say, rivalry between the Russian, Iran, Turkey Astana
talks and the U.N.-backed Geneva process?
Mr. Ford. In short, I don't think the Americans now can
gain much leverage in the Geneva process or the Astana process
because it is a war, and we are not in the war--or our war is
against a different enemy, Islamic extremists in the eastern
part of the country. So we are not a player.
In a war, military actions, military operations count for
something. Stalin once asked how many divisions does the Pope
have? I think the Russians asked a similar question about the
Americans. Now, in western Syria, which is the subject of the
peace talks, so it is my short answer.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Lister, you wrote that the President has big plans for
Syria but no real strategy. What would a serious strategy look
like to enforce deescalation areas and restabilize Eastern
Syria.
Mr. Lister. That is a good question. How long do you have?
Mrs. Wagner. Not long, sir.
Mr. Lister. You know what? I think what the previous
Secretary of State John Kerry did with the Russians had a
number of serious faults, largely because of the fact that we
didn't have very much leverage. But I think the design was
probably grudgingly largely right in the sense that because we
don't have leverage, it has to be a multilateral effort.
The problem with the current deescalation regime, which was
a Russian-led initiative, is that it was designed in such a way
to deescalate, not to cease fire. Now, that simultaneously with
a complete American cessation of support to the opposition
meant only one thing, that the regime was the only partner that
would benefit from deescalation.
So the only solution to that, frankly speaking, is if that
is what we want, to have a fair ceasefire nationwide in Syria,
and, frankly, I don't think we are really going to get there,
but if that is what we want, we have to have more skin in the
game. And that might mean being more active in the northeast
and more assertive. And that means creating the self-defense
forces in the southwest that I talked about. That would be
defensive and would have a specific purpose. They are not to
attack the regime but to defend. But we have to have more skin
in the game if we want to have any role in creating any of
this.
The same stands for the political process. We are, frankly
speaking, laughed at, because we don't have the skin in the
game and yet we make these big grand demands.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Lister, for your candid
testimony here.
Mr. Itani, in my brief time here, how can the U.S. ensure
that the Syrian regime and its Iranian allies do not get access
to any Western stabilization and reconstruction assistance? Do
you think the international community should help rebuild
Syria, for instance? In 2 seconds.
Mr. Itani. No, I don't think they should do that. And by
that I mean regime-held Syria, partly because I don't think it
would work because it would be pouring money into one of the
most corrupt and dysfunctional political economies in the
world, a political economy that was actually the initial cause
of the war, or the uprising.
Before we even started talking about military uprising and
regimes and militias and wars, it was about the political
economy. So I think it would be a very bad investment, firstly.
Second, we don't owe it to the regime to do it. It is not
that I believe we should be starving the place, but I don't
think it is the United States' duty to go rebuild the place for
him.
And luckily, that is one of the things we as the United
States have a lot of leverage over, which is international
financial flows and the organizations that he is--that the
people who want to rebuild the place are hoping will jump in.
In fact, I am actually more on the other extreme. I think we
should be really worrying about the things that are already
going on where our money is going on the----
Mrs. Wagner. Because we do not want the Syrian regime or
the Iranian allies to have access to our assistance in that
regard?
Mr. Itani. I don't believe we do, no.
Mrs. Wagner. Yes. All right. Thank you very much.
Madam Chairman, my time has expired, and I yield back.
Mr. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you Madam Ambassador.
Mr. Connolly of Virginia.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
And, Mr. Lister, I want to focus in on your written
testimony, because it strikes me. I have had to listen at this
table to my friends on the other side criticize the Obama
administration for lacking a serious strategy. And yet, if I
read your statement correctly, you have got two very pointed
critiques of the Trump administration. One is you say the Trump
administration has provided no evidence that it has developed a
meaningful strategy to match its grand goals and it has
revealed no plans to deploy the resources that would be
necessary to pursue them. Continuing to declare such goals
without deploying even close to the necessary means to achieve
them will only continue to erode American influence and
credibility in the region.
And then, secondly, what struck me in your testimony, you
went further. You said it is important to place this in a
policy context. By lending its support, its public and private
support, to a Russian-led initiative, meaning a ceasefire,
designed specifically by the Russians to strengthen Assad's
position yet further, the Trump administration has directly
abetted Assad's survival, Iran's expansion and threat to
Israel, and continued civil displacement.
We have gone way beyond a critique of Obama's policy being
reckless and not effective to actually abetting the very people
and forces we want to see removed as our precondition for peace
in Syria. That is your critique, if I understand it. I want to
give you the opportunity to expand, because that is one of the
most powerful cogent critiques of the Trump approach to Syria I
have yet heard.
Mr. Lister. Well, thank you very much for summarizing some
of the points I made. And I do----
Mr. Connolly. I actually didn't summarize. I read them.
Mr. Lister. Thank you. Well, thank you for reading them.
And I stand entirely by them. I think the fact remains that
it has taken a year for the Trump administration to make the
speech that was given 2 or 3 weeks ago. And as I said in my
opening comments, the speech was a vision. It was a dream. As
Ms. Hani said, we have nowhere near the means or the will to
achieve the grand objectives that we set.
And, yes, frankly speaking, we don't know what went on
behind closed doors when Trump met Vladimir Putin and then
shortly thereafter there was the announcement of total
cessation of support to the opposition in Syria. It is very
hard to see those two things as not having been more than a
coincidence. And the impact on the ground is huge. Let's rewind
a little bit of time and look at what Russia did when it first
intervened in Syria. Ninety-eight, I think, percent of its
immediate air strikes in the first few months of its operations
targeted the groups we were supporting.
They weren't targeting al-Qaeda, they weren't targeting
ISIS, they weren't targeting other Islamists. They were
supporting the vetted groups that we had been supporting since
the end of 2012. What does that tell us? Those were the groups
that Russia saw as the biggest explicit threat to the regime
because they were more moderate, they were more representative
of a portion of the population.
So for the Trump administration to cease support to every
single group across the entire country that was opposing Assad
and that we had invested in since the end of 2012 sent only one
message to Russia: You have a free hand.
Now, we might be thinking something different from the
Trump administration today, because if you read Secretary
Tillerson's speech, it sounds completely different. But that is
also the problem, frankly speaking, that we have seen from the
Trump administration is a complete lack of consistency. One day
we are willing to work with the Russians. The next day we want
to roll back the Russians. One day we want to attack Iran. The
next day we accept Iran as where it is.
Until we find a clear, clarified position, this is going to
be the endless situation that U.S. policy is on Syria. In fact,
we will lose it. We will be losing leverage, losing
credibility, as I say, and losing the kind of leverage we would
need on the ground to meet any of the objectives we have set.
Mr. Connolly. Well, I want to thank you in the time I have
left for that analysis. And I think it is really important for
the record. There are practical and very grave consequences
from the President of the United States aiding and abetting
Vladimir Putin's expansion of his foreign policy at our expense
and our allies'. And you have just pointed out one quite
clearly. We have aided and abetted the Assad regime as a
consequence. So that bromance between Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin
is not a trivial one and it is not without consequence.
I yield back.
Mr. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you.
Mr. Lieu.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. Let me ask you a follow-up on what Mr.
Lister said. The President of the United States has stated that
he thinks it is good to be unpredictable. My view is, in
foreign policy, that is just phenomenally stupid. And what you
want is you want world leaders and other countries to actually
know what U.S. foreign policy is and that we don't flip back
and forth and backtrack. And I just want to have you amplify a
little more. Is it your view that being unpredictable is a good
thing in foreign policy or is it a bad thing?
Mr. Lister. There is an argument for and against. But my
opinion is it is very much a bad thing. I think the way that
our rivals in the Syrian context, Russia and Iran and the
regime look at it is it is not being unpredictable, it is not
what I think the White House frequently calls it, which is
strategic ambiguity. I think frankly it is just an excuse for
indecision. And as I say, it did take us a year to make a
speech about what we think we want Syria to be sometime down
the line.
We didn't give a strategy. We didn't give a timeline. We
didn't,you know, show any means to get there. So I think the
way our adversaries see it, which, I think, the most important
answer to your question is, it makes us look confused.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. I think it is actually even worse than
that. It is not just unpredictable. It is that the same Trump
administration will simultaneously put out exactly opposite
viewpoints and take opposite actions.
So I will give you a sanction example. In the Middle East,
as you all are familiar with their Saudi-led blockade on Qatar.
And if you remember, you had Secretary of State Rex Tillerson
publically saying no, no, no, this is a bad idea. Do not do
economic blockade. It is basically an act of war. And then you
have the President of the United States basically contradict
him essentially the same day in the rose garden later saying--
taking credit, sort of, for, you know, doing this blockade. And
then later you had the State Department selling billions of
dollars of weapons to Qatar.
So if someone is looking at that, they get the impression,
I think, that the Trump administration has no idea what they
are doing.
So now let's talk a little bit about Syria. So in terms of
Turkey, last July, the Center for Security Policy put out that
Turkey reveals the location of American bases in Syria and that
the Pentagon was quite concerned about that. They didn't want
that to happen. Turkey went ahead and did it anyways. We then
see more recently in a Reuters' report on January 31 that
Turkey essentially is telling the U.S. that we should end our
support for Kurdish YPG fighters or risk being targeted by
Turkey. In fact, they had some pretty specific remarks that I
view as threats to U.S. troops and our policy there.
Given sort of Turkey's increasing--what is a good way to
put it--ability to sort of take on the U.S. in ways we don't
like and to sort of oppose our foreign policy interests, do you
think it is time that we get some truth out there? So we all
understand that the Armenian genocide happened, it is a
historical fact. And the only reason that that resolution has
not been passed is because we want to keep relations with
Turkey.
Is it now time to pass that resolution and tell Turkey
that, look, if you are going to take these actions against us,
we are going to now tell the truth and do some things that you
just might not like?
Anyone on the panel can answer that.
Mr. Itani. I will jump in only because I want to continue
the same conversation we were having about Turkey.
The thing is, if you want to judge anything that happened
over the past 4 years or 3 years with Turkey, the context is
really, really bizarre. We were fighting a proxy war against
the terrorist group on their border using the proxy group that
they view as a terrorist group and that is their existential
enemy.
So imagine--flip it around. Imagine we were to go to
Southern Syria to fight al-Qaeda, and we were to use Hezbollah
to do it. How do you think the Israelis would react? So as the
Israelis say it, I am not passing judgement on the militia in
question. As the Israelis would see it, that is how they would
see it. So everything they do I am judging in that lens.
Now, separately something else is going on in Turkey that
is kind of obfuscating everything, which is politically the
place is taking a very worrying turn, and its leader is also
taking a very worrying tone. And I am trying my best, when I
think about this from a policy stance and I think everybody
ought to try to disaggregate these two things. Turkey is not
going to attack U.S. troops. That is Erdogan speaking. However,
Turkey is going to do things like reveal our bases, because
that is to the extent that which they could provoke and anger
us. Now that ISIS is sort of behind us in the rearview mirror,
I am hoping we can continue with our lives and go back to some
degree of normalcy and have a normal State-to-State
relationship. But under those circumstances, I don't think it
is realistic to expect it to be anything but this hostile and
bizarre.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
Mr. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Ted.
And I will recognize myself.
Thank you.
One of the more alarming situations unfolding in Syria is
not only Iran's use of Shia militias to replicate Hezbollah's
model, but Iran's attempt to solidify not only a theological
bridge between Tehran, Baghdad, Damascus and Beirut, but an
actual land bridge whether they can use the airport or not.
In Sunni majority areas in Syria and Iraq, we have already
seen Iran hard at work on this model directing its proxy groups
to fuel sectarian tensions, displacing Sunnis, and manipulating
the demographics of the region for its own benefit. We have
heard reports that Iran is directing Hezbollah to take root in
areas where Sunnis have fled in Syria in order to make them
Shia majority.
It seems like Iran and its proxies are playing chess
thinking long-term, thinking strategically, while the U.S. and
our partners are playing checkers and are failing to see the
bigger picture.
How can we in the U.S. and our partners work to counter
Iran's efforts to alter Syria's demographics and establish its
control and influence from Tehran to Beirut?
Thank you, Faysal.
Mr. Itani. I am happy to take this.
So with respect to the chess-and-checkers analogy, I
completely agree, Madam Chairwoman. I have nothing to say other
than that.
But on the issue of the demographics, something a bit
stranger is going on in Syria. What seems to be happening is
the regime is removing people it sees as hostile. Of course,
most of them are Sunnis. But within the regime's eyes, you can
also be a good Sunni. Actually, it is very useful to have good
Sunnis in the sense that these are the Sunnis that like the
regime. That is one of the reasons he is still around.
So they keep them generally more prosperous areas or middle
class, and everybody else gets the sharp end of the stick.
Hezbollah is taking areas in Syria that are important to its
position in the mountainous areas between Lebanon and Syria. So
it has expanded its military domain. Demographics are only kind
of a small section of that problem. And it is regime driven on
the demographic end, strategically and militarily driven on the
Hezbollah Iran end. I will put it that way, because especially
remember there are not a lot of Shia in Syria. There are mostly
Alawites, the people on the side of the regime.
Ms. Karlin. Ma'am, could I add one point to that?
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Yes, please.
Ms. Karlin. You had mentioned Iraq. And what is interesting
here is that the situation with Iraq and Iran is actually a lot
more complicated now than I think we could say it was a few
years ago.
So I was in Iraq not long ago, including in Mosul. And what
you see is much of the successful fight against ISIS militarily
was conducted by militias, many of whom are supported by Iran.
It was not conducted by most of the Iraqi military.
So now you have Iranian support of militias that are
running, say, checkpoints in and out of Mosul, as I saw. But to
make it even tougher, they have a bit of a victory that they
can wave about.
Mr. Ros-Lehtinen. Ambassador Ford.
Mr. Ford. One last point on this, Madam Chairwoman,
briefly. It is difficult for me to imagine how we can
successfully pressure Iran in Syria without being on the same
wavelength as Turkey.
Turkey and Iran are historic rivals. Goes back hundreds of
years. Turkey is the major Sunni power, if you will, in that
part of the world. Even more important in some ways--some
ways--than Saudi Arabia.
I think to govern is also to set priorities. If it is the
priority of the United States to use the Syrian Kurdish forces
as a hammer against the Islamic State, then it is going to be
much harder to work with Turkey on the Iran problem.
On the other hand, if we decide that now the priority
should be Iran, then we need to figure out how to come to some
sort of an agreement with Turkey in a manner that meets their
concerns about what they perceive as an existential threat
emanating from the Kurdish areas of Syria.
Mr. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you again to all of our panelists
for thoughtful analysis. And our subcommittee will be back next
week with a hearing on the PA unless we are in a shutdown, in
which case, I don't know, rum and cokes at Ted's office, maybe.
Thank you so much.
And with that, the subcommittee is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 3:37 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
Material Submitted for the Record
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Theodore E. Deutch,
a Representative in Congress from the State of Florida
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Material submitted for the record by the Honorable David Cicilline, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Rhode Island
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]