- BUSINESS MEETING
[Senate Hearing 116-216]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-216
BUSINESS MEETING
=======================================================================
MEETING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
JUNE 19, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
___________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
40-529 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming, Chairman
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware,
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
Ranking Member
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE BRAUN, Indiana
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JONI ERNST, Iowa
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
Richard M. Russell, Majority Staff Director
Mary Frances Repko, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
JUNE 19, 2019
OPENING STATEMENTS
Barrasso, Hon. John, U.S. Senator from the State of Wyoming......
1
Carper, Hon. Thomas R., U.S. Senator from the State of Delaware..
2
LEGISLATION
Nomination References and Reports:
PN718, nomination of Robert Wallace, of Wyoming, to be
Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife..................
9
PN491, nomination of William B. Kilbride, of Tennessee, to be
a Member of the Board of Directors of the Tennessee Valley
Authority..................................................
10
Bills:
S. 1345, A bill to amend and reauthorize the Morris K. Udall
and Stewart L. Udall Foundation Act........................
11
S. 1833, Restore the Harmony Way Bridge Act..................
24
S. 1014, Route 66 Centennial Commission Act..................
26
S. 349, Reviving America's Scenic Byways Act of 2019
(substitute)...............................................
39
S. 1507, PFAS Release Disclosure and Protection Act of 2019
(substitute)...............................................
42
S. 1689, A bill to transfer certain funds from the clean
water revolving fund of a State to the drinking water
revolving fund of a State..................................
101
General Services Administration Resolutions......................
105
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL
Letter to Senator Carper from the Orange County Water District,
June 19, 2019..................................................
161
BUSINESS MEETING
----------
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 19, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Environment and Public Works,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:34 a.m. in room
406, Dirksen Senate Building, Hon. John Barrasso (Chairman of
the Committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Barrasso, Carper, Inhofe, Capito, Cramer,
Braun, Rounds, Sullivan, Boozman, Wicker, Ernst, Cardin,
Whitehouse, Booker, and Van Hollen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN BARRASSO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING
Senator Barrasso. Good morning. I call this business
meeting to order.
Today, we are going to consider two nominees, six bills,
and 38 General Services Administration resolutions. We will
consider three of the GSA resolutions that we noticed on Friday
at a later date.
Senator Carper and I have agreed that we will begin voting
at 9:40. At that time, I will call up the items on the agenda.
We will not debate the items on the agenda while we are voting.
Instead, we will debate the items on the agenda before we begin
voting at 9:40. I will also be happy to recognize any members
who still wish to speak after the voting concludes.
We will consider two nominations, Rob Wallace to be
Assistant Secretary for Fish, Wildlife, and Parks at the
Department of the Interior; and William Kilbride to be a member
of the Board of Directors of the Tennessee Valley Authority.
The full Committee held a hearing on Rob's nomination
earlier this month. The Subcommittee on Clean Air and Nuclear
Safety held a hearing on Mr. Kilbride's nomination last week.
I would like to thank the Chairman of the Subcommittee,
Senator Braun, for holding the hearing and assisting the full
Committee in considering Mr. Kilbride's nomination. Both
nominees are well qualified and will bring a wealth of
experience and expertise to these important positions.
I would like to say a few words about Rob Wallace. I have
known Rob for over 35 years. Without question, Rob is the right
person for the job as the Assistant Secretary for Fish,
Wildlife, and Parks.
Once confirmed, Rob will oversee the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service and the National Park Service. His confirmation will be
especially important because neither of these agencies have
Senate confirmed leadership at this time. He will play a
central role in managing fish and wildlife for the American
people.
Stakeholders from across the political spectrum agree, Rob
is an outstanding choice. I urge my colleagues to support his
nomination.
We will also consider six bills: Senator Heinrich's bill to
amend and reauthorize the Morris K. Udall and Stewart L. Udall
Foundation Act; Senator Braun's Restore the Harmony Way Bridge
Act; Senator Duckworth's Route 66 Centennial Commission Act;
Senator Collins' Reviving America's Scenic Byways Act, with a
substitute amendment; Senator Capito's PFAS Release Disclosure
Act, with a substitute amendment; and Senator Booker's bill to
transfer certain funds from the Clean Water Revolving Fund of
the State to the Drinking Water Revolving Fund of the State.
I would like to say a few words about the PFAS bill. We
will report a broad bipartisan package to address pollution
from a large class of chemicals, known as PFAS. This pollution
is an urgent concern for many communities and States across the
country.
This spring, the Committee held two hearings on this issue.
In March, we heard from top officials at EPA, as well as the
Departments of Defense and Health and Human Services. In May,
we heard from State water regulators, water utilities, and
others, who are struggling to deal with these contaminants.
The Barrasso-Carper substitute amendment to the Capito bill
requires industrial manufacturers and users to disclose to the
public when they release these chemicals into the environment.
The legislation also requires EPA to set, within 2 years, a
national primary drinking water regulation for, at a minimum,
two of the most toxic PFAS substances.
The Barrasso-Carper substitute amendment is identical to an
amendment that Senator Capito, Ranking Member Carper, Senator
Gillibrand, and I filed to the National Defense Authorization
Act last week.
I want to thank those members for their leadership on this
issue. Our bipartisan package will go a long way to helping the
Federal Government and the States combat this pollution.
Last, we will consider 38 resolutions to approve
prospectuses providing for General Services Administration
leases.
I will now turn to Ranking Member Carper for his statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. THOMAS R. CARPER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF DELAWARE
Senator Carper. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the staffs and all the folks who worked
very hard to get us ready for this day. It has been a sometimes
frenzied effort, but I think a good one.
We have some important items on our agenda. I am going to
be brief as we all have other commitments today.
Today, our Committee is set to consider a number of General
Services Administration resolutions, five pieces of
legislation, two nominees, and legislation to address
widespread contamination of substances that we refer to
affectionately as PFAS.
I am going to start by saying that the minority is willing
to move this large number of GSA resolutions today only because
of GSA's recent efforts to begin providing documents that the
minority requested as far back as the beginning of last
Congress. I thank the Chairman and his majority staff for their
help in motivating GSA to be more responsive to the minority's
document requests.
Three of the four pieces of legislation on today's agenda
are related to our Nation's transportation system. The fourth
piece is a bill introduced by Senator Heinrich that would
reauthorize the Morris K. Udall and Stewart L. Udall Foundation
Act. This bill was passed in the Senate last year, and this
year, I am confident we can get it across the finish line.
The fifth bill is Senator Booker's proposal to allow States
a 1-year opportunity to use excess Clean Water State Revolving
Loan Fund dollars to address lead contamination in drinking
water. This bill would provide immediate relief to a number of
States facing extreme cases of lead contamination, and I am
proud to support Senator Booker's proposal.
I believe the two nominees our Committee is considering
today, Rob Wallace and William Kilbride, are both qualified and
ready to lead at their respective agencies. Mr. Wallace has
pledged to uphold science and bolster the expertise of the
Interior Department career staff that he would oversee. I
believe he is up to the challenge of providing badly needed
leadership within the Department of the Interior.
I look forward to welcoming Mr. Wallace to Delaware
sometime later this year so that he can see and learn firsthand
about our national park and wildlife refuges that make the
First State home to so many people and visitors and species.
Next, let me take a minute or 2 to focus on the substitute
for Senator Capito's bill, which is a package of PFAS
contamination legislation. Over the last couple of months, I
have come to learn that addressing PFAS contamination is a
particularly complicated and multi-faceted problem faced by an
ever growing number of communities across America.
During our hearing last month, I said that our Committee
would continue to work hard with stakeholders to forge a
consensus approach to address head on the PFAS problem. For the
most part, that is what we have done. I especially want to
thank Chairman Barrasso and the majority staff, as well as our
own minority staff, and our colleagues, for their excellent and
constructive work in crafting the legislative package that is
before us today.
This substitute requires EPA to set a drinking water
standard for PFOS and PFOA in 2 years, while also establishing
on ramps so the agency can create monitoring requirements and
drinking water standards for other PFAS chemicals in the
future.
The substitute also immediately adds about 200 PFAS
chemicals to the Toxic Release Inventory. By doing so, we can
better understand the research, cleanup, and prevention that
are needed at every level of government. Furthermore, the
substitute includes additional bipartisan measures to require
research, monitoring techniques, funding for drinking water
cleanup, and guidance on how to properly dispose of PFAS.
Notably, though, there is one critical piece of PFAS
legislation missing from this package. That is the bill I
introduced with Senator Capito and 30 co-sponsors earlier this
spring that designates PFAS as hazardous substances under the
Superfund law. This designation would require DOD to help clean
up the PFAS contamination it has caused, and it would unlock
EPA resources to clean up sites when no one else can do so.
With that said, I still remain hopeful this last PFAS bill
ultimately will be included in the Defense Authorization Act. I
hope to have the Chairman agree to join me, along with other
members of this Committee, as we strive to reach that goal,
given the extensive conversations happening between our staffs,
relevant agencies, stakeholders, and constituents who are
affected by PFAS contamination.
Let me close with this. When we held our first business
meeting of this Congress back in February, I shared my hopes
that our Committee would work to reach consensus on important
issues, consensus that would help us strengthen protections for
our environment and public health while enhancing economic
growth.
Nearly half a year later, the legislative work that we have
achieved thus far on PFAS gives me renewed cause for hope that
this Committee can and will continue to make further progress
on the issues that Americans care about the most.
With that, I look forward to a quick markup and a
productive session.
Thank you all for your efforts.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much, Senator Carper.
Thanks for the kind comments about the commitment of the entire
Committee to work together on issues of bipartisan importance
to the Nation.
Now that enough members have arrived, I would like to move
to a vote on the items on today's agenda. The Ranking Member
and I have agreed to vote on two nominees, six bills, and 38
General Services Administration resolutions en bloc by voice
vote. Members may choose to have their votes recorded for a
specific item in that bloc after the voice vote.
I would like to call up first: Presidential Nomination 718,
Rob Wallace of Wyoming to be Assistant Secretary of Fish,
Wildlife, and Parks at the Department of the Interior; as well
as Presidential Nomination 491, William Kilbride of Tennessee
to be a member of the board of directors of the Tennessee
Valley Authority; S. 1345, a bill to amend and reauthorize the
Morris K. Udall and Stewart L. Udall Foundation Act; S. 1833,
Restore the Harmony Way Bridge Act; S. 1014, Route 66
Centennial Commission Act; the Cardin substitute amendment to
S. 349, Reviving America's Scenic Byways Act; the Barrasso-
Carper substitute amendment to S. 1507, PFAS Release Disclosure
Act; S. 1689, a bill to transfer certain funds from the Clean
Water Revolving Fund of a State to the Drinking Water Revolving
Fund of the State; and 38 General Services Administration
resolutions en bloc.
I move to approve and report Presidential Nomination 718,
Presidential Nomination 491, S. 1345, S. 1833, S. 1014, and S.
1689, approve the Cardin substitute amendment to S. 349 and
report S. 349 as amended, approve the Barrasso-Carper
substitute amendment to S. 1507, and report S. 1507 as amended,
and approve 38 GSA resolutions en bloc.
Is there a second?
Senator Carper. I second.
Senator Barrasso. All those in favor, please say aye.
[Chorus of ayes.]
Senator Barrasso. All those opposed, nay.
[No audible response.]
Senator Barrasso. In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes
have it.
We have approved Presidential Nomination 718, Presidential
Nomination 491, S. 1345, S. 1833, S. 1014, S. 1689, S. 349 as
amended, S. 1507 as amended, which were reported favorably to
the Senate. We have approved 38 GSA resolutions.
The voting part of this business meeting is finished. I
would be happy now to recognize any member who wishes to make a
statement on any of the nominations, the legislation, or the
resolutions that we have just approved.
Senator Whitehouse. Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Whitehouse.
Senator Whitehouse. I will just speak very briefly about
Mr. Wallace.
I was delighted to be able to vote for him. We had a
terrific conversation, and he pledged two things to me. One, to
work with me on the Blackstone Valley River National Historic
Park, which is a complicated thing, because we are developing a
park in an existing urban developed area.
This isn't a place where you can just draw lines on a map
and say everything inside is park. So we are going to need more
attention from his Service to get that completed. He was
terrific about that.
The second point we talked about is that even though the
organization he works for is called the Department of the
Interior, this is a country that has more than interior. It
also has edges, and the edges are our coasts, and our coasts
are being overlooked by his department. He has agreed to sit
down with a bipartisan group of coastal Senators and begin a
conversation as to how coastal communities can be treated with
more attention and more fairly by his department.
Thank you very much.
Senator Booker. Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Capito asked to be recognized.
Senator Capito. Go ahead, Senator.
Senator Booker. That is very generous of you, Senator
Capito.
I just want to say thank you to the Chairman and Ranking
Member. You have been tremendous. There are literally thousands
of children and families in the State of New Jersey who,
because of your partnership with me, will now have the
opportunity to have the lead problems addressed.
It really is making a real difference. This is a very, very
good day for our State and I know others as well. I want to
express my gratitude.
Thank you, Senator Capito.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Booker.
Senator Capito.
Senator Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank Ranking Member Carper, Senator Gillibrand,
and the staff, too, for the work that we have done on the PFAS
legislative package that we see today, but also the work that
was done to get it into an amendment for the NDAA.
I did talk with the Chairman and thanked him for his
efforts as well, the Chairman of the Armed Services Committee.
I am proud to lead this bipartisan consensus package. It is
very important to me.
You have heard me talk about two of the communities in my
State, Parkersburg and Martinsburg, who have endured a history
of PFAS contamination. We are very concerned about this.
This will hold emitters to account, will provide more
transparency, and ensure that Federal agencies, communities,
and the public can respond to emissions. Sunlight being the
best disinfectant, I think this accountability is really good.
The Manager's Amendment also adds a refined version of the
legislation I introduced with Senator Gillibrand to direct the
EPA to impose safe drinking water standards for PFOA and PFAS
and other PFAS compounds as the science merits.
We have included language ensuring that the EPA can assist
rural water systems. This was a concern that came out in our
hearing, whether rural water systems could meet the challenges
of testing, both financially and with the technical expertise.
This will help them so they can meet these standards.
It is regrettable to me that the EPA has been dragging its
feet on this issue to the extent that Congress is compelled to
act, but ensuring the public's faith in their drinking water is
vitally important. This also provides for the facilitation of
research into PFAS and effects on human health.
There still remains much to be done. I look forward to
continuing work with my colleagues, Senator Carper mentioned
this, on getting to an agreement on addressing legacy
contamination at industrial and military sites around the
country through the CERCLA and Superfund programs.
I believe we need to prioritize development of new
mitigation technologies, including destroying PFAS contaminated
material in a responsible way that does not change the medium
of contamination from soil and water to the air. This will
require new sampling methodologies and standards for the
sophisticated processes needed to break that carbon fluorine
bond that makes these substances useful for commerce but
persistent in the environment.
The public needs the confidence that Washington is working
to keep their water, soil, and air safe while protecting their
economic interests and standards of living. I am very pleased
this is in here.
Thank you very much for your dedication and help.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Capito.
Senator Cardin.
Senator Cardin. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you and
Senator Carper in regard to moving the Reviving American Scenic
Byways Act that I introduced with Senator Collins, giving us an
opportunity to restart this highly beneficial, grassroots
program that has been dormant since 2009.
I also want to thank you for the courtesies in removing
three of the prospectuses that were on the list today, one
dealing with the Bureau of Fiscal Services at the United States
Department of Treasury that we are working in regard to certain
employee issues, and then also removing the consolidated
activities, various buildings, to get certain understandings as
to the restrictions on the use of those funds.
Again, thank you for the courtesy of giving us the
opportunity to clarify those prospectuses.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you.
Senator Braun.
Senator Braun. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Carper.
The Harmony Way Bridge, which has been closed since 2012,
is included in this package. It is the last remaining Federal
Bridge Commission responsibility, created in 1941 to manage
basically local bridges.
The Commission wasn't up to the task. Over time, the bridge
fell into disrepair.
The community of New Harmony, it is vital to them. It gives
them the flexibility now to move forward. The Restore the
Harmony Way Bridge Act is a prime example of bipartisan
cooperation that can happen in DC when leaders come together to
solve problems affecting constituents. It eliminates unneeded
Federal programs and allows the community of New Harmony to
make decisions that are in their own best interest.
Thank you again for the support, and I look forward to this
legislation making it to the full Chamber.
Thank you so much.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you.
Senator Sullivan.
Senator Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to commend you, the Ranking Member, and Senator
Capito, in particular, and finally all of us getting our arms
around this PFAS issue which I think is going to occupy a lot
of our time, but I think it is a good beginning on what is in
this legislation, particularly with regard to loans for
communities, forbearance for the EPA with regard to penalties
on water systems in municipalities and localities.
As Senator Capito mentioned, the next step we need to start
focusing on is the CERCLA issue and the responsibility in
communities, particularly where we have large military bases,
like in my State. I think we are off to a good start, but I
want to commend both of you, and her and the other members,
Democrats and Republicans, on this Committee for that important
legislation. Hopefully we will see it on the floor soon.
Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Sullivan.
Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. Mr. Chairman, I enjoy music. Every now and
then I hear a song that seems particularly appropriate. I was
listening to my favorite radio station driving to the train
station this morning and I heard an old Chicago song. It
started off, ``Only the beginning.'' It is a great song.
I think we have made good progress here today. As the
Senator says, this is only the beginning. We still have work to
do, on the challenges that you face in Alaska with respect to
PFAS contamination and the huge cleanup responsibilities in
almost every State. Almost every State can tell us some more
stories. We need to continue to work. It is a good start, but
it is only the beginning.
Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. I thought you were going to sing the
Chicago song ``Does Anybody Really Know What Time It Is?''
[Laughter.]
Senator Barrasso. We could sing it here, but we will not
because instead, I am going to ask unanimous consent that we
not sing, but that the staff have the authority to make
technical and conforming changes to each of the matters
approved today.
With that, our business meeting is concluded.
[Whereupon, at 9:52 a.m., the business meeting was
concluded.]
[Legislation submitted for the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]