- DEFENDING OUR DEMOCRACY: BUILDING PARTNERSHIPS TO PROTECT AMERICA'S ELECTIONS
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
DEFENDING OUR DEMOCRACY: BUILDING PARTNERSHIPS TO PROTECT AMERICA'S
ELECTIONS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
FEBRUARY 13, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-1
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
___________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-094 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
__________
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Rogers, Alabama
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Peter T. King, New York
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
John Katko, New York
Kathleen M. Rice, New York
John Ratcliffe, Texas
J. Luis Correa, California
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Xochitl Torres Small, New Mexico
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Max Rose, New York
Debbie Lesko, Arizona
Lauren Underwood, Illinois
Mark Green, Tennessee
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan
Van Taylor, Texas
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri
John Joyce, Pennsylvania
Al Green, Texas
Dan Crenshaw, Texas
Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Michael Guest, Mississippi
Dina Titus, Nevada
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California
Val Butler Demings, Florida
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Chris Vieson, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENTS
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
1
Prepared Statement.............................................
2
The Honorable Mike Rogers, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Alabama, and Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
3
Prepared Statement.............................................
4
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Prepared Statement.............................................
5
WITNESSES
Panel I
Mr. Christopher C. Krebs, Director, Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, U.S. Department of Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
8
Prepared Statement.............................................
10
Mr. Thomas Hicks, Commissioner, U.S. Election Assistance
Commission:
Oral Statement.................................................
13
Prepared Statement.............................................
16
Panel II
Mr. Alex Padilla, Secretary of State, California:
Oral Statement.................................................
61
Prepared Statement.............................................
62
Mr. Noah Praetz, Former Director of Elections, Cook County,
Illinois:
Oral Statement.................................................
65
Prepared Statement.............................................
66
Mr. Jake Braun, Executive Director, Cyber Policy Initiative:
Oral Statement.................................................
75
Prepared Statement.............................................
77
Mr. John H. Merrill, Secretary of State, Alabama:
Oral Statement.................................................
78
Prepared Statement.............................................
80
FOR THE RECORD
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Letter, Brennan Center for Justice.............................
48
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Article........................................................
93
APPENDIX
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Christopher C.
Krebs..........................................................
95
Questions From Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for Christopher C.
Krebs..........................................................
95
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Christopher C.
Krebs..........................................................
96
Questions From Honorable Dina Titus for Christopher C. Krebs.....
96
Questions From Honorable Yvette D. Clarke for Christopher C.
Krebs..........................................................
96
Questions From Honorable Michael T. McCaul for Christopher C.
Krebs..........................................................
97
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Thomas Hicks......
97
Questions From Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for Thomas Hicks.....
99
Questions From Honorable Dina Titus for Thomas Hicks.............
101
Question From Honorable Yvette D. Clarke for Thomas Hicks........
102
Questions From Honorable Michael T. McCaul for Thomas Hicks......
102
Questions From Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for Alex Padilla.....
103
Question From Honorable James R. Langevin for Alex Padilla.......
104
Question From Honorable Dina Titus for Alex Padilla..............
104
Questions From Honorable Yvette D. Clarke for Alex Padilla.......
104
Question From Honorable Michael T. McCaul for Alex Padilla.......
104
Questions From Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for Noah Praetz......
105
Question From Honorable James R. Langevin for Noah Praetz........
107
Question From Honorable Dina Titus for Noah Praetz...............
108
Questions From Honorable Michael T. McCaul for Noah Praetz.......
108
Questions from Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for Jake Braun.......
109
Questions from Honorable James R. Langevin for Jake Braun........
110
Question From Honorable Dina Titus for Jake Braun................
112
Questions From Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for John H. Merrill..
112
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for John H. Merrill...
114
Question From Honorable Dina Titus for John H. Merrill...........
114
Questions From Honorable Yvette D. Clarke for John H. Merrill....
114
Question From Honorable Michael T. McCaul for John H. Merrill....
115
DEFENDING OUR DEMOCRACY: BUILDING PARTNERSHIPS TO PROTECT AMERICA'S
ELECTIONS
----------
Wednesday, February 13, 2019
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Bennie G. Thompson
(Chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Thompson, Jackson Lee, Langevin,
Payne, Rice, Correa, Torres Small, Rose, Underwood, Slotkin,
Cleaver, Green of Texas, Clarke, Titus, Watson Coleman,
Barragan, Demings, Rogers, King, Katko, Ratcliffe, Walker,
Higgins, Lesko, Green of Tennessee, Taylor, Joyce, Crenshaw,
and Guest.
Chairman Thompson. The Committee on Homeland Security will
come to order. I welcome the Members to the first hearing of
the Committee on Homeland Security of the 116th Congress. I
appreciate your flexibility and that of our witnesses after we
rescheduled the hearing due to the services of late Chairman
John Dingell. Our thoughts and prayers are with his wife.
Today the committee will hold a hearing on defending our
democracy, building partnerships to protect America's
elections. Election security is a National security issue and
it must transcend party politics because it requires a unified
effort to protect America's elections. Unfortunately, this
hearing is long overdue. During the 115th Congress, the
Republican Majority spent much of its time ignoring the
intelligence and refusing to acknowledge the threat to our
democracy.
Frustrated by the lack of action on this critical issue,
Democrats on this committee and the Committee on House
Administration launched the Congressional Task Force on
Election Security in July 2017. The task force met with dozens
of elections experts, secretaries of State elections, and
National security experts to assess vulnerabilities in election
infrastructure and determine how to address them.
In February 2018, the task force produced a report that
included 10 recommendations and introduced legislation to
implement them. That legislation is now part of H.R. 1, the For
the People Act, which the House is expected to consider in the
coming weeks.
Fortunately, since 2016, progress has been made toward more
secure elections. The Department of Homeland Security and
Election Assistance Commission have built stronger, more
effective partnerships with State and local election officials.
But it is unclear whether each agency has the resources
necessary to meet the increasing demand for their resources.
Will EAC's $10 million budget provide sufficient resources
for it to administer additional election security grants to
States? Does DHS have the resources to provide its services to
every State and county that requests them?
Congress needs to understand the existing capability of
each agency. Now, existing capabilities can be leveraged,
grown, and augmented. Local election officials are on the front
lines of securing our elections, and their success depends on
the support they receive from Federal and State governments.
Although some dispute that has--the election infrastructure
local election officials oversee is vulnerable to hacking,
cybersecurity experts have made a credible case. The Federal
Government, especially Congress, must understand the resource
constraints of local election officials and partner with them
to address vulnerabilities to election infrastructure through
grants and services.
The intelligence community has made clear the threats to
our elections persist, so more work remains to be done. Just
last month, Director of National Intelligence Dan Coats,
warned, Russia in 2016 and unidentified actors as recently as
2018 have already conducted cyber activity that has targeted
U.S. election infrastructure.
He went on to say, we should expect adversaries and
strategic competitors to refine their capabilities and add new
tactics as they learn from each other's experiences in advance
of the 2020 elections.
I look forward to hearing from our panel of witnesses today
about how Congress and Federal agencies can support efforts to
further strengthen our elections and protect them from attack.
I welcome our Republican colleagues' support in these
efforts and I look forward to working with all those whose goal
is to protect America's elections and defend our democracy.
[The statement of Chairman Thompson follows:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
February 13, 2019
Election security is a National security issue that must transcend
party politics, because it requires a unified effort to protect
America's elections. Unfortunately, this hearing is long overdue.
During the 115th Congress, the Republican Majority spent much of its
time ignoring the intelligence and refusing to acknowledge the threat
to our democracy.
Frustrated by the lack of action on this critical issue, Democrats
on this committee and the Committee on House Administration launched
the Congressional Task Force on Election Security in July 2017. The
Task Force met with dozens of elections experts, State election
officials, and National security experts to assess vulnerabilities in
election infrastructure and determine how to address them. In February
2018, the Task Force produced a report that included 10 recommendations
and introduced legislation to implement them.
That legislation is now part of H.R. 1, the For the People Act,
which the House is expected to consider in the coming weeks.
Fortunately, since 2016, progress has been made toward more secure
elections.
The Department of Homeland Security and Election Assistance
Commission (EAC) have built stronger, more effective partnerships with
State and local election officials. But it is unclear whether either
agency has the resources necessary to meet the increasing demand for
their resources.
Will EAC's $10 million budget provide sufficient resources for it
to administer additional election security grants to States? Does DHS
have the resources to provide its services to every State and county
that requests them?
Congress needs to understand the existing capability of each agency
and how existing capabilities can be leveraged, grown, and augmented.
Local election officials are on the front lines of securing our
elections, and their success depends on the support they receive from
Federal and State governments.
Although some dispute that the election infrastructure local
election officials oversee is vulnerable to hacking, cybersecurity
experts have made a credible case it is. The Federal Government--
especially Congress--must understand the resource constraints of local
election officials and partner with them to address vulnerabilities to
election infrastructure though grants and services.
The intelligence community has made clear the threats to our
elections persist, so more work remains to be done. Just last month,
Director of National Intelligence Dan Coats warned, ``Russia in 2016
and unidentified actors as recently as 2018 have already conducted
cyber activity that has targeted U.S. election infrastructure.'' He
went on to say we should expect ``adversaries and strategic competitors
to refine their capabilities and add new tactics as they learn from
each other's experiences'' in advance of the 2020 elections.
I look forward to hearing from our panel of witnesses today about
how Congress and Federal agencies can support efforts to further
strengthen our elections and protect them from attack. I welcome my
Republican colleagues' support in these efforts, and I look forward to
working with all those whose goal is to protect America's elections and
defend our democracy.
Chairman Thompson. I now recognize the Ranking Member of
the full committee, the gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Rogers, for
an opening statement.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I look forward to the opportunity to hear from our
witnesses today regarding election security. The integrity of
our elections is foundational to our democracy. All Americans
should have confidence that voting equipment and systems are
secure and your vote counts as they intended and that election
results are accurately reported.
Last week DHS and DOJ released their findings that there
was no evidence of any foreign interference in the 2018
election. I believe that the tremendous work done by DHS, our
intelligence community and State and local leaders made that
happen but there is certainly more work that can be done.
Much of our focus today will be on the work we still need
to do to secure the technology and systems behind our elections
but we can't lose sight of a simple lesson: Foreign
intelligence services, domestic partisans, and on-line vandals
do not care what our laws say. They are happy to use our public
forums against us. My home State saw liberal activists
deliberately mislead Alabamians regarding public endorsements
and political issues in the 2017 U.S. Senate Special Election.
They bragged to liberal donors behind closed doors about
their success in manipulating Alabama voters. H.R. 1 attempts
to address these pressing issues but the bill's provisions are
deeply naive. As it stands, H.R. 1 is an exercise in regulating
everything that moves near a ballot box. The problems facing
our election systems are more complex than that. Election
security has long been a bipartisan priority for Members of
this committee. It is my hope that this bipartisan tradition on
this issue will continue in this Congress.
We need a deliberative, bipartisan process to solve these
issues. Unfortunately it appears our committee will not have an
opportunity to mark up the election security provisions in our
jurisdiction. That is unfortunate because the election security
provisions in this bill could be improved and I know Members on
both sides of this committee have some good ideas on how to
make those improvements. As it stands now, much of H.R. 1's 570
pages appear to be a political exercise.
That is why I am very disappointed that election security,
an issue where we have an opportunity to work together to move
bipartisan legislation has gotten caught up--getting caught up
in a partisan political grab.
I hope that H.R. 1--when H.R. 1 stalls in the Senate, as it
will, we will revisit the issue of election security in a
bipartisan manner. I thank our witnesses for taking the time to
speak to our committee about the work you are doing on the
front lines of elections.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement of Ranking Member Rogers follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Mike Rogers
I look forward to the opportunity to hear from our witnesses today
regarding election security. The integrity of our elections is
foundational to our democracy.
All Americans should have confidence that voting equipment and
systems are secure, their vote counts as they intended, and that
election results are accurately reported.
Last week, DHS and DOJ released their findings that there was no
evidence of any foreign interference in the 2018 election. I believe
the tremendous work done by DHS, our intelligence community, and State
and local leaders made that happen. But there is certainly more work to
be done.
Much of our focus today will be on the work we still need to do to
secure the technology and systems behind our elections. But we can't
lose sight of a simple lesson: Foreign intelligence services, domestic
partisans, and on-line vandals do not care what our laws say. They are
happy to use our public forums against us.
My home State saw liberal activists deliberately mislead Alabamians
regarding public endorsements and political issues in the 2017 U.S.
Senate special election. They bragged to liberal donors behind closed
doors about their success in manipulating Alabama voters.
H.R. 1 attempts to address these pressing issues, but the bill's
provisions are deeply naive. As it stands, H.R. 1 is an exercise in
regulating everything that moves near a ballot box.
The problems facing our election system are more complex than that.
Election security has long been a bipartisan priority for Members of
this committee.
It is my hope that this bipartisan tradition on this issue will
continue in this Congress. We need a deliberative, bipartisan process
to solve these issues.
Unfortunately, it appears our committee will not have an
opportunity to mark up the election security provisions in our
jurisdiction. That is unfortunate because the election security
provisions of this bill could be improved.
And I know Members on both sides of this committee have some good
ideas on how make improvements. As it stands, much of H.R. 1's 570
pages appear to be a political exercise.
That is why I am very disappointed that election security, an issue
where we had an opportunity to work together to move bipartisan
legislation, has gotten caught up in this partisan political power
grab.
I hope when H.R. 1 does not advance in the Senate, we can revisit
the issue of election security in a bipartisan manner.
I thank our witnesses for taking to the time to speak to our
committee about the work you are doing on the front lines of elections.
Chairman Thompson. I thank the gentleman for his comments.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that under the
committee rules opening statements may be submitted for the
record.
[The statement of Hon. Jackson Lee follows:]
Statement of Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee
Chairman Bennie G. Thompson thank you for holding today's hearing
so that the committee may learn more about how the Department of
Homeland Security is ``Defending Our Democracy: Building Partnerships
to Protect America's Elections.''
At the outset, let me congratulate you Mr. Chairman on your
election to lead this august committee, and Mr. Rogers on his election
as Ranking Member.
Chairman Thompson, your participation in the House Administration
Committee's Subcommittee on Elections Field Hearing held in
Brownsville, Texas last week was substantive and impactful.
Also, your skillful leadership in co-chairing the 115th Congress'
Task Force on Election Security, which resulted in a report last year
which informs our hearing this morning.
I look forward to continuing working with the returning Members of
the committee and welcome an outstanding cohort of new Members on both
sides of the aisle, who I trust will find the important work advanced
by this committee as fulfilling and rewarding as I have since joining
its inception.
I thank today's witnesses:
Panel 1
The Hon. Christopher C. Krebs, director, Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, U.S. Department of Homeland
Security; and
The Hon. Thomas Hicks, chairman, Election Assistance
Commission.
Panel 2
The Hon. Alex Padilla, secretary of state, California;
Mr. Noah Praetz, former director of elections, Cook County,
Illinois;
Mr. Jake Braun, executive director, Cyber Policy Initiative,
University of Chicago; and
The Hon. John Merrill, secretary of state, Alabama (Minority
witness).
I thank each of today's witnesses for bringing their expert view on
the partnerships among Federal, State, and local agencies responsible
for ensuring the integrity of elections have matured since 2016 and
about the resources and support necessary to prepare for the 2020
Presidential elections.
The efforts to ensure that every eligible person can register to
vote, and cast a vote in a public election have spanned generations.
I have been persistent in my efforts to protect the rights of
disenfranchised communities in my district of inner-city Houston and
across the Nation.
Throughout my tenure in Congress, I have cosponsored dozens of
bills, amendments, and resolutions seeking to improve voters' rights at
all stages and levels of the election process.
This includes legislation aimed at:
1. Increasing voter outreach and turnout;
2. Ensuring both early and same-day registration;
3. Standardizing physical and language accessibility at polling
places;
4. Expanding early voting periods;
5. Decreasing voter wait times;
6. Guaranteeing absentee ballots, especially for displaced
citizens;
7. Modernizing voting technologies and strengthening our voter
record systems;
8. Establishing the Federal Election Day as a National holiday; and
9. Condemning and criminalizing deceptive practices, voter
intimidation, and other suppression tactics.
Along with many of my colleagues in the CBC, I was an original
cosponsor of H.R. 9, the Fannie Lou Hamer, Rosa Parks, and Coretta
Scott King Voting Rights Act Reauthorization and Amendments Act, which
became public law on July 27, 2006.
I also authored H.R. 745 in the 110th Congress, which added the
legendary Barbara Jordan to the list of civil rights trailblazers whose
names honor the Voting Rights Act Reauthorization and Amendments Act.
This bill strengthened the original Voting Rights Act by replacing
Federal voting examiners with Federal voting observers--a significant
distinction that made it easier to safeguard against racially-biased
voter suppression tactics.
In the 114th Congress, I introduced H.R. 75, the Coretta Scott King
Mid-Decade Redistricting Prohibition Act of 2015, which would prohibit
States whose Congressional districts have been redistricted after a
decennial census from redrawing their district lines until the next
census.
The voting rights struggles of the 20th Century are now joined by
voting rights threats posed by the 21st Century.
Russia an adversary of the United States engaged in repeated
attempts to interfere in the 2016 Presidential election, which prompted
an unprecedented all-of-Government effort to alert local and State
election administrators to be aware of the threat.
Russia targeted our Presidential election according to the report,
``Background to Assessing Russian Activities and Intentions in Recent
U.S. Elections: The Analytic Process and Cyber Incident Attribution,''
provided by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence's
National Intelligence Council.
Russia used every cyber espionage tool available to influence the
outcome of the Presidential election by using a multifaceted campaign
that included theft of data; strategically-timed release of stolen
information; production of fake news; and manipulation of facts to
avoid blame.
The Russian General Staff Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) is
suspected by our intelligence agencies of having begun cyber operations
targeting the United States election as early as March 2016.
They took on the persona of ``Guccifer 2.0,'' ``DCLeaks.com,'' and
Wikileaks as the identities that would be reported as having
involvement in the work they had under taken to undermine our Nation's
Presidential election.
Russia is blamed for breaching 21 local and State election systems,
which they studied extensively.
In February 2018, special counsel Robert Mueller released
indictments of 13 Russians, at least one of whom has direct ties to
Russian President Vladimir Putin.
The 37-page indictment details the actions taken to interfere with
the U.S. political system, including the 2016 U.S. Presidential
election.
Among the charges, which include charges for obstruction of
justice, are several especially notable details.
The indictment states that 13 defendants posed as U.S. persons and
created false U.S. personas and operated social media pages and groups
designed to attract U.S. audiences.
The social media profiles ``addressed divisive U.S. political and
social issues'' and falsely claimed to be controlled by U.S. activists.
The defendants are also accused of using ``the stolen identities of
real U.S. persons to post on social media accounts'' which, over time,
became the chosen ``means to reach significant numbers of Americans for
purposes of interfering with the U.S. political system, including the
Presidential election of 2016.''
The goal of the effort was to sow discord in the U.S. political
system, including the 2016 US. Presidential election.
The internet does not sleep--and nor do our Nation's on-line
adversaries.
That Russia used cyber intrusions to attack United States political
institutions to collect data to manipulate the media and the public
with the purpose of influencing the outcome of the 2016 Presidential
elections is now an undisputed fact.
The United States has enemies in other corners of the globe who
would not hesitate to attack our election system if given the chance.
These foreign adversaries do not share our commitment to democracy,
liberty, and human rights, or the precious freedoms we hold dear.
On January 6, 2017, Homeland Security Secretary Johnson, as one of
his last official acts under the Obama administration, designated
election systems as critical infrastructure, and created a new
subsector under the existing Government Facilities Sector designation.
On that same day, President Elect-Trump was briefed by the
intelligence community that Vladimir Putin had directed the cyber
attack on the United States of America.
Since then, intelligence officials have continued to warn that
foreign governments--including Russia, Iran, and China--could attempt
to interfere in U.S. elections.
In March 2017, then-Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Director
James Comey testified before the House Permanent Select Committee on
Intelligence that the Russians are not finished and that they will be
back.
In February 2018, six intelligence agency chiefs issued a dire
warning about the Kremlin's on-going efforts to influence the U.S.
elections.
On January 29, 2019, the director of national intelligence
testified before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence that our
adversaries ``probably already are looking to the 2020 U.S. elections
as an opportunity to advance their interests.''
The House Committee on Homeland Security has the responsibility of
providing for the cybersecurity of Federal civilian agencies as well as
the security of the Nation's 16 critical infrastructure sectors from
cyber and other threats.
The Election Infrastructure Subsector covers a wide range of
physical and electronic assets such as storage facilities, polling
places, and centralized vote tabulation locations used to support the
election process, and information and communications technology to
include voter registration databases, voting machines, and other
systems to manage the election process and report and display results
on behalf of State and local governments.
The work to secure our Nation's election system from cyber threats
is on-going, which is why this hearing is relevant.
I look forward to the committee's markup of H.R. 1, the ``For The
People Act,'' critical legislation to repair and strengthen our
democracy.
While this bill's language brings much-needed improvements to
election administration by providing a funding stream to support the
replacement of outdated voting systems, and support for the
administration of Federal elections there is still more that must be
done.
Specifically, that we should be mindful of the provision of voting
systems for in-person voting and allow for sufficient machines to serve
the population that will cast ballots at each polling location during
early voting and on election day.
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) mission in
cybersecurity and infrastructure protection is focused on enhancing
greater collaboration on cybersecurity across the 16 critical
infrastructure sectors and the sharing of cyber threat information
between the private sector and Federal, State, and local partners.
This committee will work hand-and-glove with the House Judiciary
and House Administration Committees as well as the Senate Committees to
ensure that the tools applied to the current threat to our elections is
effectively and adequately addressed.
We know the threats that computing devices and systems face, which
are almost too numerous to count:
Bot-nets;
Ransom-ware;
Zero Day Events;
Mal-ware;
Denial-of-Service Attacks;
Distributed Denial-of-Service Attacks;
Pharming;
Phishing;
Data Theft;
Data Breaches;
SQL Injection;
Man-in-the-middle attack.
The list goes on, but suffice it to say that as hard as one person
in our Government is working to stop cyber attacks there are likely
another thousand attempting to breach a system or device owned by a
United States citizen.
During the 2016 election we learned of new threats from cyber space
that go far beyond any that would have been considered in previous
elections.
This Congress is poised to do the hard work of delving into the
issue of Russian involvement in our national election and providing
solutions.
The work today must focus on election recovery should a serious
cyber incident occur during an election.
Vulnerabilities of computing systems are not limited to intentional
attacks, but can include acts of nature, human error, or technology
failing to perform as intended.
I am particularly concerned that so many jurisdictions rely on
electronic poll books, to check-in voters before issuing them ballots,
with no paper back-ups.
Finally, the use of untrustworthy paperless electronic voting
machines without sufficient paper ballot options will come to an end
when H.R. 1 becomes law.
The right and better approach to election cybersecurity is to be
prepared and not need options for voters to cast ballots should voting
systems fail, rather than being unprepared and needing options for
voters to cast ballots during an election that are not available.
We must be steadfast in our resolve to have a strong shield to
defend civilian and critical infrastructure networks for all threats
foreign and domestic.
I look forward to the testimony of today's witnesses.
Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. I would like to extend a welcome to our
first panel of witnesses. First I would like to welcome Chris
Krebs, the director of DHS's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency back to testify before this panel. Director
Krebs has been at the helm of DHS's cybersecurity activities
since 2017 and he has been an integral player in shaping and
developing the Department's election security capabilities.
Next I am pleased to welcome Mr. Tom Hicks, the current
chairman of the U.S. Election Assistance Commission, and also
congratulate him on swearing in a new batch of election
assistance commissioners.
We had the opportunity to hear from the chairman in 2017,
when he came to speak before the Congressional Task Force on
Election Security. I look forward to hearing about his work
since that time. Without objection, the witnesses' full
statements will be inserted in the record. I now ask each
witness to summarize his statement for 5 minutes, beginning
with Mr. Krebs.
STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER C. KREBS, DIRECTOR, CYBERSECURITY AND
INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY AGENCY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY
Mr. Krebs. Thank you. Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member
Rogers, and Members of the committee. Good morning and thank
you for the opportunity to testify regarding the Department of
Homeland Security's efforts to secure the vote. First, however,
I would like to, once again, thank this committee for its
leadership in establishing the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, or CISA.
By creating our new agency and law, Congress formally
recognized DHS's role as the leader of the National effort to
safeguard Federal networks and critical infrastructure from
cyber and physical threats. On behalf of the agency, once
again, thank you. This morning, I want to update this committee
on the progress made over the last 2 years working with the
election community.
CISA's election security mission is clear, to support the
efforts of election officials and their private-sector partners
consistent with the Constitution, existing law, and electoral
tradition. Since 2016 we have learned quite a bit through
partners like the Election Assistance Commission, and thousands
of election officials across the country, like you will hear in
the next panel, that know elections.
They know their systems. They know what they need to
conduct a successful election. Over the last 2 years, in
focused, oftentimes humbling engagements, we have become
partners with the election community. For the 2018 election, we
worked with all 50 States, over 1,400 local and territorial
election offices, 6 election associations, and 12 election
vendors.
Our approach is threefold: Making sure the community has--
the election community has the information they need to defend
their systems, making sure the election community has the
technical support and tools they need to defend their systems,
and building enduring partnering--partnerships to enhance
resilience, and advance security efforts together.
In 2018 we focused on building scalable, repeatable
mechanisms to dramatically grow our information-sharing
capabilities. The Elections Infrastructure Information Sharing
and Analysis Center, or EI-ISAC was established. By Election
Day, EI-ISAC had over 1,400 members, the fastest-growing ISAC
of any critical infrastructure sector.
We share contextualized threat information and actionable--
threat intelligence and actionable information that was
enriched through our close partnership with the intelligence
community and law enforcement.
More importantly, State and local election officials were
sharing what they were seeing on their own networks. We also
deployed intrusion detection capabilities, or Albert Sensors,
to provide real-time detection capabilities on election
networks.
As of Election Day in 2018, these sensors offered
protections to election infrastructure and voter registration
databases for more than 90 percent of registered voters. For
reference, during the 2000 election, we were below 30 percent
of coverage.
Second, we provide technical support and services to
election officials and vendors. Initially, we offered our
standard services, including cyber hygiene, scans, and risk
invulnerability assessments that we offer Federal agencies and
other infrastructure sectors.
As we refined our understanding of election officials'
requirements, we shifted to capabilities that are quicker, less
intrusive, and can scale to more jurisdictions. This
scalability is critical because while our initial efforts in
2016 were primarily targeted in State--State election
officials, we recognize the need to increase our support to
counties and municipalities who operate elections as well.
Our Last Mile Initiative sought to provide information
customized to the local county level. This initiative provided
no-cost tailored information on cyber safeguards, threats and
risks, and a checklist of cybersecurity action items.
The final area of focus has been building enduring
partnerships toward a collective defense. While it may seem
mundane, governance, communications, coordination, training,
and planning are the critical foundational elements of our
Nation's efforts to secure our elections.
These efforts, and others, contributed to a secure 2018
election. The Department of Homeland Security and the
Department of Justice recently concluded there is no evidence
that any identified activities of a foreign government or a
foreign agent had a material impact on the integrity or
security of election infrastructure or political campaign
infrastructure used in the 2018 midterm elections.
While 2018 is behind us, the 2020 election season is
already under way. We are clear-eyed that the threat to our
democratic institutions remain, and we must continue to press
for increased security and resilience of our election systems.
Over the next 2 years, CISA will focus on expanding engagement
to the local level.
We will continue to work with election officials to improve
both, there and our understanding of risk. With that better
understanding of risk, we can support efforts by election
officials and Congress to obtain the resources they need to
secure their election systems. Once again, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before the committee today. I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Krebs follows:]
Prepared Statement of Christopher C. Krebs
February 13, 2019
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Rogers, and Members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify regarding the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) progress in reducing and
mitigating risks to our Nation's election infrastructure. DHS has
worked to establish trust-based partnerships with State and local
officials who administer our elections, and I look forward to sharing
with you an update on our work during the 2018 midterm election cycle.
Leading up to the 2018 midterms, DHS worked hand-in-hand with
Federal partners, State and local election officials, and private-
sector vendors to provide them with information and capabilities to
enable them to better defend their infrastructure. This partnership led
to a successful model that we aim to continue and improve upon in the
2020 election cycle.
Since 2016, DHS's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
(CISA) has led a voluntary partnership of Federal Government and
election officials who regularly share cybersecurity risk information.
CISA has engaged directly with election officials--coordinating
requests for assistance, risk mitigation, information sharing, and
incident response. To ensure a coordinated approach, CISA convened
stakeholders from across the Federal Government through the Election
Task Force.
The Department and the Election Assistance Commission (EAC) have
convened Federal Government and election officials regularly to share
cybersecurity risk information and to determine an effective means of
assistance. Since 2016, the Election Infrastructure Subsector (EIS)
Government Coordinating Council (GCC) has worked to establish goals and
objectives, to develop plans for the EIS partnership, and to lay the
groundwork for developing an EIS Sector-Specific Plan. Participation in
the council is voluntary and does not change the fundamental role of
State and local jurisdictions in overseeing elections.
DHS and the EAC have also worked with election vendors to launch an
industry-led Sector Coordinating Council (SCC), a self-organized, self-
run, and self-governed council with leadership designated by sector
membership. The SCC serves as the industry's principal entity for
coordinating with the Federal Government on critical infrastructure
security activities related to sector-specific strategies. This
collaboration is conducted under DHS's authority to provide a forum in
which Federal and private-sector entities can jointly engage in a broad
spectrum of activities to coordinate critical infrastructure security
and resilience efforts, which is used in each of the critical
infrastructure sectors established under Presidential Policy Directive
21, Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience. The SCC has helped
DHS further its understanding of the systems, processes, and
relationships particular to operation of the EIS.
Within the context of today's hearing, I will address our efforts
in 2018 to help enhance the security of elections that are administered
by jurisdictions around the country, along with our election-related
priorities through 2020. While there was activity targeting our
election infrastructure leading up to the midterms, this activity is
similar to what we have seen previously and occurs on the internet
every day. This activity has not been attributed to nation-state actors
and along with the Department of Justice (DOJ), we concluded that there
is no evidence to date that any identified activities of a foreign
government or foreign agent had a material impact on the integrity or
security of election infrastructure or political or campaign
infrastructure used in the 2018 midterm elections.
assessing the threat
The Department regularly coordinates with the intelligence
community and law enforcement partners on potential threats to the
homeland. Among non-Federal partners, DHS has engaged with State and
local officials, as well as relevant private-sector entities, to assess
the scale and scope of malicious cyber activity potentially targeting
the U.S. election infrastructure. Election infrastructure includes the
information and communications technology, capabilities, physical
assets, and technologies that enable the registration and validation of
voters; the casting, transmission, tabulation, and reporting of votes;
and the certification, auditing, and verification of elections.
In addition to working directly with State and local officials over
the past 2 years, we have partnered with trusted third parties to
analyze relevant cyber data, including the Elections Infrastructure
Information Sharing and Analysis Center (EI-ISAC), the National
Association of Secretaries of State, and the National Association of
State Election Directors. DHS field personnel deployed around the
country furthered information sharing and enhanced outreach.
enhancing security
During the 2018 midterms, CISA provided a coordinated response from
DHS and its Federal partners to plan for, prepare for, and mitigate
risk to election infrastructure. Working with election infrastructure
stakeholders was essential to ensuring a more secure election. CISA and
our stakeholders increased awareness of potential vulnerabilities and
provided capabilities to enhance the security of U.S. election
infrastructure as well as that of our democratic allies.
Election officials across the country have a long-standing history
of working both individually and collectively to reduce risks and
ensure the integrity of their elections. In partnering with these
officials through both new and on-going engagements, CISA will continue
to work to provide value-added--yet voluntary--services to support
their efforts to secure elections in the 2020 election cycle.
improving coordination with state, local, tribal, territorial, and
private-sector partners
Increasingly, the Nation's election infrastructure leverages
information technology for efficiency and convenience, but also exposes
systems to cybersecurity risks, just like in any other enterprise
environment. Just like with other sectors, CISA helps stakeholders in
Federal departments and agencies, State, local, Tribal, and territorial
(SLTT) governments, and the private sector to manage these
cybersecurity risks. Consistent with our long-standing partnerships
with State and local governments, we have been working with election
officials to share information about cybersecurity risks, and to
provide voluntary resources and technical assistance.
CISA works with the EI-ISAC to provide threat and vulnerability
information to State and local officials. Through funding by CISA, the
Center for Internet Security created and continues to operate the EI-
ISAC. The EI-ISAC has representatives co-located with CISA's National
Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center (NCCIC) to enable
regular collaboration and access to information and services for
election officials.
providing technical assistance and sharing information
Knowing what to do when a security incident happens--whether
physical or cyber--before it happens is critical. CISA supports
election officials with incident response planning including
participating in exercises and reviewing incident response playbooks.
Crisis communications is a core component of these efforts, ensuring
officials are able to communicate transparently and authoritatively
when an incident unfolds. In some cases, we do this directly with State
and local jurisdictions. In others, we partner with outside
organizations. We recognize that securing our Nation's systems is a
shared responsibility, and we are leveraging partnerships to advance
that mission. CISA actively promotes a range of services including:
Cyber hygiene service for internet-facing systems.--Through this
automated, remote scan, CISA provides a report identifying
vulnerabilities and mitigation recommendations to improve the
cybersecurity of systems connected to the internet, such as on-line
voter registration systems, election night reporting systems, and other
internet-connected election management systems.
Risk and vulnerability assessments.--We have prioritized State and
local election systems upon request, and increased the availability of
risk and vulnerability assessments. These in-depth, on-site evaluations
include a system-wide understanding of vulnerabilities, focused on both
internal and external systems. We provide a full report of
vulnerabilities and recommended mitigations following the testing.
Incident response assistance.--We encourage election officials to
report suspected malicious cyber activity to NCCIC. Upon request, the
NCCIC can provide assistance in identifying and remediating a cyber
incident. Information reported to the NCCIC is also critical to the
Federal Government's ability to broadly assess malicious attempts to
infiltrate election systems. This technical information will also be
shared with other State officials so they have the ability to defend
their own systems from similar malicious activity.
Information sharing.--CISA maintains numerous platforms and
services to share relevant information on cyber incidents. Election
officials may also receive information directly from the NCCIC. The
NCCIC also works with the EI-ISAC, allowing election officials to
connect with the EI-ISAC or their State chief information officer to
rapidly receive information they can use to protect their systems. Best
practices, cyber threat information, and technical indicators, some of
which had been previously classified, have been shared with election
officials in thousands of State and local jurisdictions. In all cases,
the information sharing and use of such cybersecurity threat
indicators, or information related to cybersecurity risks and incidents
complies with applicable lawful restrictions on its collection and use
and with DHS policies protective of privacy and civil liberties.
Classified information sharing.--To most effectively share
information with all of our partners--not just those with security
clearances--DHS works with the intelligence community to rapidly
declassify relevant intelligence or provide as much intelligence as
possible at the lowest classification level possible. While DHS
prioritizes declassifying information to the extent possible, DHS also
provides Classified information to cleared stakeholders, as
appropriate. DHS has been working with State chief election officials
and additional election staff in each State to provide them with
security clearances.
Field-based cybersecurity advisors and protective security
advisors.--CISA has more than 130 cybersecurity and protective security
personnel available to provide actionable information and connect
election officials to a range of tools and resources to improve the
cybersecurity preparedness of election systems, and to secure the
physical site security of voting machine storage and polling places.
These advisors are also available to assist with planning and incident
management for both cyber and physical incidents.
Physical and protective security tools, training, and resources.--
CISA provides guidance and tools to improve the security of polling
sites and other physical election infrastructure. This guidance can be
found at www.dhs.gov/hometown-security. This guidance helps to train
administrative and volunteer staff on identifying and reporting
suspicious activities, active-shooter scenarios, and what to do if they
suspect an improvised explosive device.
election security efforts leading up to the 2018 midterms
In the weeks leading up to the 2018 midterm elections, DHS
officials supported a high degree of preparedness Nation-wide. DHS
provided free technical cybersecurity assistance, continuous
information sharing, and expertise to election offices and campaigns.
EI-ISAC threat alerts were shared with all 50 States, over 1,400 local
and territorial election offices, 6 election associations, and 12
election vendors.
In August 2018, DHS hosted a ``Tabletop the Vote'' exercise, a 3-
day, first-of-its-kind exercise to assist our Federal partners, State
and local election officials, and private-sector vendors in identifying
best practices and areas for improvement in cyber incident planning,
preparedness, identification, response, and recovery. Through tabletop
simulation of a realistic incident scenario, exercise participants
discussed and explored potential impacts to voter confidence, voting
operations, and the integrity of elections. Partners for this exercise
included 44 States and the District of Columbia; EAC; Department of
Defense, including the Office of the Secretary of Defense, U.S. Cyber
Command, and the National Security Agency; DOJ; Federal Bureau of
Investigation; Office of the Director of National Intelligence; and
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).
Through the ``Last Mile Initiative,'' DHS worked closely with State
and local governments to outline critical cybersecurity actions that
should be implemented at the county level. For political campaigns, DHS
disseminated a cybersecurity best practices checklist to help
candidates and their teams better secure their devices and systems.
On Election Day, DHS deployed field staff across the country to
maintain situational awareness and connect election officials to
appropriate incident response professionals, if needed. In many cases,
these field staff were co-located with election officials in their own
security operations centers. DHS also hosted the National Cybersecurity
Situational Awareness Room, an on-line portal for State and local
election officials and vendors that facilitates rapid sharing of
information. It gives election officials virtual access to the 24/7
operational watch floor of the CISA NCCIC. This setup allowed DHS to
monitor potential threats across multiple States at once and respond in
a rapid fashion.
Our goal has been for the American people to enter the voting booth
with the confidence that their vote counts and is counted correctly. I
am proud to say that our efforts over the past 2 years have resulted in
the most secure election in modern history.
no evidence of election interference
The Secretary of Homeland Security and the Acting Attorney General
have concluded that there is no evidence to date that any identified
activities of a foreign government or foreign agent had a material
impact on the integrity or security of election infrastructure or
political or campaign infrastructure used in the 2018 midterm elections
for the U.S. Congress. The activity we did see was consistent with what
we shared in the weeks leading up to the election. Russia, and other
foreign countries, including China and Iran, conducted influence
activities and messaging campaigns targeted at the United States to
promote their strategic interests.
election security efforts moving forward
Ensuring the security of our electoral process remains a vital
National interest and one of our highest priorities at DHS. In the run-
up to the 2020 election season, DHS will continue to prioritize
elections by broadening the reach and depth of information sharing and
assistance that we are providing to State and local election officials,
and continuing to share information on threats and mitigation tactics.
DHS goals for the 2020 election cycle include improving the
efficiency and effectiveness of election audits, continued
incentivizing the patching of election systems, and working with the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and the States to
develop cybersecurity profiles utilizing the NIST Cybersecurity
Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure. We will also continue
to engage any political entity that wants our help. DHS offers these
entities the same tools and resources that we offer to State and local
election officials, including trainings, cyber hygiene support,
information sharing, and other resources.
DHS has made tremendous strides and has been committed to working
collaboratively with those on the front lines of administering our
elections to secure election infrastructure from risks. Just last week,
DHS officials provided updates to the secretaries of state, State
election directors, and members of the GCC and SCC on the full package
of election security resources that are available from the Federal
Government, along with a roadmap on how to improve coordination across
these entities. DHS also worked with our intelligence community
partners to provide a Classified 1-day read-in for these individuals
regarding the current threats facing our election infrastructure.
We will remain transparent as well as agile in combating and
securing our physical and cyber infrastructure. However, we recognize
that there is a significant technology deficit across SLTT governments,
and State and local election systems, in particular. It will take
significant and continual investment to ensure that election systems
across the Nation are upgraded and secure, with vulnerable systems
retired. These efforts require a whole-of-Government approach. The
President and this administration are committed to addressing these
risks.
Our voting infrastructure is diverse, subject to local control, and
has many checks and balances. As the threat environment evolves, DHS
will continue to work with Federal agencies, State and local partners,
and private-sector entities to enhance our understanding of the threat;
and to make essential physical and cybersecurity tools and resources
available to the public and private sectors to increase security and
resiliency.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the committee today,
and I look forward to your questions.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you for your testimony. I now
recognize Mr. Hicks to summarize his statement for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF THOMAS HICKS, COMMISSIONER, U.S. ELECTION
ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
Mr. Hicks. Good morning, Chairman Thompson and Ranking
Member Rogers and Member of the committee. I am pleased to
appear you today to offer testimony on the pressing issue of
how to build partnerships to better protect American elections.
Today's hearing comes 3 months after the 2018 midterm
elections. Early estimates indicate that a record number of
eligible Americans cast their vote in November. I congratulate
the Nation's election administrators and their teams for a job
well done, inspiring work that the staff and I saw, first-hand,
as we travel across the Nation in the weeks surrounding the
election.
This work, coupled with improved lines of communications
between Federal, State, and local officials and Federal
agencies that serve them resulted in no indication of foreign
attacks on our Nation's election infrastructure.
The EAC is the only Federal agency focused solely on
elections. This focus is of great value to election
administrators and the voters they serve. The commission's
mission and other mandates established under the Help America
Vote Act, HAVA, are as relevant today as at any time since the
watershed bipartisan legislation was signed into law.
We commissioners and the EAC staff stand ready to roll up
our sleeves to address the unique needs of those we serve. Just
last week, two new commissioners, Benjamin Hovland and Ben
Palmer--Donald Palmer were sworn in, joining Vice Chair
McCormick and myself to make up a full slate of commissioners
the agency has had in nearly a decade.
Today's hearing and many of the commission's own efforts
focus on election security, which is only one key component of
election administration. I have attached to my written
statement, a diagram that demonstrates the many different
competencies that require election administrator's awareness
and attention, knowledge of election law and election
technology, to vote tabulation and post-election audits.
Election officials must operate in each of these areas with
no room for error. That is why the EAC works to provide its
resources to each of our competencies. That is why we partner
with other Federal agencies to leverage their subject-matter
expertise.
Some of the EAC's Federal partners include DOD, DHS,
Department of Justice, National Institute of Standards and
Technology, and the United States Postal Service. This morning
I will briefly address the EAC's work to help States secure
their elections, including efforts to swiftly and responsibly
distribute $380 million in newly appropriated HAVA to States
and the on-going work to test and certify voting systems.
In the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018, Congress
appropriated $380 million in HAVA to the States, in eligible
territories for projects and programs to improve the
administration of Federal elections. Within 3 months of the
appropriation, the EAC received distributed requests for 100
percent of the funds from all 55 eligible jurisdictions and
States.
One hundred percent of the funds were quickly distributed
to eligible States and territories to draw down. The EAC staff
is currently exam the--examining the Federal financial reports
regarding how States spent funds last year, the recent Federal
furlough has slightly delayed this process.
But from our early assessments, we believe that about 58
percent of the funds went toward shoring up election security
and about 33 percent of the funds was used to purchase voting
equipment.
After we complete our 2018 spending analysis, we will
provide more specific details about the expenditures and the
State's future plans for using HAVA funds. The distribution of
HAVA funds is only one example of the EAC's work to strengthen
election security. The EAC serves as a central partner with DHS
in ensuring that--the success of our National security efforts.
DHS has stated that the election security for Government
Coordinating Council, the GCC, was formed faster than any other
similar critical infrastructure sector council today. The EAC
took a needed early leadership role in working toward this
accomplishment.
Building on that success, the EAC convened discussions
between election system vendors and DHS for the formulation of
the Sector Coordinating Council, the SCC. Both the SCC and the
GCC were formulated before the 2018 election year, less than 1
year from the critical infrastructure designation by DHS.
In addition, ahead of the 2018 mid-term elections, the EAC
focused on steps our commission could take to further serve
election officials operating in a new threat environment.
On multiple occasions, the EAC brought together election
officials, lawmakers, security experts, academics, and
Government partners, for discussion and events to tackle this
vital issue. While taking--talking about election security at
forums is important, so is hands-on training.
The EAC staff was involved in the establishment of Harvard
University's Belfer Center tabletop exercise, which have since
been conducted across the country. In addition, since 2015, the
EAC has presented its election official as I.T. manager,
training to officials representing hundreds of elections
jurisdictions across the country and we will increase our
efforts following the 2016 election.
This training is available on-line through FVAP program,
that many more election officials can easily access to complete
these efforts. The EAC has also produced a video and supporting
materials to help local election officials explain the many
levels of election security for their jurisdictions.
The final area I will highlight today during my testimony
is the EAC's testing and certification program. The EAC--the
Help America Vote Act charges the EAC with administrating a
Federal program for setting voluntary voting system guidelines
and testing for vendors may choose to have EAC accredited and
monitored labs test their voting systems against those
guidelines for certification.
The guidelines contain requirements for security as well as
other important components such as accessibility, usability,
and interoperability. These components and functions of the
same are deliberated and developed in public working groups
under the direction of the EAC's Technical Guidelines
Committee, which is chaired by the director and under secretary
of commerce for standard and technology.
After development and approval by the TGDC, the voluntary
guidelines are submitted to the EAC's executive director,
provided for the EAC's Standards Board and Board of Advisors,
published for public comment and presented to the EAC's
commissioners for consideration and approval.
Last spring, the EAC conveyed its advisory boards to review
and comment on the adoptions of the newest versions of the
guidelines VVSG 2.0. Both boards recommended that the EAC adopt
VVSG 2.0. Now that a quorum--I ask for 1 additional minute or
30 seconds.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Thompson. Granted.
Mr. Hicks. Thank you, sir.
Quorum has restored to the EAC. We anticipate that the VVSG
2.0 will soon be posted for public comment and we will hold
public hearings on the proposed guidelines.
Members of the committee, the EAC's mission includes
supporting election officials across the country as they
administer Federal elections and the EAC is committed to that
work, to always seeking better ways to do it. I welcome your
feedback and I look forward to answering questions you may
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hicks follows:]
Prepared Statement of Thomas Hicks
February 12, 2019
Good morning Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Rogers, and Members
of the committee. I am pleased to appear before you today to offer
testimony on the pressing issue of how to build partnerships to better
protect American elections. As the 2020 Presidential Election
approaches and jurisdictions across the Nation prepare to host a number
of State and local elections in the months ahead, I assure you that
supporting election officials in their work--including providing
election security tools and resources--is one of the most important
responsibilities of the U.S. Election Assistance Commission, better
known as the EAC.
Today's hearing comes 3 months after the 2018 midterm election.
Voter confidence in our election system is an issue the EAC often
publicly addressed ahead of last year's election and it is
intrinsically tied to the topics I will discuss today. With early
estimates indicating that a record number of all eligible Americans
participated in the 2018 midterms, it is important to recognize the
incredible ingenuity and care that election officials and those with
whom they work demonstrated ahead of the midterms and continue to
exhibit today. It is this work that shores up the very foundation of
our democracy and instills voter confidence. EAC Commissioners and the
Commission's staff saw this first-hand in the weeks surrounding the
midterm election as we traveled the Nation to observe everything from
pre-election preparations to post-election audits. In 2018, the work of
our Nation's election administrators and their teams, coupled with a
dramatically improved line of communication between Federal, State, and
local election officials and the Federal agencies that serve them,
resulted in no indication of foreign attacks on our Nation's election
infrastructure. I am proud of the role the EAC played in that
coordinated effort.
The EAC is the only Federal agency that focuses solely on
elections, and this focus is of great value to election administrators
and the voters they serve. The EAC's mission and other mandates
established under the Help America Vote Act (HAVA) are as relevant
today as at any other time since that watershed, bipartisan legislation
was signed into law. When HAVA passed HAVA in 2002, Congress set out to
make sweeping and much-needed reforms to the Nation's voting process.
Congress established the EAC to serve as the Federal leader in helping
States carry out that vision, and the Commission has done so
successfully. The EAC has helped election officials in each State and
U.S. territory identify and implement legally-required changes to the
way America votes. The Commission has a strong relationship with State
and local election leaders and the voters they serve, which makes
progress possible and remains of great value as lawmakers consider
additional ways to support the administration of Federal elections.
We Commissioners and the exemplary EAC staff stand ready to roll up
our sleeves to address the unique needs of those we serve. Just this
week, two new EAC commissioners, Benjamin Hovland and Donald Palmer,
were sworn in, joining Vice Chair Christy McCormick and me to make up
the first full quorum of Commissioners the agency has had in nearly a
decade. While the EAC has made great strides over the years, we always
seek to do better and to do more.
Certainly one of the primary focuses of our efforts, election
security is only one component of election administration. I have
attached a diagram to this testimony that demonstrates the many
different competencies that require election administrator awareness
and attention. Election officials must operate in each of these areas,
so the EAC works on each of them. Knowledge of election law, finance,
accessibility standards, security considerations, election technology,
public relations and human resources are all core on-going election
official responsibilities. As officials prepare to administer an
election, they must be experts on mail, street file maintenance, voter
registration, military and overseas voting, local candidates and
campaign finance laws, project management, polling places and real
estate, advance voting, and logistics. On Election Day and beyond,
election officials must also direct activities such as voting and
tabulation, canvassing, auditing, administering recounts, and carrying
out list maintenance. Many of these topics are covered in the EAC's
Election Administration and Voting Survey report to Congress, including
the 2018 report that is under way now and will be delivered to you this
summer.
It is worth noting that in addition to this work, the EAC provides
voters with vital resources and assistance needed to register to vote
and to cast ballots, and it includes administering the National
clearinghouse of election administration information to continually
equip our partners in Congress, State and local government, private
industry, advocacy organizations, other Federal agencies, academia, and
others in the elections industry with the information they require and
rely on.
The EAC also works alongside Federal partners to leverage their
subject-matter expertise to augment the EAC's whole-of-elections
perspective with specialized products. The EAC works with these
partners to produce EAC products, help other agencies better develop
products for election stakeholders, and help our stakeholders
understand and integrate these products into the context of their array
of responsibilities. These partners include the Department of Defense,
the Department of Justice, the Department of Homeland Security, the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), and the United
States Postal Service.
Today I will focus my remarks on election security, one of the most
integral components of the EAC's work. The EAC has worked diligently to
help States secure their elections, especially in months leading up to
last year's election. The EAC expeditiously distributed newly-
appropriated HAVA funds to the States, assisted our Federal partners in
establishing and managing the critical infrastructure operational
framework, continued to test and certify voting systems, and
highlighted and distributed important best practices in election
administration. This work yielded substantial benefits in 2018 and
continues as we look ahead to 2020.
distributing newly-appropriated hava funds
In the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018, Congress
appropriated $380 million in HAVA funds to the States and eligible
territories for projects and programs to improve the administration of
Federal elections. Within 3 months of the appropriation, the EAC
received disbursement requests for 100 percent of the funds from all 55
eligible States and territories, a remarkable percentage, and 100
percent of the funds were quickly made available for the eligible
States and territories to draw down.
Less than 2 weeks after these new funds were signed into law by
President Trump, the EAC issued Notice of Grant Award letters to each
State. Within 3 weeks of the signing, Missouri became the first State
to request its funds. In the subsequent 10 weeks, the EAC conducted a
webcast public forum to explain how the funding would proceed, worked
directly with the National Association of Secretaries of State (NASS)
and the National Association of State Election Directors (NASED) to
share information, conducted multiple webinars to further discuss how
the funds may be used, consulted with members of the disability
community to hear their views on use of the funds, and had frequent
contact with each State in an effort to move the funds quickly.
The EAC website also provides access to a set of Frequently Asked
Questions regarding the funds. The attached map, also on the EAC
website (www.eac.gov), shows the amount of funds appropriated to each
State. The EAC fulfilled its promise to get the funds to the States as
quickly as possible, and the Commission continues to consult with
States and territories regarding the proper use of the funds, which
were disbursed after the States provided a short narrative describing
plans for how the funds will be used.
The EAC has used the new HAVA funds not just as an opportunity to
provide much-needed financial support to the States, but also as a
mechanism to promote best-practice information sharing among election
administrators. Details from the State plan documents have been shared
with the entire election community and on the EAC website. It is
essential that the States and territories have access to the wealth of
ideas and innovative approaches contained in other States'
individualized planned activities as they plan their own use of the
funds. As we continue to work closely with the State and local leaders
charged with spending these funds, the EAC's staff will continue to
compile the information we receive so that the election community and
others will have access to particulars of how the States and
territories are expending their funds to further update and secure
their election systems.
The EAC's staff is currently examining Federal Financial Reports
regarding how States spent funds last year. The recent Federal furlough
has slightly delayed this process, but from our early assessment, we
believe that about 58 percent of funds spent went toward shoring up
election security and about 33 percent were used to purchase voting
equipment. After we complete our 2018 spending analysis, we will
provide more specific details about those expenditures and about
States' future plans for using new HAVA funds. I've attached to this
testimony two charts detailing how States initially indicated they
planned to spend funds and the percentage of total funds allotted for
activities such as election security and updating election equipment.
critical infrastructure activities
The distribution of HAVA funds is only one example of the EAC's
work related to election security. The EAC has been serving as a
central partner with the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) in
ensuring the success of this National security effort well before the
2017 Critical Infrastructure designation by former Secretary Jeh
Johnson. The DHS has stated that the election sector's Government
Coordinating Council (GCC) was formed faster than any other similar
critical infrastructure sector council to date. The EAC took an early
leadership role in working toward this accomplishment, and we recognize
it as an exemplary proof-point of how local, State, and Federal
Governments can effectively work together toward the shared goal of
protecting our Nation's election infrastructure.
Building on that success, the EAC also convened discussions between
election system vendors and the DHS for the formation of the Sector
Coordinating Council (SCC). Thanks to the swift establishment of the
GCC and the well-established relationships between the EAC and election
equipment vendors, work on the SCC began in the summer of 2017, and its
official formation meeting took place before the end of last year. Both
councils were functioning before the 2018 election year, less than 1
year from the Critical Infrastructure designation by the DHS.
The EAC Chair serves on the GCC Executive Committee, and all EAC
Commissioners are chartered members of the GCC. Like many members of
the GCC, the EAC is seeking security clearances through the DHS and has
been assured that the Department will be addressing those security
requests soon.
During the last Presidential Election cycle, the EAC was a key
player in Federal efforts to share vital security information with the
States and educate our Federal partners about ways to best serve the
needs of election administrators. For example, the EAC:
Distributed urgent security alerts and threat indicators
from the DHS and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) to
States and territories to help protect election systems from
specific cybersecurity threats.
Met on multiple occasions with staff from the DHS, the FBI,
and the White House to discuss specific and nonspecific
threats, State and local election system security and
protocols, and the dynamics of the election system and its
8,000-plus jurisdictions Nation-wide.
Served as the Federal Government's primary communication
channel to provide real-time cybersecurity information to
election officials around the country. This information
included current data on cyber threats, tactics for protecting
election systems against these threats, and the availability
and value of DHS resources for protecting cyber assets.
Participated in and convened conference calls with Federal
officials, secretaries of state, and other State chief election
officials, local election administration officials, Federal law
enforcement, and Federal agency personnel to discuss the
prospect of designating elections as part of the Nation's
critical infrastructure. These discussions focused on topics
such as coordinating security flashes from the FBI, the
implications of a critical infrastructure designation,
education on the Nation's election system, and the dynamics of
successfully communicating information to every level of
election officials responsible for running the Nation's
election system.
Provided DHS with perspective, information, and data related
to the election system, introductions to officials in the
election community, and information that assisted the agency
with shaping communications in a manner that would be useful to
the States and local election officials.
Published a white paper entitled ``U.S. Election Systems as
Critical Infrastructure'' that provided a basic understanding
of critical infrastructure for election officials.
Contributed to multiple foundational DHS documents used to
structure the Elections Systems Critical Infrastructure
designation and sector.
Ahead of the 2018 Midterm Election, the EAC focused on steps our
commission could take to further serve election officials operating in
the new threat environment. The EAC brought together election
officials, security officials, academics, and Federal Government
partners for an Election 2018 kick-off summit at the National Press
Club in January 2018. Just 1 month ahead of the mid-term election in
October 2018, we gathered a similar audience here in the Capitol
Visitors Center for an election readiness summit that featured, among
others, Senators Blunt and Klobuchar, as well as high-level officials
from DHS and the National Counterintelligence and Security Center.
These events and others like them throughout 2018 raised awareness of
the security preparations election officials had under way and the
resources available to the States and localities to help with this
critical work.
While talking about election security at forums is important, the
EAC also knows the importance of training. EAC staff was intricately
involved in the establishment of Harvard University's Belfer Center
Table-Top Exercises, which have since been conducted across the
country. During the past year, the EAC has also developed and presented
its ``Election Official as IT Manager'' training to officials
representing hundreds of election jurisdictions across the country, and
we are working with the DHS to put this training on-line through the
FedVTE platform so that many more election officials can easily access
it.
The EAC also produced a video and supporting meeting materials to
help local election officials explain the many levels of election
security at their jurisdiction. The video was designed to be viewed at
civic group meetings and election worker trainings. It can also be
customized by jurisdictions, and some States are tailoring the video to
their voters and processes. We plan further work in this regard. In
addition, the EAC Commissioners continuously meet with State and local
election officials at regional conferences across the country. These
visits allow the Commissioners to apprise officials of best practices,
promote resources available from the EAC and our Federal partners in
agencies such as the United States Postal Service, the Federal Voting
Assistance Program (FVAP) within the Department of Defense, the
Department of Justice, and the DHS, and discuss current concerns and
topics in election administration, such as contingency planning,
accessibility, voter registration, and technology management.
On Election Day 2018, we were pleased to have our newly-hired chief
information officer and the head of our Testing and Certification
Program on-site with other Federal agencies and key election
stakeholders who gathered at the National Cybersecurity &
Communications Integration Center (NCCIC). We are proud of the role we
played last year, and we continue to seek new ways to provide election
security support to State and local election leaders.
testing and certification/voluntary voting system guidelines
The Help America Vote Act charges the EAC with administering a
Federal program for setting a voluntary National standard for testing
and certificating voting systems. This testing standard is the EAC's
Voluntary Voting System Guidelines (VVSG), and vendors may choose to
have EAC-accredited and monitored labs test their voting systems
against these guidelines for certification. The guidelines contain
requirements for security, as well as other important components--such
as accessibility, usability, and interoperability. In fact, while
security is a guiding consideration of certification, so is
accessibility for voters with disabilities and voters with limited
English proficiency.
These considerations are deliberated and developed in public
working groups under the direction of the EAC's Technical Guidelines
Development Committee (TGDC), which is chaired by the director and
under secretary of commerce for standards and technology. This TGDC's
membership is made up of technical and scientific experts from fields
such as security, accessibility, voting machine production, and voting
machine use. After development and approval by the TGDC, the voluntary
guidelines are submitted to the EAC's executive director, provided to
the EAC's Standards Board and the Board of Advisors, published for
public comment, and presented to the EAC's commissioners for
consideration and approval. Last Spring, the EAC convened its advisory
boards to review and comment on the adoption of the newest version of
the voluntary guidelines, VVSG 2.0. Both boards recommended that the
EAC adopt VVSG 2.0. Now that a quorum has been restored at the EAC, we
anticipate that the VVSG 2.0 will soon be posted for public comment, we
will hold public hearings on the proposed guidelines, and the agency
has the pieces in place for final consideration.
While the EAC has been hard at work on the newest version of the
VVSG, the EAC has not stopped its on-going work to rigorously review,
test, and certify voting systems. These reviews are referred to as test
campaigns, and in these campaigns EAC accredited laboratories test
vendor-submitted voting systems against the standards contained in the
VVSG. Once a system successfully completes a test campaign, the results
of the campaign are transmitted to the EAC's executive director for
certification of the voting system to the standard against which it was
tested. If the EAC's executive director agrees that the voting system
has conformed with the standard, it is certified as such and assigned a
certification number. It takes the EAC approximately 8 to 12 months to
certify a newly-submitted voting system. If the system has already been
certified and the vendor is making an upgrade or revising a component,
it may take as little as a few weeks or as much as 6 months to upgrade
or change.
In addition to the actual certification of the voting systems, the
EAC's Testing and Certification Program continually conducts quality
monitoring of all EAC-certified systems and audits the quality of the
EAC-accredited test labs. Monitoring of the voting systems occurs
throughout the entire span of manufacturing and life of service,
including manufacturing facility audits, field system review and
testing, and field anomaly reporting from manufacturers and election
officials.
conclusion
Members of the committee, the EAC's mission includes supporting
election officials across the country as they administer Federal
elections, and we are committed to that work and to always seeking
better ways to do it. The importance of election security and how the
newly-appropriated HAVA Funds will assist States remain a primary focus
and top priority for the commission. I am honored to support the
important work carried out by our Nation's election administrators each
and every day, and I congratulate them on a job well done in 2018. The
EAC looks forward to working closely with them ahead of the 2020
Presidential Election. I welcome your feedback, and we look forward to
answering questions you may have.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. I thank the
witnesses for their testimony. I remind each Member that he or
she will have 5 minutes to question the panel. I now recognize
myself for questions.
Director Krebs, given the 2019 World-wide Threat Assessment
that warned that the U.S. adversaries and strategic competitors
probably are already looking at the 2020 U.S. elections, how
confident are you that our election infrastructure, as it is at
this moment, is secure against cyber attacks?
Mr. Krebs. Chairman, thank you for the question. I
certainly think that, just like any other I.T. system, the
election infrastructure bears additional securing and
resilience measures. But I will say that compared to where we
were in 2016, not just from a fundamental I.T. security
perspective, but from a collaboration working across the
different stakeholder groups, we are light-years ahead of where
we were. Most importantly, we have greater visibility both of
the threats that are incoming, but also how they would work
across the ecosystem and across the infrastructure.
I mentioned earlier, the Albert sensor coverage that we
have, less than 30 percent in 2016, over 90 percent in 2018,
that gives us near-real-time visibility in what is happening
across the networks.
The last thing I will add here, the area that I think we
need to invest the most as a Nation, is ensuring auditability
across infrastructure. It is a key tenant of I.T. security. If
you don't know what is happening and if you can't check back
across the system, what is happening in the system, then you
don't really have security. So, to the extent that we can focus
on an outcome of auditability throughout the process end-to-
end, that is the greatest area of need in my view.
Chairman Thompson. So, is that a matter of software or
training or what?
Mr. Krebs. Yes, sir, everything. One area that we can focus
on, and the good news is from my understanding and I would
defer to Chairman Hicks, every State is--that is not already on
a paper-type ballot, whether it is hand-marked or whatever--
every State, including the 5 that are on electronic machines
right now, are moving toward paper.
Paper helps that auditability process. Then you have after-
election audits on the backend, but it is not just about the
voting day, it is also all the way through the voter
registration process, making sure that you have visibility and
understanding of what is happening in those databases.
Chairman Thompson. Right. So, Mr. Hicks, are you concerned
that so much of what we use is from international sources and
the potential for supply chain compromise is there or has that
issue come up in your review?
Mr. Hicks. It has come up in our reviews but I would like
to say that it is difficult to function in a world economy and
not have some form of components coming from overseas. I
believe that that is being looked at but I believe that we can
still move forward with a secure election process because the
EAC certifies voting systems and that is all components within
those systems for the voluntary voting system guidelines and
standards and we certify the labs that do that as well. So I
have very little concern in foreign components overall because
I have great faith in our labs and the overall structure of our
voluntary voting system guidelines to ensure that those systems
are functioning the way that the American people want them to.
Chairman Thompson. Mr. Krebs do you want to comment on
that?
Mr. Krebs. Yes, sir. So I mentioned in my opening remarks
that we have three primary areas of focus for 2020. One is
extending to locals but the second piece is better
understanding the risk across the election infrastructure. As
Chairman Hicks mentioned, supply chain concerns are certainly
in that register of risk that we are looking at but I am
actually at this point more concerned or focusing in on basic
cyber hygiene practices.
When we looked across a range of sectors and segments what
we saw was the election community still has challenges with
basic cyber hygiene and so what our area of focus is helping
with patching, helping implement multifactor authentication,
helping on phishing campaign assessments, things of that
nature.
Chairman Thompson. So before I run out of time, your
testimony indicated that all the secretaries of state had
participated in some aspect of your resources?
Mr. Krebs. Yes, sir. All 50 States have engaged with the
Department in one way, shape or form. The election
infrastructure ISAC for instance has all 50 States as members.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you, I yield to the----
Mr. Hicks. Congressman, there is one other aspect of that
that I wanted to jump on, with--Under Secretary Krebs was
speaking about, and one way to ensure that the systems are
functioning the way that they are intended is through
auditability. So once we move away from those 5 States that
don't have paper trails associated with them, I believe that
all States should be able to audit using some form of paper but
also to ensure that we continue on with the Help America Vote
Act of ensuring that those who have disabilities might not be
able to use that paper can still vote independently and
privately.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you. I yield to the Ranking Member
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Commissioner Hicks in
your opening statement you made reference to the fact that last
spring the EAC had distributed $380 million in fiscal year 2018
funds to the States to improve their elections. To date, how
many States and territories have been able to spend their
allocation? I know you said 100 percent of it had been
distributed but have they been able to spend it?
Mr. Hicks. All the States are spending that money now. They
have up to 5 years to spend the money for--for additional
things. It is basically an infrastructure grant. So if we look
toward--and continuing on with infrastructure, it won't be
built within 3 months but it would be carried on for the 5
years the Congress appropriated that money for.
Mr. Rogers. You are just starting to spend it?
Mr. Hicks. Yes.
Mr. Rogers. OK.
H.R. 1 authorizes, and this is also for Mr. Hicks, H.R. 1
authorizes--nearly $1.2 billion over the next 2 years to local
election security improvements. Is it feasible for States to
buy equipment, implement new security measures and poll
workers, trained in time for the primaries 2 years from now?
Mr. Hicks. I missed part of your question, sir.
Mr. Rogers. Given that $1.2 billion is to be spent, can the
States take that money and buy equipment, train poll workers,
and implement security measures in time for the primaries for
the 2020 elections?
Mr. Hicks. I believe States can do most of that. But again
we can't just--the States can't go to Best Buy and get that off
the shelf so most of the States are moving toward not only
purchasing new voting equipment but also other aspects of the
election process in terms of voter registration, election
audits, security overall so it is not just purchasing new
voting equipment, they are going from registration to election
night reporting.
Mr. Rogers. My point is I just don't see how they are going
to be able to get that done by the 2020 primaries and they are
right--you are talking about next March is Alabama's primary;
some of them are early as February or January of next year.
Finally, you--for Mr. Hicks, you talked about certifying that
the EAC certifies election security systems. Can you tell me
more about that certification process?
Mr. Hicks. It is voting systems overall. So basically for
voting systems, once the State decides they want to fall under
that process of our voluntary voting system guidelines, those
systems are sent by the vendors to those--to our test labs and
then certified to those sorts of standards. It is the same as
if computers or iPhones or other aspects of that, they are
tested to a certain standard.
Mr. Rogers. Can you have your staff to submit to my staff--
for the full committee staff, what those standards are,
certification standards? I would really be interested in
reviewing those.
Mr. Hicks. Well there is several of them so we just
certified 1.1 in 2015 but for the last 4 years since I have
been at the commission, we have been working on the 2.0
voluntary voting system guidelines and there is a healthy
debate going on right now between myself and the other
commissioners when ensuring that those get out for public
comment relatively soon.
Mr. Rogers. Good. Mr. Krebs, can DHS and EAC complete
supply chain security and other qualification mandates on
vendors required by H.R. 1 fast enough for States to know that
what they are buying is acceptable machines in time for the
2020 primaries?
Mr. Krebs. I am not sure. I have to think about the number
of systems, the research, the requirements that would have to
go into that. I may need to get back to you on the timeliness
of that.
Mr. Rogers. My final question is these 5 States that
currently have audit concerns, you both made reference to the
fact they are moving toward paper. Can you tell me more about
what they are doing?
Mr. Hicks. So those States are purchasing--some States are
already in line to purchase new voting equipment, like Georgia
overall. But some States are putting bids out to other
manufacturers to get some sort of paper. So it is basically
little things like buying anything. There is different models
out there and what works best for those States is what those
States are going to purchase. But there are other aspects of
voting systems that are out there--optical scan machines or
just paper-based systems overall where States are looking
toward getting those so that they can audit those at night--
after election night and so forth.
Mr. Rogers. Do you have a time line of when they expect to
be able to get that auditability?
Mr. Hicks. It is an on-going thing. So the first purchase
of voting equipment under the Help America Vote Act was more
than 15 years ago and as I--when I say how much confidence
folks have on computer systems that they purchase 15 years ago
but the EAC gives guidance on maintaining aging voting
equipment to ensure that those systems function the way they
were designed to.
So I would say that it is an on-going process so it might
not be, you know, fully completed in 2020. By 2022, 2024 as
elections continue on, more systems will be mothballed.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you. The Chair recognizes the
gentlelady from New York, Ms. Rice.
Miss Rice. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Mr. Krebs, I would like
to start with you if I could. I applaud the progress that you
have made protecting the machinery of our elections but what I
want to address now is another part of election protection, and
that is protecting the campaigns and the political party
committees from attack. Everyone is well aware of what happened
in 2016. There was the hacking of the DNC, the DCCC, and the
Clinton campaign, all hacked by Russia.
We know the subsequent use of the stolen materials have a
profound effect on the election. We also know that in 2018 the
NRCC was hacked, that being in the midterm cycle. Now I know
that on our side the DCCC launched unprecedented cybersecurity
and disinformation prevention operations. But all of that work
was done by themselves. It was not done in coordination with
any Federal agency--with the Federal Government at all even
though these are Federal campaigns.
So I want to ask you, do you think that we should rethink
how we are doing all this?
Mr. Krebs. Yes, ma'am. Thank you for the question. So
during the 2018 cycle and even to today, we have worked with
the major parties. RNC, we have conducted training--conducted
training. DNC, we have a very good relationship with the CIO.
We continue to work with the other committees so it is in our
area of engagement. I take your point though that we need to
expand and deepen and broaden that engagement. We continue to
think about the various offerings that we have whether its
capabilities, technical support information sharing, training,
those are all the areas that we are continuing to push out.
I would encourage each of you, as you are coming up on
another cycle, you know, please work with us, your own
campaigns. We have capabilities that we can offer and it is
definitely within our--it is an area of priority engagement for
us going forward.
Miss Rice. So I am glad to hear you say that. I want to ask
your opinion about whether you think using the Information
Sharing Analysis Center, the ISAC model that you use for
working with sectors like the energy and financial fields. Do
you think that that would be of help here?
Mr. Krebs. In terms of political infrastructure and
political campaigns?
Miss Rice. Yes.
Mr. Krebs. I don't have any reason to believe why it
wouldn't work.
Miss Rice. I think that that is something that we have to
look into because all of this is about sharing information when
you are being hacked and what you do about getting down
disinformation and all that kind of stuff. There were 3 States
that did not use any part of the election assistance commission
so this could be either to Mr. Hicks or to you, Mr. Krebs.
Three States--Florida, Oklahoma, and Oregon chose not to use
any part of the EAC's testing or certification program and they
were all targeted by Russian hackers in 2016.
I guess my question is are we encouraging States to
participate in the programs and I understand the tension
between, you know, the State's rights over how their elections
are run but there is--I guess I would ask you, do you think
there is a role for the Federal Government to play and did the
Government--Federal Government do enough to participate
States--to encourage States to participate in the program
before the 2018 cycle and how many States will be participating
in this--in the 2020 cycle?
Mr. Krebs. So I wouldn't use 2016 as the baseline for how--
what States engage, what local communities engage. I would
instead recommend that we look at 2018. All 50 States worked
with the Department of Homeland Security, and it is also
important to keep laser-focused on what the Department's
mission is; that is cybersecurity technical assistance. The
election capabilities, that resides with the EAC and NIST and
the others. We are very focused on cybersecurity capabilities.
We had all 50 States, 1,400 jurisdictions, a number of election
equipment vendors all playing ball with us.
The difference between 2018 and 2016 and I hope that you
will hear this in the next panel was trust. In 2016 there was
no relationship between the Department and EAC. There was no
relationship between Secretary Padilla or Secretary Merrill.
Right now, those relationships are strong and growing stronger.
So I am very confident that going forward that we have the
baseline of engagement and partnership in place to only
continue to improve the security and resilience in the voting
system.
Mr. Hicks. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman. There
are two aspects that I would like to point out with--for two
States that I went to last year. I went to Oregon and I did go
to Florida as well. In Oregon I saw the wildfires that were
going on and they were looking toward the EAC to get some sort
of guidance in terms of overall aspects of running their
elections. They're an all-paper State so they do everything by
vote by mail. So they were--they were I think on top of things
in terms of moving forward.
Florida, I had the honor of going down to visit with Bay
County which was devastated by Hurricane Michael and to see
their election folks basically in tears but being happy that
the EAC was there to document their--their concerns and get
others to see that and I hope that our staff will be able to
have the videos that we took up relatively soon so folks can
pay attention to that and not forget those folks as well.
I think that there are different aspects that the States
have gone to, to use our services, so we do touch all 55
jurisdictions--the 50 States and the 5 territories and the
District of Columbia. So I believe that, as Under Secretary
Krebs talked about, there was a lack of cooperation--not
cooperation but communication with Federal partners before that
but I think since the EAC's founding in 2003 that we have
helped States improve the process. So I think that as each
election goes on that we will continually improve that process.
Miss Rice. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr. Katko.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to
congratulate you on becoming Chair of this committee and I am
looking forward to working with you and Mr. Rogers and I know
based on past experience with you that we will continue the
fine bipartisan work on this committee that I wish the rest of
Congress would engage in.
Mr. Krebs, it is nice to meet you. I am now the Ranking
Member of the Cybersecurity Subcommittee and in that capacity I
think we will become well-acquainted with each other going
forward.
I was heartened, Mr. Krebs, about what you said in your
testimony today and what you said in your written testimony,
that there has been no evidence to date that any identified
activities of a foreign government or a foreign agent had a
material impact on the integrity or security of election
infrastructure or political or campaign infrastructure in the
2018 midterms. That is a great thing.
But, I also kind-of took pause by what you said that
election security has come a long way, but it bears additional
measures. One of the things that you mentioned was
auditability.
I want to make sure I understand a little bit more in
depth, what are some of the additional measures you think we
should be taking to makes sure that we do the best we can to
secure our elections?
Mr. Krebs. So, I continue to believe and that--and
Secretary Neilson has been consistent with this as well, but
voter verifiable paper trails are critical elements of
auditability. In that--after-election audit processes, and I
don't want to stipulate to any specific type of audit, there
are a number and variety of audits that could be implemented
based on the systems that are in place, but those are two
elements.
Mr. Katko. Mr. Hicks, is there anything you want to add to
that?
Mr. Hicks. I believe that the States in 2018, when they
submitted their request for funds to us, allocated over $20
million to go toward the auditability of elections. There are
many different ways to audit elections, and then as we move
forward, the EAC has done a paper on 6 ways to do audits and I
hope that States take advantage of those resources.
Mr. Katko. Now, Mr. Hicks, you also mentioned that as part
of the process of review, you wanted to look all the way
through the voter registration process. Could you explain the
different steps you would like to look at as far as doing your
audits of the election security?
Mr. Hicks. So, it is basically to go, and it is not just
depending on audits, it is basically to go from voter
registration and list maintenance to ensure that the folks who
are on the rolls are the people who are assigned to that.
Many States have gone toward on-line voter registration
through the DMVs and other aspects. Some States have gone to
automatic voter registration, and then you go toward polling
places to ensure that people have access to the polls to make
sure that the ramps for those who have disabilities and
wheelchairs and so forth can still get in there and the height
of the machines and so forth, to the poll worker training, I
think that is a vital part. They are the front line of defense
that we have in terms of Federal elections.
There is over a million requests for poll workers in each
Presidential year that is always coming up short and I would
like to see for--for more people to actually volunteer to be
poll workers.
Then, toward election night reporting with the Associated
Press, and other aspects as well. So, it goes from A to Z in
terms of ensuring that our election process remains strong and
that voters' confidence remains high.
Mr. Katko. Is there anything you might add to that Mr.
Krebs?
Mr. Krebs. No, sir.
Mr. Katko. OK, another question I have is, what--do you--
does the size of the State matter at all, as far as compliance
with these issues and being active participants in them, No. 1?
No. 2, the nation-state actors, obviously we are concerned
about them, the Iraqs--I mean the Irans and the Russians of the
world and others. Is there other actors outside of that arena
that you have potential--that have potential to disrupt around
minor elections, Mr. Krebs?
Mr. Krebs. So, to your first question, we have the smallest
State and the largest State engaging with us. So, I wouldn't
characterize any sort of participation based on the size of the
State.
In terms of the landscape of threat actors, certainly the
big four or primarily, in this case, China, Russia, Iran have
been active in foreign interference and influence operations.
But, generally speaking, in terms of cybersecurity issues
writ large, we do see more blended operations, proxies,
cutouts, things like that, so that is on the international
landscape. It is just getting more complex, more of a blended
environment.
Mr. Katko. Mr. Hicks, want to add to that?
Mr. Hicks. Thank you, sir. The--I believe that it is a
misnomer that think that it is the States, but it is mostly the
local election officials who are running the elections and it
is usually one or two individuals. It is not the large counties
that are basically targeted. It is usually the person who is
not only handling the election, but they are driving the school
bus, they are doing payroll, they are doing nine other
different things, and so they are targeted.
So, we try to offer--we try to go out to the States and
offer training as I.T. managers for election officials to their
State conferences, because they are not always able to come to
the District of Columbia to get that sort of training.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Correa, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Correa. Mr. Chairman--thank you Mr. Chairman. First of
all, let me congratulate you on your chairmanship, sir. Wanted
to also thank you for holding this most important hearing on
our Democratic institutions, our voting system, the integrity
of our votes goes to the heart of our Democratic system in this
country. Thank you very much, sir.
First question I have is for Mr. Hicks. That is, during the
recent Government shutdown, secretaries of state across the
country were notified that conversations with the Department of
Homeland Security would be suspended.
Can you tell me what the effects, negative, of the
Government shutdown were, in terms of harming the security of
our election system, given these next elections are just around
the corner?
Mr. Hicks. I think that is more appropriate question for
Under Secretary Krebs, with his discussions with Homeland
Security.
Mr. Correa. Mr. Krebs.
Mr. Hicks. I would add that with the Government shutdown,
we were furloughed. I was still working myself and then we have
hired a CIO to ensure that our infrastructure in our office
would remain high. We still had conversations with States and
locals.
As I stated in my testimony, some of our delay, in terms of
reporting out issues, have occurred because of the Government
shutdown and our election voting administration survey, we are
collecting that data to hopefully have that out to Congress by
the end of June, but I am hoping that none of that will be
delayed because of the shutdown.
Mr. Correa. Thank you. Mr. Krebs.
Mr. Krebs. Sir, so during the shut--there was no question
there was an impact from the shutdown. During that 35-day
period we continued to share intelligence, threat intelligence,
as it came in. We continued to send indicators out to those
Albert Sensors I mentioned earlier on. We continue to conduct
analysis based on the information we had and the intelligence
that we had.
In terms of the things that we had to pause, for one,
meeting with new secretaries of state that were sworn in
earlier in January; that was probably my biggest regret in
terms of missed opportunities. We also had to pause some of the
vulnerability assessments. We have since rescheduled those, and
those are back on the books.
Then just general planning, in terms of the recent National
Association of Secretaries of State and the State Election
Director annual conference, content development for that
engagement did have to slow. My sense of things, though, was we
ramped back up, I placed election security as one of the top
priorities for CISA as we restarted after the shutdown.
My sense of things is that we will be back on track, if not
already back on track, for instance, we are already in the
planning process for another National-level tabletop exercise
this June. Last year we had 44 States in the District of
Columbia. This year we hope to outdo even that.
Mr. Correa. Very quickly, cybersecurity, as it pertains to
the census that exercise we do every 10 years, redistricting is
based on the census, how secure do you think that data,
redistricting data, census data is when it comes to cyber
threats?
Mr. Krebs. We do work directly with the Census Bureau on
protecting the system, particularly the 2020. So, happy to come
back and provide you a little bit information and the
committee----
Mr. Correa. That is a critical issue.
Mr. Krebs. Yes, sir.
Mr. Correa. Mr. Hicks.
Mr. Hicks. That is not one that the EAC focuses on. But I
talk to our staff and get a clear answer for you sir.
Mr. Correa. But I presume that it is something on--on your
plates--something on your radar that you are looking at, again,
security of our census data?
Mr. Krebs. Absolutely. Yes sir. Like I said, we do work
closely with the Census Bureau on this--the 2020 census.
Mr. Correa. Quickly, post-election audits, what would such
audits look like? Would they be the same across the country?
Mr. Hicks. Those would not be the same across the country.
What works in Rhode Island might not necessarily work in
Washington State.
Mr. Correa. Is that because of the paper versus no-paper
situation?
Mr. Hicks. No. It is just that there is different factors
to it; the number of people, the way that they run elections.
Some are townships. Some are counties, and so forth. It would
be more of the type of machines that they use, and other
aspects of it. But I believe that it is--that all States should
be doing some sort of audits to ensure that the confidence of
elections remain high.
Mr. Correa. Thank you. Just different machines, different
outcomes, different standards, do you see us giving States
rights here? The ability of States to choose whatever they want
to purchase. Are we looking at moving toward more
standardization?
Mr. Hicks. No. I think that States should purchase the
machines that work best for them. I would equate it a little
bit to purchasing a car. You might want a different type of
car, but all of those cars should still have some sort of
standards associated with it.
Mr. Correa. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. I now recognize the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Ratcliffe.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for holding
this hearing. Securing election infrastructure is and
rightfully should be one of the central priorities of this
Congress, and certainly a priority for the American people.
I will say that I don't think that Title III of H.R. 1
adequately brings forth solutions that effectively and
efficiently addresses the issue of hardening election security,
much less do so in a bipartisan manner.
I do want to start with you, Director Krebs. Good to see
you again. One of the things that CISA is in a unique position
to do now is it sits between the resources, and capabilities,
and intelligence of the Federal Government, and the innovation
that is happening in the private sector.
But one of the things that I have heard often over the last
4 years, as the Chairman of the Cybersecurity Subcommittee, is
that the amount of actionable intelligence, or information
coming from the intelligence community, being provided to the
private sector through DHS is not enough, or is not good
enough, or is not timely enough, or is, in some respects, stale
information. You and I have talked about that. I would be
curious in your perspective, now as the director of CISA.
Address, for me, the progress, with respect to that issue.
Mr. Krebs. Sir, thank you for the question. It is for sure,
a continuous improvement process. We are better than--today
than we were a couple of years ago. I do want to say that--that
this election cycle, 2018, the time between 2016 and 2018
really was a--for us, and the intelligence community and law
enforcement, a forcing function to improve the way we go about
doing business both, on intelligence, analysis, sharing,
partnering on incident response, and other surge capabilities.
That we are going to be able to spin that out so the
election community is supported, but so is every other sector;
the grid, the financial sector. Every other critical
infrastructure sector will benefit from the progress we have
made, specific to the election community, over the last 2
years. So net-net, we--there is progress there.
In terms of the specific information sharing, the--I
mentioned those Albert Sensors. One of the things that we
really worked closely with the intelligence community on was
helping the I.C. understand what the information--the network
defense requirements were of the community--of the election
community so that they could refine their collection and
analysis, and then push their refinements back out into the
network defender space.
We have also conducted some studies, in terms of the
indicators that we share through our automated indicator
sharing program. Based on those studies, 30 percent of the
indicators that are shared are unique and they have a unique
shelf life, about 120 days.
That is one of my areas of focus for the agency, finding
where we are unique. Finding where we have value-add, and we
are not competing or supplanting a private-sector capability,
but really action--taking action using those intelligence
community capabilities.
Mr. Ratcliffe. So when we talk about the election
infrastructure threat landscape, we talk about needing to
provide our Federal partners, but also our State and local
officials and private-sector vendors with the information and
capabilities they need to better defend that infrastructure.
I noticed in your testimony you talked about DHS host--
hosting a tabletop vote exercise, really for that purpose, in
terms of identifying some of the best practices and areas for
improvement on cyber incident planning, preparedness,
identification, response, recovery, all of those things. What
is your overall takeaway from that exercise? Was it impactful,
and how so?
Mr. Krebs. So my sense of things is yes, it was impactful.
I suggest you ask the next panel whether they found that
useful--that exercise useful. But I think the numbers prove
that it was at least a coordinating moment. That we got 44
States and the District of Columbia participating over 3 days,
in the middle of primary season, that in and of itself shows
that the community is participating.
We also had social media companies. We had political
parties. We had the defense--the Department of Defense, the
intelligence community. We believe we can do better. So, we are
going to do the tabletop to vote exercise again, as I
mentioned, once again this summer.
But again, it really reinforced, for us, that any small
piece of information that an election official finds they
should share because that--a bunch of small things can add up
to a big thing. That was, kind-of, along the see something, say
something line, really trying to reinforce that information
sharing, both ways, can lead to better defense across the
systems.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Director. I see my time is
expired. I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. The Chair
recognizes the gentlelady from Michigan, Ms. Slotkin.
Ms. Slotkin. Good afternoon, and good morning. Thanks for
being here, to both of you. I agree with my colleagues. I think
election security has got to be one of the most bipartisan
issues. We can all agree that threats to our democracy and the
integrity of our democracy is a threat to our National
security.
If we, as a people, do not believe in our system, all
forward progress is lost. So I think it is an extremely
important issue. I think that there are two pieces to it that I
am worried about. One is actual election security, right? So
the integrity of the actual systems and you have spoken to
that.
But then, there is the perception that the elections,
particularly in 2020, may not be fair and free, right? On both
sides, regardless of what side you are on.
You have talked about good work that you are doing and I
appreciate that but if you can just give us your sense on both
issues, what is the one issue on both issues that keeps you up
at night? What are you most worried about on election security
actual integrity of our system and then on the perception,
right, because I think for all the good work you have done,
there is a huge group of people who are just ready to say, on
both sides, that 2020 isn't going to be free and fair which is
a deep--deeply concerning to me. So on election security and
the perception that they are not secure, what keeps you up at
night for both of you?
Mr. Krebs. So this question lasers right in on I think the
biggest area of discussion that we need to have in the country
right now. So first and foremost on the security of the
systems, we have both mentioned it several times, the committee
Members have mentioned it, we have got to get to auditability.
That is--that is the key, understanding what is happening
across the process is critically important.
On the perception, we did a lot of work throughout the 2018
cycle on education and awareness not just in the voting public.
Working with the EAC and some of the election associations, we
issued guidance, awareness materials, reinforcing that go to
trusted sources for information on elections. Those trusted
sources are the elected officials at the State and local level.
Go look at the State secretary's website for information on
when you vote, how to register, what the deadlines are. Go to
the source. Don't listen to whatever third party, fourth party,
whatever you have--whatever have you which plays into the
bigger part of we have to do more awareness building in this
country and introduce critical thinking and reinforce critical
thinking as we are just deluged with information. It is too
easy to just click like and forward on. We have got to have
people thinking, where is this information coming from? Why is
it being served up to me? That continue--will continue to be
one of our priorities going into 2020.
Mr. Hicks. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman. I
agree with Secretary Krebs but I also wanted to add a couple of
other things. One, election interference is nothing new. It was
mostly done, you know, since--it has been done since we have
had elections. Whether or not that is pamphlets saying
Democrats vote on Wednesday, Republicans vote on Thursday or
other access to the polls, but the things that I would want to
focus in on for our--our agency is to ensure that all aspects
are taken care of. One being access and also access for three
different groups. One, our military and overseas voters who--
who don't always have access to ballot boxes and so forth. Two,
our disabled voters who might not be able to get access inside
the polls themselves and the third would be language
minorities.
Ms. Slotkin. So I know I have a very short time and thank
you as a military spouse for ensuring that our military can
vote. That is a big issue for our military community. So you
both mentioned this--and the perception--the concern that the
perception that these aren't free and fair elections, the role
of social media, of news, of third sources passing along the
wrong information. Can we--can you do your jobs without the
social media companies doing more--particularly social media
companies doing more to identify and disclose who is actually
paying for some of the ads that are coming through? Who are
actually, you know, originating and spreading this information?
Can you help me understand their role in making your jobs
harder or easier?
Mr. Krebs. So transparency for certain is key. I will say
that the social media companies deserve some credit for what
they did, how they stepped up in the 2018 cycle. On Election
Day we had a National situational awareness, more room, both a
virtual presence where all States and local jurisdictions were
plugged in but we also had a physical presence at our facility
in Virginia and the social media companies participated.
Now what that allowed us to do is win election officials,
identified disinformation, misinformation, or just flat-out
false information that was being passed around, videos that
have been edited but saying, look this machine is changing my
vote. It was immediately flagged for the social media
companies. Social media companies were able to get the ground
truth with the election official, they were able to pull down
that false information because it was in violation of their
terms of service and then the election official was out and
able to say, here is what really happened. Don't believe that.
So they--they played a part.
There is always much more to do here and keep in mind that
the adversary will continue to pivot, pivot, pivot as we raise
defenses and block off avenues.
Ms. Slotkin. Thank you gentlemen. I am almost immediately
out of time so I appreciate it.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Walker.
Mr. Walker. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Director Krebs, is
there any evidence of foreign interference in the 2018
elections?
Mr. Krebs. So as I indicated in opening and my written, the
statement issued by the DOJ and DHS last week indicated that
there was no attributable--there was no evidence of
attributable activity to a nation-state actor of material
impact on the election.
Mr. Walker. Thanks for covering that again. I just want to
make sure that we are on the record with that. Is there any
evidence of domestic interference in the 2018 elections?
Mr. Krebs. I would have to defer you to the Department of
Justice on that.
Mr. Walker. OK. How should we or how do we define
interference? Is it just hacking and abusing voting systems or
does it also include false or misleading political statements?
Mr. Krebs. Well I believe the way the 2016 intelligence
community assessment broke things down, at least the way I look
at foreign interference, it is consistent with that report,
there is hack and lead campaigns that was targeting for
instance in 2016 the DNC releasing sensitive e-mails. There is
the social media campaign that disinformation trying to sow
divisiveness across the community and then third is the actual
technical cybersecurity operations focusing on election
infrastructure.
It is important to note that anyone, any actor, could do
any of those three things. It is just a matter of capability
and then effectiveness.
Mr. Walker. I want to go to Commissioner Hicks before I ask
my question. I do want to say Commissioner Hicks, I think that
is the best baritone voice I have heard since Lou Rawls.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Walker. I don't know, maybe you could slow jam the
election news with Jimmy Fallon sometimes, I don't know. But my
question is, what separates interference from political free
speech? Can you give us a line or describe the parameters
there?
Mr. Hicks. That is a difficult question but thank you for
the compliment by the way. The election assistance commission
focused mostly in on the administration--the administration of
elections. So we work with the States and local officials to
help them administer the election in a way that ensures that
confidence remains high, that there is no interference with the
First Amendment rights of individuals or groups but to ensure
that our role and we stay in our lane with that.
Mr. Walker. So from what I am understanding, it is a hard
line to call or it is hard to interpret. Who ultimately does
make that decision where it crosses over in being more just
somebody's right or somebody's free speech rights versus
someone else who would call that interference? How do we
describe that--how do--how do--in moving forward how do you
interpret that?
Mr. Hicks. Domestically, that would be the Department of
Justice to make that determination.
Mr. Walker. All right, let me get a couple more--time for a
couple more. Going to go back to Director Krebs, director,
there were multiple reports of campaigns being hacked in 2018.
What did the DHS provide in assistance in these instances?
Mr. Krebs. So, would have to defer to the Department of
Justice and the FBI on any specifics of their engagements,
whether they engaged in the campaigns. We provide our resources
as a technical cybersecurity capability to anyone that is
interested.
Any information that we had or picked up through press or
through referrals from the Department of Justice, we would
offer our services, that would be a vulnerability assessment,
that would be an incidence response assessment and those sorts
of things. Those relationships, as they come about, are
sensitive, confidential, trusted relationships. But, generally
speaking, we continue to provide information, incidence
response capabilities.
Mr. Walker. Sure. I am sure they appreciate the support,
but this--maybe just as a yes or no, are you aware that there
were campaigns in 2018 that were hacked?
Mr. Krebs. I am aware of reports of campaigns having, for
instance, spear phishing and things like that----
Mr. Walker. When you say you were aware of it, did you guys
take a look at it? I know DOJ is lead on that, but from your
organization, were you contacted to look into this any further
or offer support on a campaign that was hacked?
Mr. Krebs. I would have to go back and look at the
specifics of any campaign. We are aware of spear phishing
events and things like that.
Mr. Walker. Help me understand, when you say got to go back
and look. You are not aware or you were aware of some? You just
don't remember?
Mr. Krebs. What I am unclear on right now is our actual
engagements with any specific campaigns. Typically on things of
that nature that the FBI has direct lead on engagement. We come
back--we kind-of put out the fire so to speak.
Mr. Walker. If we provided maybe 2 to 3 weeks, is that
possible? I would love to have----
Mr. Krebs. Certainly, I would follow up, yes, sir.
Mr. Walker. I would appreciate that. Last question, to your
knowledge does H.R. 1 addresses campaign security?
Mr. Krebs. I would have to go and dig into H.R. 1. I have
been focusing on the election infrastructure piece. We always
provide assistance to political campaigns, political
infrastructure. So, whether it is included in H.R. 1 or not, we
will always provide assistance.
Mr. Walker. OK, thank you so much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes the
gentlelady from New Jersey, Mrs. Watson Coleman.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you Mr. Chairman. I am concerned
about reports that election vendors don't fix vulnerabilities
once they have been made aware of them, and then, in fact, it
is not just recognizing a vulnerability and then reporting it
and not having it dealt with, but even years have been
involved. What role does the EAC have in making sure vendors
are taking steps to remedy vulnerabilities when they find them?
Mr. Hicks. If a vendor is--thank you, Congresswoman, for
the question. If a vendor is a registered vendor with the EAC,
they have a certain amount of time to report errors with their
machines to us and fix those vulnerabilities.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. If they don't? If they don't fix them?
Mr. Hicks. Then we don't have enforcement authority, in
terms of fining and so forth, but we can go toward the
decertification of their voting equipment.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Does that mean that then no one can
purchase their voting equipment?
Mr. Hicks. Then it would not be certified under EAC
standards.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. So, no one could purchase and use
their voting equipment?
Mr. Hicks. If someone--since it is a voluntary system,
folks could still purchase that equipment and use it.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. To what extent have we knowledge of
that kind of a problem?
Mr. Hicks. If they are--voting machines are basically
computers. So if there are patches that need to be made, then
those are acknowledged and then fixed.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. But, to what extent do we know of it
being a problem where a vendor has been given sufficient notice
and still has neglected to fix these things?
Mr. Hicks. I have----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Is that a pervasive problem? Is that a
rare problem?
Mr. Hicks. I am not aware of any issues to that degree.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Do you think that we need some kind of
enforcement authority in some entity, I don't know which one it
would be, that would compel those types of vendors to correct
the situation?
Mr. Hicks. If Congress gave us that authority, then we
would, like we have with all of the issues with the Help
America Vote Act, we would act accordingly.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. I know that--I know that a lot of work
is being done with States and secretaries of state, I am
wondering--in my State there are 21 counties and the counties
are basically the entities that run the elections and the
municipalities carry out.
To what extent is there this guarantee that the information
sharing, the training, the cybersecurity guidance gets down to
those levels? What is the mechanism to do that? Or do you deal
directly with the local and county officials that deal with the
elections?
Mr. Krebs. So, specific to the cybersecurity information-
sharing piece and the technical assistance piece, you have
highlighted an area that we recognize needs additional
attention. Last year the Elections Infrastructure ISAC, the
Information Sharing Analysis Center, had 1,400 local
jurisdictions.
My understanding, and the number seems to change regularly,
but somewhere in between 8,800 and 10,000 voting jurisdictions
across the country. Some--and that is below the county,
precincts, voting spots, so we are looking at scalable,
repeatable ways that we can engage each and every one of them.
For instance, deploying or providing information, I.T. manager
training for election officials.
As Commissioner Hicks mentioned, these devices, these
voting--this voting equipment, the process, the databases, they
are computers. So, election officials sometimes, sole officials
end up having to be I.T. managers as well.
So, it is important that we provide them the support, the
training, what to look for in terms of phishing e-mails and
things like that, how to apply patches, how to work with
vendors and ask the right questions. But, for us, one of our
top priorities in the run up to 2020 is extending out from that
1,400 and the rest of the----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. So the--thank you. I am sorry. The
HAVA money that was already allocated, that is allocated, it is
in the hands in of the various States and jurisdictions, right?
Mr. Hicks. There were two rounds of HAVA money. One that
were submitted in 2003 and then the 2018 HAVA funds. The 2018
HAVA funds have all been distributed to all the 55
jurisdictions.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. So, we do we have an understanding
about how much more money we need in order to ensure that the
right voting machines, the appropriate voting machines that
have the verifiability in them, would cost?
Mr. Hicks. The--from my travels around the country, from
what I have heard from individual States in terms of replacing
all the voting equipment, can run from between half a billion
to $1 billion.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am honored to serve
on this committee again with you, sir. You are a solid patriot.
With your leadership, and that of Ranking Member Rogers, I
believe our committee will always move forward. Contentious,
though, at times, we may be. We will be focused on the security
of our homeland and we will get things done.
Mr. Krebs, the voting systems that we are discussing today,
explain to America--my research says that there is somewhere
over 174,000 voting precincts in America. Is that true?
Mr. Krebs. I would have to defer to Commissioner Hicks on--
--
Mr. Higgins. Is that true sir?
Mr. Hicks. Yes, sir.
Mr. Higgins. So you have got a lot of voting precincts.
Article I Section 4 of our Constitution gives a station--States
and local jurisdictions State legislature authority,
specifically to the time, place, and manner of holding
elections for Senators and Representatives shall be prescribed
by each State by the legislature thereof.
So you are dealing with over 174,000 small communities. The
voting systems we are discussing and the integrity thereof
regarding cyber threat, is it true that most of these systems
are--are independent? They are electronic. They are analog.
They are not connected to the internet at all. They are--they
are--they are in high schools and in gymnasiums across America,
and cafeterias at elementary schools. They are rolled out,
secured, and plugged in. They are not connected to the internet
at all.
Mr. Krebs. So there is, obviously, a range of equipment out
there from various vendors. The general best practice is yes,
they should be air-gapped. They should not be----
Mr. Higgins. There you go.
Mr. Krebs. I use that term----
Mr. Higgins. I just wanted to clarify that. We are dealing
with scores of thousands of individual voting systems, most of
which are--are not actually connected to the internet. Now, the
threat is real and should be--should be addressed, certainly.
This committee will do our job regarding election security.
In the densely populated areas there is--obviously, a
threat to a single precinct would be more significant,
regarding numbers, as opposed to more rural areas. Is that
correct?
Mr. Krebs. I think the threats can vary. There are
certainly situations where a more densely populated--could pose
a higher risk.
Mr. Higgins. In other words, a small percentage of error
interference would have a greater affect on numbers in more a
densely populated area, and a more heavily voted precinct.
Mr. Krebs. It is possible.
Mr. Higgins. So it is a landscape across our Nation that we
must serve. In my opinion, and those of my colleagues, I
believe on both sides of the aisle, we need to move forward
carefully. The--the cyber threats themselves--now that we have,
sort-of, categorized what we have got. Nation-states, rogue
states, bad actors like Russia, Iran, China, North Korea versus
a criminal element; organized crime.
How would you differentiate between the cyber attempt to
interfere with an election by a nation-state versus a cyber
attempt to interfere with an election by a criminal element
within a nation-state?
Mr. Krebs. So at this point, I think given the way the
threat environment has blended, and you have hybrid threat
actors. I am not sure that there is much of a distinction
between nation-states and criminal elements.
Mr. Higgins. Exactly. It--and in times past during the Cold
War--are you familiar if you are a student of history,
gentlemen? That rogue states, some of our enemies across the
world attempted to influence public opinion and policy with
pamphlets, and flyers, and illegal radio broadcasts into
territories. Is that correct?
Mr. Krebs. Yes, sir.
Mr. Higgins. So wouldn't that take--wouldn't that reflect,
in the modern era, using social media, and the attempt to
influence public opinion, and perhaps elections in that way?
Mr. Krebs. As--as we saw----
Mr. Higgins. So this is nothing new, is it?
Mr. Krebs. Well, as we saw in 2016, there were technical
lone network operations, as well as influence campaigns. Those
activities--the influence campaigns, in particular, continue
today.
Mr. Higgins. Right.
Mr. Krebs. It is not just Russia.
Mr. Higgins. It continues today, and we need to adapt to
the changing time. I thank you gentlemen for doing both.
Mr. Hicks, as an American should--in your opinion sir, do
you think that a voting precinct, again, of over 174,000 in our
country that has never had an issue and have never had a
complaint; they have the Constitutional rights to run their own
elections. These--this would include local and State elections,
as well as Federal, of course. Do you think a voting precinct
that has never had an issue or a problem with their system
should be forced by the Federal Government to spend money and
invest in manpower, and change, and--and receive interference
from the Federal Government? I will leave you to answer, sir.
Mr. Hicks. Thank you for the question. I wanted to clarify
one quick thing, it is 8,000 jurisdictions across the country,
and then the voting precincts are what you are referring to.
I wouldn't necessarily say that there has never been any
issues with any of those voting precincts. There are issues
with every election, as we go--move forward. That is just the
nature of elections. But we need to address and adapt to each
issue as they arise.
Mr. Higgins. Well stated, sir. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for your indulgence.
Chairman Thompson. The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady
from New York, Ms. Clarke.
Ms. Clarke. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank our
Ranking Member, and I thank you gentlemen for appearing before
us today. As a follow-up to a question my colleague, Ms. Bonnie
Watson Coleman of New Jersey, asked: How is DHS and EAC
prioritizing outreach to the local governments--local level?
Mr. Hicks. Well, the former president of the National
Association of State Election Directors was actually from New
Jersey. We worked really closely with him, and all other
States, to ensure that the process was moving forward. So it is
a high priority for us. It is one we take seriously, but it is
not our only priority.
Mr. Krebs. DHS's No. 1 priority; more State--more local
engagement.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. There seem to be areas where State
and local election officials have not yet resolved low-hanging
fruit issues of their election security; for instance, the use
of wireless modems to transmit election results. These
practices needlessly introduce vulnerabilities into the
process.
What do you perceive as some of the low-hanging fruit in
securing election operations? Might stronger, more vocal
leadership from Federal partners like DHS, or EAC, or even the
White House, move the needle on those issues?
Mr. Krebs. So over the last couple of years we have
conducted a number of vulnerability assessments, 26 plus
jurisdictions, State and local. We have also conducted remote
penetration testing.
The interesting thing that we found was that, of all of
those assessments, the findings were generally similar;
unpatched systems, misconfigured systems, lack of multi-factor
authentication.
So what happened is we took a lot of that learning across
those assessments, worked with the Government Coordinating
Council, which is State, local, EAC, the intelligence
community, law enforcement, and put together when Congress
appropriated that $300 million to the last HAVA tranche of
money, and provided some expenditure guidance.
So our sense of things is that we have been pushing out
those best practices. But there is certainly more to do. On the
point of the modems and I used air quotes when I said air gap
on a lot of the equipment.
Yes, there is equipment still out there that has modems. It
is only used in very discrete circumstances. Nonetheless,
absolutely that is why I used my air quotes there. It is a best
practice to disable or remove that capability.
In some cases there was simply no other alternative for
jurisdictions in the 2018. So that capability was limited but
left in place. Auditability can also help identify and spot any
irregularities.
But my sense and understanding is going forward that
continues to be one of those priority actions. Low-hanging
fruit as you mentioned.
Mr. Hicks. Thank you again. I think that it goes from A to
Z, from voter registration all the way to election night
reporting. That all aspects of election should have some sort
of security to it.
We have talked a lot about cybersecurity but I also think
that physical should also remain high. Also we should continue
with our quest to have all elections being audited because then
it remains--the confidence of the election remains high.
The way that those audits are conducted can be done by each
individual State. But I believe that, in my own personal
opinion, that we need to ensure that we do all we can to afford
confidence of the--the system. Because what I have said in 2016
and 2018, if you don't vote then your vote definitely will not
count.
Ms. Clarke. Well, I think part of the challenge too is at
the local level, just the level of proficiency of the use of
the technologies of the individuals who were employed to
administer these elections.
I don't know whether you are getting a true sense of that
across the length and breadth and depth of our Nation. But I
can tell you that there have been a lot of senior citizens that
have this as a preferred profession.
Not to disparage anyone but they tend to be a little bit
less concerned about cyber hygiene. So I think that there just
needs to be a consistent outreach to these local jurisdictions
in helping folks to really be trained and vigilant around the
work that they do.
Just one more question. I know that we had talked about
five jurisdictions that have paperless voting. I wanted to be
corrected if I am wrong, but the only record that the votes
cast on these machines is a digital record stored on the voting
machines themselves, which means if the machine is hacked,
election officials have no paper ballot they can count on by
hand to determine how the voter really voted. Is that correct?
Mr. Hicks. It is a lot more detailed than that because all
these systems have more than one redundancy for back up in
their--in their systems. So----
Ms. Clarke. But if it is hacked how would you know?
Mr. Hicks. Well, it could be stolen as well. So there is
all aspects of machines could be--you do a forensic scan of
those machines to ensure that the ballots are counted
correctly.
Ms. Clarke. So to the best of your knowledge, were any of
these paperless voting machines used by States in 2018
elections running software that was out of date with known
exploitable cybersecurity flaws?
Mr. Hicks. I would have to go to my staff to see what the
actual scanning of those districts were because it is not just
those 5 individual States. There are other jurisdictions around
the country as well.
Ms. Clarke. It would be good if you could get back to us
with that. It is very important as you talk about auditability
that we are exact in what--how these machines can be exploited.
Mr. Hicks. I would also point to the fact that a lot of
these States are moving away from machines that don't have a
paper component to them.
Ms. Clarke. We want to expedite that right? Thank you. I
yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from Arizona, Mrs. Lesko.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks for calling me a
young lady. I really like that.
[Laughter.]
Mrs. Lesko. I got to hang around here more often. My first
question is for Mr. Krebs and thank you both for being here.
You know we have talked--hit on this a little bit with Mr.
Walker but there was a lot of media--there still is a lot of
media out there about how the Russians allegedly interfered in
the 2016 election and I think we found out that a lot of it had
to do with social media misinformation.
To Ms. Slotkin's points that a lot has to do with
perception, if voters believe that their votes count and they
are not being compromised. To your knowledge, was there any
evidence or is there any evidence that the Russians or anybody
else hacked into the actual election system and changed the
outcome of the election on Election Day?
Mr. Krebs. Ma'am, I am not aware of any evidence that they
had access or ability to influence the casting, counting
tabulation.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you. The reason I think that is important
is because there is a lot of confusion out there and--so we
need to make sure that when we talk to people that we are not
talking about actual hacking into the election system is what
the media is talking about.
However, we want to prevent it in the future of course. My
next question is actually for Mr. Hicks and this was touched on
briefly by the Ranking Member Rogers. That was about the money
in this bill that is going toward certain things.
So the Democrat's Congressional Task Force on Election
Security recommended $300 million for States to acquire these
paper ballot systems, conduct audits, address cyber
vulnerabilities, provide cybersecurity training to local and
State election officials, institute cybersecurity best
practices, and to make other improvements to effect Federal
election security. Through the Help America Vote Act Congress
appropriated $380 million in grants for fiscal year 2018 for
these purposes.
This bill, H.R. 1, which we are talking about today,
authorizes $1.77 billion in grants. So why do we need to give
States an extra $1.77 billion to do the same thing that in this
task force they said they could achieve with $300 million?
Mr. Hicks. The States--from the States that I have--I have
traveled to all 50 States in the last 4 years or so and the
States have all indicated that elections--Federal elections
occur every 2 years and that the replacement of voting
equipment from the 2002, 2003 initial HAVA funds need to be
done.
The money that was put into the Help America Vote Act funds
for 2018 did not just go toward machines. They went toward
Title I, which gave States a lot of leeway into improving the
vote--the voting process.
Whether or not that was voter registration, audits,
communications, just to--and other aspects as well.
Mrs. Lesko. So, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Hicks, so I don't know
if you answered do you--why--why if it--in one report it said
you need only $300 million but this one is $1.77 billion. Do
you know why?
Mr. Hicks. I don't know why, but I believe that they were
going toward one aspect of the process in terms of--and I have
to read back through the report, but I would--I am assuming
that it was one aspect of what they were looking at as opposed
to overall with H.R. 1. Because I believe that they were just
looking toward certain machines, but I believe that maybe H.R.
1 covers a lot more than just the one aspect of it.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chair, I yield
back my time.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much, as a point of
clarification the $1.8 billion was for over 10 year's period of
time, so it was not just 380--a one-shot deal. So it is in
anticipation that upgrading will be a constant rather than just
standing for one time.
Chair recognizes the gentleman from Rhode Island, former
Secretary of State, Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Director and Mr.
Hicks thank you very much for being here and for your testimony
and Mr. Krebs I want to thank you also--thank you for the work
you are doing at CISA, I am glad that agency has been
reorganized and properly tasked, and I look forward to work
with you, and supporting you in your work.
Obviously this is one of the most important issues that we
are facing as a country, has been securing our elections from
foreign adversaries that want to try to undermine and sow
discord. They have got a pretty effective, well-coordinated
campaign that we have to obviously have to get even better
organized and I know that we will.
So I want to thank you and Assistant Director Manfra for
your support, particularly in my home State of Rhode Island. I
had attended one of the final planning meetings before the
election with our Secretary of State Nellie Gorbea, who
testified before this committee, along with you.
Also the DHS personnel in the room made vital contributions
to that discussion, and as someone who has overhauled an entire
State election system, I understand the challenges of having
the best equipment and making sure that it works well. When I
reorganized and overhauled our election system we didn't have
to deal with the issue of course of cybersecurity and threats
from foreign adversaries trying to undermine us.
So let me just say, one of the topics that came out of that
meeting was coordination with media. We have seen how
effectively the Russians, for example in targeting Ukraine
elections, went right to the media and trying to sow discord
and confusion in election processes. How have you engaged with
local, State, and National media outlets to ensure that
unofficial voting--vote reporting is protected from malicious
interference?
Mr. Krebs. So a couple examples I think that are
instructive of the progress we have made, particularly with the
National media, but also local and State-level media. Two
things, one in advance--2 weeks in advance of the election we
held a media tabletop exercise, just like what we did with the
State, and local election officials we brought in a couple
dozen media representatives, sat in a room, 4 hours, walked
through a scenario that included both technical on-network
effects as well as social media influence operations.
We walked through here is what you would see, here is what
you would hear from a State or a local election official, here
is what you would hear from the Federal Government and what the
Federal Government would be doing whether it was DHS, the FBI,
the intelligence community--and help them understand what was
going on in the background.
So that, if something did happen, they would have the basis
of understanding, they would know A, who to call, but also
rather than say, oh there was a denial-of-service attack
against an election night reporting website. We would be able
to have a conversation and say, actually it is not that--
instead it is simply a configuration issue and that website
dropped.
The second thing we did is on Election Day every 3 hours
over the course of the election we had a conference call with
National media. The same thing, we would walk through issues as
they popped up over the course of the day.
Oftentimes we referred them to the local or State election
official to address the questions, but where we could chip in
and provide some clarification. Really the important thing was
getting ahead of issues and dispelling any sort of doubt, or
questions about what may be happening in the background. We
found it to be very beneficial in terms of getting ahead of
problems before they really started.
Mr. Langevin. OK, thank you. Is--another topic, as
Commissioner Hicks mentioned on this testimony, I know that
Representative Slotkin has touched upon this as well.
Obviously public confidence and the integrity of our
elections is a vital component of our democracy and following
the 2016 elections, American voters reported a decrease in
confidence in the election systems, and outcomes and it is
exactly playing to the hands of what our adversaries want to
try to accomplish here. But election security, particularly
cybersecurity, is certain an important aspect of increasing
confidence, but it is not sufficient.
So who right now in the interagency has the role of
coordinating protection of election integrity, and its
perception thereof, and who--which cybersecurity is just a
part?
Mr. Krebs. So in terms of the interagency process, the FBI
and the Department of Justice have the responsibility to lead
on countering foreign influence, and that is the social media
campaigns, that is the direct response--the threat response
piece. So as things bubble up, or pop up they work with
partners to address and--immediately address head-on.
The Department of Homeland Security's role here is in terms
of--is more on the lines of educating awareness, building--
taking case studies that we saw in 2016--or even before that
that we have seen the Russians do, that we have seen the
Chinese do. Then pushing awareness and information out on--
these are the sorts of things that you need to look for. Here
are the things that you can do to ensure you are getting ground
truth and you are getting the right information.
Again, going back to the elections, just as Chairman Hicks
mentioned, it is--you need to listen to your State and local
election official, they are the ones that have the official
information. They are the ones that are going to tell you where
to go, what day to vote. Don't listen to the text messages,
don't listen to the tweets, or posts or whatever.
Mr. Langevin. So do you believe that--and you talk about
who the lead is, but you believe that there should be a whole-
of-Government approach, or should it be silos based on
experience?
Mr. Krebs. So it is certainly cliche but this is a whole-
of-Nation approach. There is a specific role for a number of
agencies, including the intelligence community using their
specific authorities, whether it is the Bureau and their law
enforcement capabilities, whether it is the Department of
Homeland Security and our unique convening capabilities.
One thing I will note is that when some of the social media
companies over the course of the election took action and took
down, whether it was Iranian activity or whatever, we were able
to work with the FBI, work with the social media companies,
convene the State and local election officials in a call or
even a Classified briefing and get--and have them walk through,
here is what happened, here is what you need to be on the
lookout for.
So there is a role in this for everyone. There is a role in
this for every American, and--and it is upon us, particularly
the Department, to give them the awareness, the tools to be
smarter consumers of information.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Green.
Mr. Green of Tennessee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member. I extensively reviewed H.R. 1 in my previous committee
hearing on Oversight and Government Reform. I certainly believe
that election security is critical. Ms. Slotkin did a very nice
job of saying--speaking about it, and I am impressed. I have to
tell you, I am very impressed with what you have done in the
2018 cycle--essentially flawless.
There were no penetrations that we are aware of--and we
have to be able to do that. We--our democracy rests on one
person, one vote. But with regards to this H.R. 1, I am going
to be completely upfront and say that I am disappointed by the
Majority party because it seems to have disregarded our
Constitution.
They claim the purpose of the bill is to protect our
institutions, but they are promoting a bill that fails to
improve security, all while thumbing the nose--or its nose to
Federalism. Our country was not made for a few hundred people
in Washington, DC to dictate to my State in Tennessee how we
are going to do everything, including our elections.
Our founders, our Constitution, our electoral process have
been grounded in Federalism. This bedrock is the foundation of
our country, and it has to be protected. When power is
concentrated in the hands of a few, tyranny inevitably follows.
Our founders knew this; that is why they created, you know,
three branches of Government.
They created separation between the Federal Government, the
States, the local government--recall the 10th Amendment. I want
to thank you again for the hard work that resulted in such
success in 2018, and I, from the previous questions that were
asked, assume you have not read H.R. 1. Is that correct?
Mr. Krebs. I have reviewed it, yes.
Mr. Green of Tennessee. You have reviewed it? OK. Can you
tell me, then, in a more global sense, how far should the
Federal Government be able to go in telling Tennessee how we
run our elections? Considering specifically, what was read
earlier from my colleague, about what the Constitution says
concerning elections.
Mr. Krebs. I--so every State is different; every
jurisdiction's different, every set of equipment's going to be
different. I would defer to Secretary Hargett to decide what is
best for the citizens of Tennessee.
But whatever I can do, as the Department of Homeland
Security, to make his job easier--the thing I will note, and it
has been part of the conversation throughout the morning, that
the threat landscape is different today in 2019 than it was in
2001, with HAVA and even before that. Back then, we were
focused on--the Department was focused on an antiterrorism
mission.
Today, we have the most active nation-state adversary
landscape, certainly in my lifetime. That means that individual
States, individual counties, individual precincts cannot go it
alone against the full-frontal assault of the Russian GRU or
the Russian FSB. So I need to be able to provide whatever
capabilities I can so that we can assure a collective defense
across election security.
Mr. Green of Tennessee. Yes, but the--the--as you have
reviewed H.R. 1, I am sure you know that it tells Tennessee we
can't have voter identification; it tells us we--we can allow
voter registration to happen on the day of the election with no
way to verify it.
That seems to me to be a violation of the Constitution, as
has been read and is clearly articulated in the 10th Amendment.
That is more than just security; that is dictating how we run
our elections in Tennessee.
Quite honestly, that is offensive to us down in Tennessee.
For Mr. Hicks, I do have a question, sir. You said there is
about 8,000 jurisdictions, if I understood correctly. How many
of those jurisdictions are identical? They do elections
identical to one or the other?
Mr. Hicks. That would be a difficult question to answer. I
believe that, you know, each individual jurisdiction conducts
their elections the way that they feel best for those
constituents in their jurisdiction.
But the Election Assistance Commission goes to these--once
invited, goes to these States and jurisdictions to offer our
assistance, whether or not that is the $380 million that
Congress appropriated or other aspects through our clearing
house or other aspects of it, because those jurisdictions might
not know techniques or things that are being done in other
jurisdictions. But we bring that to them so they can run their
elections effectively.
Mr. Green of Tennessee. Well, thank you for that answer,
and I really appreciate it. My issue isn't so much with you
not--with your help--we want your help; it is essential to
protecting--but dictating how we run our elections in
Tennessee, that is a little different. That is my point. Thank
you very much.
Chairman Thompson. The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady
from Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for this
hearing. Along with the Ranking Member, we are appreciative for
a hearing that indicates one of the strongest elements of
democracy is the independent right of every American to cast
their vote, unimpeded, unsuppressed, and unoppressed.
Let me ask you, Commissioner Hicks--and thank you for the
Election Assistance Commission. In 2016, I believe then-
Secretary Jeh Johnson joined with 16 other agencies,
intelligence agencies, as I recall, the fall of the election to
indicate a conspicuous engagement of Russia into the elections.
Let me just read a sentence--E-Deceptive Campaign Practices
Report 2010; Electronic Privacy Information Center. They are,
however, talking generally about what deceptive campaigns or
attempts to misdirect targeted voters, regarding the voting
process, or in some way affect their willingness to cast a
vote.
Deceptive election activities include false statements
about polling place opening and closing times the date of the
election--voter identification rules or the eligibility
requirements for voters who wish to cast a vote. I think the
intelligence report was focused on targeting voters, misleading
information, social media, do you believe, based on those
intelligence reports at that time--you are aware of that
report, elective report, in 2016?
Mr. Hicks. I am aware of it.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Do you believe the reports, first of all,
Mr. Johnson joined in that report ahead of the Department of
Homeland Security?
Mr. Hicks. I have no reason to believe that that was false.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So in that--and Mr. Krebs?
Mr. Krebs. Yes, ma'am; I agree with the intelligence
community assessment.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So we know that there is, among others--
and we certainly know that Russia is--looms large as having
intentions to interfere with our elections. That means Federal
elections, but Federal elections are held in States. We are a
collective of 50 States, so we know that that--they would be
impacted.
In that kind of report and the efforts that you all have,
do you see States willing to accept your assistance, and in
what way is the best way that you are helping States
acknowledge their own plight, if you will, of susceptibility to
this kind of intrusion?
Mr. Hicks. I believe State--thank you, Congresswoman--I
believe States have come to the Federal Government more so than
they were before because there was a little bit of a hesitation
that way. But I believe that communication has improved to the
point where States are giving their input through the
Government coordinating council, working with vendors and other
aspects of that through the sector-specific council to ensure
that the election integrity remains high.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me, because my time is short, go to
the cybersecurity for both of you to ask or Director Krebs you
can start with this. Cybersecurity involves everything from
large systems to small mobile devices. My question is about a
host of technologies Classified as edge devices that may have
internet connections. How concerned should you be about edge
devices and election technology security?
Mr. Krebs. So we----
Ms. Jackson Lee. We could be concerned.
Mr. Krebs. Yes, ma'am. I briefly touched on some of those
equipments that have modem or other telecommunications
connectivity, best practice generally speaking is to disable or
remove that sort of capability. In 2018 some just didn't have
the time or the equipment to transition out. But it is
something that across the risk profile of election
infrastructure, it is something that we work on. We work with
the State and local officials that have that equipment and we
work on transitioning and road mapping to more secure systems.
Ms. Jackson Lee. To each of you, do you feel, in spite of
your good works, that our election systems, State and Federal,
are still in jeopardy of intrusion?
Mr. Hicks. I believe that there can always be improvements
to be made and I believe that the work of the EAC can help with
those improvements.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Do you feel that would be foreign
intrusions----
Mr. Krebs. Yes. There is always progress that can be made.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me ask the Chairman to submit into the
record from the Brennan Center for Justice a study on securing
elections from foreign interference, ask unanimous consent.
Chairman Thompson. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]
Letter Submitted For the Record by Hon. Sheila Jackson Lee
February 12, 2019.
Representative Jackson Lee,
2079 Rayburn HOB, Washington, DC 20515.
Dear Representative Jackson Lee: My name is Lawrence Norden, and I
am the Deputy Director of Democracy at The Brennan Center for Justice
at NYU School of Law. First, please extend the Brennan Center's thanks
to Chairman Thompson and the U.S. House Committee on Homeland Security
for holding tomorrow's hearing on Election Security, an issue of
critical national importance. For nearly 15 years, I have led the
Brennan Center's extensive work on election security and foreign
interference. In 2005, in response to growing public concern over the
security of new electronic voting systems, I chaired a task force (the
``Security Task Force'') of the nation's leading technologists,
election experts, and security professionals assembled by the Brennan
Center to analyze the security and reliability of the nation's
electronic voting machines.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Lawrence Norden, The Machinery of Democracy: Voting System,
Security, Accessibility, Usability, and Cost, Brennan Center for
Justice, 46, 2006, https://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/
publications/Machinery_Democracy.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the 14 years since, I have authored or co-authored numerous
studies on the security, usability, cost, and design of our election
systems. In 2017, with my colleague Ian Vandewalker, I co-authored
Securing America's Elections from Foreign Interference, which looks at
the key steps we must take to ensure our elections are secure, free,
and fair.\2\ The report begins with a foreword from Ambassador R. James
Woolsey, former Director of Central Intelligence, and I have attached
it to this letter.* With the 2020 elections around the corner, I
believe the study will be of use to the committee. I ask that this
report be placed into the record for the hearing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Lawrence Norden, Securing America 's Elections from Foreign
Interference, Brennan Center for Justice, 2017, https://
www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/publications/
Securing_Elections_From_Foreign_Interference_1.pdf.
* The document has been retained in committee files and is
available at the website listed above.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the coming weeks, the Brennan Center will be releasing a new
study on the state of voting technology and the need for additional
resources to ensure that our elections in 2020 are as secure and
reliable a possible.
My colleagues at the Brennan Center and I are available to speak to
the committee, as well as provide briefings or updates, at the
committee's request.
Sincerely,
Larry Norden,
Deputy Director, Democracy Program.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And unanimous consent for E-deceptive
Campaign Practices by the Electronic Privacy Information
Center, unanimous consent.
Chairman Thompson. Without objection.**
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
** The document has been retained in committee files and is
available at https://epic.org/privacy/voting/
E_Deceptive_Report_10_2010.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ms. Jackson Lee. To the two witnesses just a yes or no
answer. The help of this committee and legislative effort to
improve your work along with funding, would that be of help to
you, Mr. Hicks?
Mr. Hicks. Yes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Krebs.
Mr. Krebs. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Taylor.
Mr. Taylor. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank you Ranking
Member. I appreciate the opportunity to be here.
So in 2011, I carried the MOVE Act Compliance Legislation
for the State of Texas. So in 2009 on a bipartisan effort
Congress passed the law that allowed States to do--or required
States to do a better job of helping men and women who were
serving in uniform outside the United States be able to vote.
That was--that was a 4-year compliance periods so the States
had 4 years to comply with it. One of the reasons for that was
that it--logistically we had to change our election schedule in
Texas and so I am sure my colleagues from Texas will recall
that all of the sudden they were filing instead of in January
they were filing in December and that actually required a
Constitutional amendment that had to be passed by the citizens
of Texas.
So in working on that, again on a bipartisan basis, it took
a lot of lifting on behalf of the State to comply with that
piece of legislation. This legislation is far more ambitious in
what it endeavors to do. Has there been--have--have you done a
study Mr. Krebs of what different States' laws they would have
to change or Constitutional amendments that they would have
to--to comply with H.R. 1? Have you done that Mr. Krebs?
Mr. Krebs. No, sir. We are focused on the technical
aspects.
Mr. Taylor. OK, and Mr. Hicks, have you done that? Have you
analyzed what Constitutional amendments or statutory changes
would be necessitated by H.R. 1?
Mr. Hicks. We have not.
Mr. Taylor. OK. I certainly hope if this is a serious bill,
if this is something we actually think will be passed into law
that we have thought about at some level what we are going to
have to do at the State level because we cannot comply with
this at the State level unless we have really thought about it.
I--I hope this isn't a show bill.
So Commissioner Hicks, in terms of ballot stuffing of
yesteryear, right? So we--we had ballot stuffing with paper
ballots, is--with the paper ballot provision in H.R. 1 return
us to the system of paper ballots? I mean is that--is that what
we are doing? We are kind-of going back in time?
Mr. Hicks. I guess I would need to read back through it
because I don't--I don't interpret it that way.
Mr. Taylor. So the way I read it is that it requires paper
ballots. Is that--is that not what you--what you understand?
Mr. Hicks. For auditability.
Mr. Taylor. Right. So for time--for auditability and I
think this is an important distinction that we should let out
here. So time now, in my county, we have electronic machines
that print out on an individual machine-by-machine basis an
audit of every vote so that that can be gone through and done
with an audit. So the machines are auditable through a paper
trail, not of the ballot itself but of what it--of ballots that
are cast on that particular machine if that makes sense.
So as I understand this bill, everybody has got to stop
using those machines and start buying new machines that are all
paper ballots. That is my understanding.
Mr. Hicks. That is not my understanding because there are
some machines that might have a paper trail associated under
glass but it would be the verifiability of the voter to verify
that piece of paper.
Mr. Taylor. Are there enough machines that will be
manufactured between now and the beginning of the primaries in
less than a year that we could actually implement this bill?
Mr. Hicks. I would need to talk to the vendors to see their
capabilities of manufacturing those machines.
Mr. Taylor. So we don't know if it could--it is even
physically possible to generate the number of machines that
will be required with this. I know there is funding in this
legislation but I am just unclear of whether or not it is even
possible to logistically have all the machines in place.
Mr. Hicks. I would have to talk to the vendors themselves.
Mr. Taylor. You don't know. Does anybody--Mr. Krebs, do you
have any idea?
Mr. Krebs. I don't know but I assume if there is money to
be made they will figure out a way to do it.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Taylor. Well and I think and just as a practical--on a
practical level so actually in my home county in Collin County,
Texas, I was actually an election judge before I was elected to
the legislature and in that process I saw what happens when
there are not enough voting machines.
You have very long lines, people get discouraged and they
don't vote and so you have reduction of participation which is
really--it is a really disappointing event.
It is a very sad thing when people show up to vote, they
wait for an hour, they can't actually vote because there aren't
enough machines. Is--what--what provisions do we have in this
legislation that would protect from that scenario because it
seems like we are setting up in this rush to try to get a bill
out the door to provide funding with very limited amount of
time to put it together, so to speak, that we would make sure
that we have enough voting locations that we don't have people
lining up and then saying I am not going to participate, I am
not going to vote.
Mr. Hicks. I think States have done a great job of moving
toward Election Day being the last date to actually cast their
ballot. Some States have moved toward early voting or vote
centers or absentee voting as well to alleviate the charge of
having Election Day where 100 million people are trying to show
up at the polls.
Mr. Taylor. Thank you. Thank you Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. Let me, for the
record, indicate for the Members and the witnesses, we are
technically here for only Section 3 of H.R. 1 bill. Some of the
questions have gone to other sections of the bill and I would
like for us to talk specifically about Section 3, which is our
jurisdiction. Yes, so I am--I just--I understand the interest,
but I don't think the witnesses are prepared to address some of
the questions that have been offered by the committee at this
point and that is just to make sure that we are all on track.
We now recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Rose.
Mr. Rose. Chairman, thank you, and that is Staten Island,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. There is a difference.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Rose. Mr. Krebs, how you doing? I am the incoming
Subcommittee Chair of Intel and Counterterrorism, so I look
forward to working with you and I think you hit the nail on the
head earlier, that it is clear that there are state actors,
non-state actors that are probing the homeland across the board
to figure out where our vulnerabilities are. As they conduct
that probe, our electoral systems are one of the things that
they are analyzing.
So, in line with that I want to get a sense of, when you
are working with local and State actors, who are you talking
to? Is it the Terrorism Task Force, is it the Fusion Center, is
the secretary of state, is it the Governor, is the law
enforcement entities? If it is all of the above, how do you do
that and what systems are in place to coordinate that type of
multifaceted action?
Mr. Krebs. It is all of the above and even more, the
Homeland Security advisers and Adjutant Generals and things of
that nature. My team, the Cyber Infrastructure Security Agency,
which you rightly point out, this election security issue is
not just about cybersecurity threats, there are also physical
securities threats, there are insider threat, their access to
machines, manipulation to machines on device that we need to be
thinking about. So, we approach this as a cyber and physical
security.
But, more broadly, form a counterterrorism perspective--the
thing I have learned over the last couple years is that
secretaries of state are their natural risk managers. They have
to plan for the hurricane. Look at what happened in the
panhandle of Florida in the last election cycle. They have got
to anticipate any nature of threat, and so, as we work through,
we do active-shooter training and those sorts of activities.
We have mechanisms in place, including, my team has over
140 security advisers out in the field that work day in, day
out with infrastructure owner/operators, with these officials,
they conduct training, they do walk-throughs, they do security
facility assessments to--in a lot of cases they provide reports
back to the facility owner/operator with suggested
improvements.
Mr. Rose. So, but just to push you for a second on this, my
understanding then is that there--you don't have an entity that
you are reaching out to, to coordinate this at the State and
regional level. That it is incumbent upon you all, with these
140 folks, to be reaching out to all of these local entities
and it seems, from our perspective, that this is rather
disparate.
Mr. Krebs. So, specific to elections, we have developed
communications protocols after some of the missteps of the
2016--post-2016 notifications where we have a coordination
protocol, where we work with the State--the chief election
official, the homeland security advisers, and so that is
typically our point of entry for--specific to elections.
Mr. Rose. OK, it would be great to see that.
Mr. Krebs. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rose. Then just last, at the Federal level, you
mentioned that you have convening responsibility, but who is
actually in charge of this interagency process? Who's at the
head of the table when all these folks are gathered together
and who has that statutory authority to actually make sure that
we are getting the job done here?
Mr. Krebs. So, there are a couple different levels of this
conversation. There is a policy coordination piece that the
National Security Council, Ambassador Bolton leads. There have
been a number of convening meetings and what-not, all the way
up to the principle committee meetings with the President.
Then at the operational level, there is a working group
that brings together the Department of Defense, the EAC is
involved, the DNI.
Mr. Rose. Are you in charge of the working group?
Mr. Krebs. Am I? No, sir. I am in charge of the
cybersecurity expertise and technical support to election
officials, that is my role.
Mr. Rose. Who would be in charge of the working group?
Mr. Krebs. There are a range of responsibilities and there
is law enforcement actions, that is naturally the FBI, there is
intelligence assessments, that is naturally the Director of
National Intelligence, there is the cybersecurity piece, that
is me. This again goes to the whole-of-Nation, the whole-of-
Government approach. There is no one agency that has all of the
tools and capabilities that are needed to push back on this.
Mr. Rose. OK, all right. Thank you. I yield back my times.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Crenshaw.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thank you both
for being here. I am pleased that this committee is meeting to
discuss the integrity of our elections and how to strengthen
the cybersecurity of our election infrastructure.
I will say, that election integrity is multifaceted, there
is a lot of aspects to it. It is not just the cyber side, but
it is also the voter fraud side, including voter I.D. laws and
how to prevent fraud by vote by mail.
I would say it is unfortunate that this is not a mark-up
process and it is also unfortunate that this part of the bill,
which I think we could reasonably come to a bipartisan solution
on, is attached to a much larger bill that is poisonous and
will certainly not make it past the Senate.
I want to ask you both, could you clarify what role you had
in crafting this particular legislation?
Mr. Krebs. So, in the last Congress we certainly provided
technical assistance on aspects that got rolled into it, but
suggestions on what DHS needs, what DHS does.
Mr. Crenshaw. OK.
Mr. Hicks. I spent 11 years as a House staffer. If the
committee wants to come and ask my opinion, I am more than
willing to give it.
Mr. Crenshaw. OK, but you were not consulted prior to this
hearing on what should be in this section of the bill?
Mr. Hicks. The committee--Chairman Thompson and then-
Chairman Brady invited me to speak before their Task Force and
I gave input there on various aspects.
Mr. Crenshaw. Is there anything missing from this section
of the bill that would you recommend go in it? Are there new
authorities or capabilities that--and I think this is directed
to you, Director Krebs, that DHS would need that are currently
not in it?
Mr. Krebs. So at this point, again, I think the Department
has, generally speaking, the authorities we need to engage and
support the election officials.
Mr. Crenshaw. One of the key provisions in this bill, it
includes the expiration date on funds. It is asking us to spend
a lot more money very rapidly; I want to get a sense of how
realistic that is from you all. Given the slow pace of
upgrading election infrastructure, do you think that States
would need more time and flexibility on this, given your
experience working with them?
Mr. Hicks. I believe that the Chairman had talked about
that this would go over for 10 years and in that cycle there
would be 5 Federal elections, allowing for States to make
improvements overall.
If the--I believe that the provision was put in there
because of the original HAVA provisions that allowed States to
use those funds in perpetuity. So this gives them a deadline to
actually spend the money similar to the 2018 provision, which
only allowed for 5 years.
Mr. Crenshaw. Do you have anything to add?
Mr. Krebs. Sir, our role is to help the election officials
spend the money in the most risk-based and security-formed
manner.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you gentleman, I yield.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Underwood.
Ms. Underwood. Thank you Chairman Thompson for calling this
important hearing, and it is a hearing that central to
protecting our democracy and I thank the witnesses for
testimony here today. My own State of Illinois was a target
during the 2016 Presidential elections where the information of
the 76,000 Illinoisans were compromised by Russian hackers.
So while I am relieved to hear from you that there are no
known harms that were caused in 2018's midterm elections by
nation-state actors, for me, and I think those on this panel it
is critical that State, Federal, and local governments continue
to collaborate to strengthen election security and landscape of
these ever-evolving threats. Now my colleague Congresswoman
Slotkin pursued a line of questioning with you regarding social
media and some of the threats that you all have recognized.
My follow-up question, at the end of your response sir, Mr.
Krebs, is that you said that the enemy was changing tactics and
so what should we be looking for in 2020 to ensure that we are
continuing preparedness particularly at the State and local
levels?
Mr. Krebs. That is exactly the question, what do we need to
be prepared for? We have a habit of defending against the last
attack, and so we can close out the last avenue of attack, we
can patch vulnerabilities, we can configure systems more
security. But if we have seen anything, the adversary gets
ahead of us, anticipates.
So what we are working through right now is what could an
advanced actor do? I--this is a personal perspective, but I
tend to think that they could look back and exploit, hey, we
were in that system--we are in there again. But they might not
really be there.
Ms. Underwood. Right.
Mr. Krebs. So they--and one way to look at it is the
Russians in some cases are living rent-free in our heads, and
so how are they going to take that to their advantage without
actually being on-network, but using their media--social media
tools, their influence campaigns. So staying ahead of them and
their ability to spread false information--it is working with
social media, it is working with the traditional media in a
content-neutral way.
But getting ahead and anticipating the things they may try
to push, but most importantly and this again goes to that
whole-of-Nation approach. What can we do to better inform the
American people of the risks that are being presented to them
and information that is being presented, again to make them
more informed consumers?
Ms. Underwood. More concretely then, you perceive social
media to continue to be a significant threat heading in to
2020?
Mr. Krebs. I see from a cost----
Ms. Underwood. OK.
Mr. Krebs. Effectiveness and risk perspective, that is
probably--it is cheap to do, it is highly effective in terms of
broad impact, and it is comparatively low-risk compared to on-
network activity. So I think that it is going to remain a tool
in their toolkit, they continue to do it to this day. What is
most concerning is more actors, including the Iranians and
others are getting in to that game, following the lead of the
Russians.
Ms. Underwood. Sure. One of the trends that we have seen,
at least in Illinois is the rise in popularity of early voting,
taking advantage of vote by mail or, as we call it, vote at
home. So wondering about any specific threats obviously social
media is probably less relevant in that stage of voting in an
election, so just wondering if you had any specific threats
that you might want to make this committee aware of?
Mr. Krebs. I am not aware of any specific threats to early
voting, the thing I will note though is early voting provides
us earlier opportunities to spot anomalies through the auditing
process and other security fall-back measures. So in some
cases, it actually advantages the defender.
Ms. Underwood. In your experience every jurisdiction is
engaging in that auditing process throughout the early vote
period?
Mr. Krebs. I am not sure I have enough information to say
that conclusively.
Ms. Underwood. Where would we go to find that out?
Mr. Krebs. In part, we would need to work with EAC through
some of their mechanisms.
Ms. Underwood. OK, thank you so much. I yield back, sir.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. The Chair now
recognizes the other gentlemen from Mississippi, Mr. Guest.
Mr. Guest. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will follow up a
little bit to what Congressman Taylor had talked about earlier.
In section 3001 of this act it says that it amends the Help
America Vote Act of 2002, to create a grant program for States
to replace current voting machines with paper ballot systems,
for security improvements before the 2020 general Federal
election. Mr. Krebs, do you know what percentage of voting
systems would have to be replaced to meet that requirement?
Mr. Krebs. Specifically no, but I know that 5 States and--
83 percent of another very large State need to go through that
process.
Mr. Guest. So would the other 45 or 44 and a percentage of
the State that is not in compliance--would those current voting
systems comply with what we are seeking to do here?
Mr. Krebs. I would have to do a little bit deeper research
on there, but I do know that of those other States that may be
nominally in compliance, there are still legacy machines that
are outdated and some of them may not be supported by the
vendor. It is a good thing to refresh and retire legacy
systems.
Mr. Guest. OK, but as far as a percentage of systems that
would need to be replaced, you do not have a percentage to give
us today?
Mr. Krebs. Not--not with me sir, I would have to work with
the----
Mr. Guest. Mr. Hicks, do you have any idea?
Mr. Hicks. I could talk to our staff to figure out what the
exact percentage is, but I don't have a direct percentage right
now.
Mr. Guest. Do you have an estimate on the cost to comply
with section 3001, Mr. Krebs?
Mr. Krebs. No, sir.
Mr. Guest. Mr. Hicks.
Mr. Hicks. The earlier testimony before the Senate Rules
Committee, that question was asked about replacing aging voting
equipment in non-compliance would be in this bill, I believe
that to be between $500 million and $1 billion.
Mr. Guest. I know there was previous testimony that at
least 45 States currently used paper ballots--and this may have
been testified to earlier and I may have missed it--outside of
Georgia what were the other 4 States that do not currently use
paper ballots?
Mr. Hicks. South Carolina, Louisiana, I believe New
Jersey--and I would have to get the rest of that--and Delaware,
yes.
Mr. Guest. Then Mr. Krebs you said that there was another
State that was partially in compliance with using paper
ballots----
Mr. Krebs. Pennsylvania----
Mr. Guest. Pennsylvania.
Mr. Krebs. Yes, sir.
Mr. Guest. What percentage of Pennsylvania did you say does
not currently use paper ballots?
Mr. Krebs. I would have to get back to your with specifics,
it is somewhere around the 80 percent number. I will note that
all 5 States that are--don't have paper trails right now, and
the State of Pennsylvania are all on a path toward voter
verifiable paper trail. These are good things, this is a good
trend.
Mr. Guest. Of those States that we have just talked about
that are on that path, do we have any idea as to whether or not
they will have paper ballots for the 2020 election cycle?
Mr. Hicks. I would--I don't know if all 5 of those will be
but I know that they are on that path to comply with that. But
I would also say that whatever path they take to ensure that
those folks who have disabilities can still vote independently
and privately as prescribed by the law in the Help America Vote
Act.
Mr. Guest. Then finally, Mr. Krebs, in your report on page
6 you say that our voting infrastructure is diverse subject to
local control and has many checks and balances. Do you believe,
Mr. Krebs, that elections should remain under local control?
Mr. Krebs. Yes, sir.
Mr. Guest. Do you--do you Mr. Hicks, do you also believe
elections should remain under local control?
Mr. Hicks. States and localities are the ones that run
elections.
Mr. Guest. Thank you. I yield back Mr. Chair.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green.
Mr. Green of Texas. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
your leadership and allowing me to serve on this committee
under our leadership. I am a person who loves his country and I
love my State but I have heard this 10th Amendment argument
before. Lonnie Smith was a dentist in Houston, Texas. He wanted
to vote and there was a white primary. Smith versus Allwright,
1944, went to the Supreme Court of the United States of
America. Lonnie Smith prevailed; that ended white primaries.
The 10th Amendment argument has been used consistently by
some States who deny rights. Texas is one such State. I love my
State but Texas has been a bad actor for decades. I love my
State. My State currently has a poll tax in contravention of
the 24th Amendment to the Constitution of the United States of
America. Talk about this photo I.D. and we will give you an
I.D. if you can't afford it, if you are indigent.
Well I tested that system and voted without my proper I.D.
and had some time to secure the proper I.D. The State of Texas
will accord you an I.D. at no cost if you are from Texas
because in my case I am from Louisiana. I had to get my birth
certificate from Louisiana to get my I.D. in Texas and I had to
pay a fee for that; clever ways to disenfranchise.
So I thank God for the Federal Government and the stand
that has been taken over the years to protect the rights of
people in States. I don't think that is in contravention of the
10th Amendment.
Now, to my question, you said Mr. Hicks that the States are
moving toward some sort of paper component, I believe is the
phraseology that you utilized. Paper trail is what people at my
level of life would probably say, ``Why are they doing that?''
What is the rationale for moving to paper verification?
Mr. Hicks. It is a little bit of two things. One, I believe
it is confidence to ensure that the--if there is an audit being
done that there is some sort of physical trail that people can
point to and do a physical count of that. The other is I
believe just moving back toward confidence as well.
Mr. Green of Texas. Confidence and the level of confidence
that we aspire or that we desire to have, is that one that
would give us a belief that if there has been some sort of
intervention, we will be able to detect it and that paper--
verifiable paper may be of assistance?
Mr. Hicks. There could be.
Mr. Green of Texas. If this is the case that verifiable
assistance by way of paper is something that is of value, can
you give me a good reason why we would oppose having verifiable
paper given that States are moving toward it and given if there
is some value in it, why would we oppose it? What is a good
reason to desire a system that doesn't have this type of
verification?
Mr. Hicks. The biggest reason that I have heard over the
years is those folks who have disabilities who may not have the
dexterity functions to handle that paper and to verify it. So
if I am without sight, I can't verify a piece of paper
physically. I think the technology is moving toward allowing
folks who have sight disabilities to be able to verify that but
they still would have to physically use that paper. I believe
that we have come a long way since the 2000 election in terms
of technology and moving forward.
For instance back in 2000, everyone in this room probably
has a smart phone. No one had those issues. So as we move
forward with technology to allow for people to cast their
ballots and so forth, the other aspect of that is people who
live overseas and are in combat areas where they might not have
access to a fax machine to fax that back or the ability to get
that piece of paper back. But to ensure that our military and
overseas folks still have a way to cast their ballots for the
rights they are defending for us all.
Mr. Green of Texas. Thank you. Persons who need assistance
in polling places, we currently allow that. If you need some
sort of--if you are visually impaired we allow you to be
assisted and there are ways to deal with our military personnel
in foreign places, distant places. The empirical evidence seems
to indicate that there is more value in having it than not. Is
that a fair statement?
Mr. Hicks. Yes.
Mr. Green of Texas. All right, thank you Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from Florida who comes from a State
that has some minor experience in voting issues. Mrs. Demings.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman and thank you
again to our witnesses for being here with us. Everybody in
this room clearly understands the deep, dark, ugly history that
our great Nation has as it pertains to voter suppression and I
would think that this committee would lead the effort in making
sure that we have a system that allows citizens of this country
to be able to exercise their right to vote. That I would
believe in this country that we would ensure that race, gender,
economic status, or ZIP code would never again be--to a
person's right to vote. So I want to thank you--the two of you
for what you do to make our process fair.
I am from Florida and let me just say I am not offended
when Florida people all over this Nation question what in the
heck is going on in Florida? I am not offended by it because I
am committed to making sure that we get the process right. We
can never underestimate the--how important the cooperation is
between Federal, State, and local governments are to making
sure that this process is right. In the November's election, 20
States, including my home State of Florida, elected new
Governors, and while several others elected or appointed new
secretaries of state.
So as we prepare for the 2020 election and using what
happened in 2016 kind of as a tool that we will not forget,
looking at the vulnerabilities and the experiences of 2016, I
will ask both of you, what outreach have you participated in to
secretaries of state, to new executive officers or Governors to
make sure that they are prepared for the 2020 process?
Mr. Hicks. Thank you, Congresswoman. That is a great
question. We work very closely with the National Association of
Secretaries of State, and I actually participated in their
winter conference 2 weeks ago, where I met several of the new
secretaries myself. We also work with the National Association
of State Election Directors who also had their conference a
couple of weeks ago, here in the District of Columbia, where I
have met several of those new folks.
We work very closely with them to find out what sort of
assistance the EAC can have. In 2018, we held a summit in--at
the National Press Club where it was well attended, broadcast
on C-SPAN, where we talked to people about preparing for the
2018 election.
One month before the 2018 election, in October we held a--
another summit in the Congressional Visitor's Center where
Members of Congress and others were able to kick the tires on
voting machines, and hear from election officials, themselves,
about how they were preparing for the election coming up.
I believe that the EAC is looking to hold additional forums
this year, and next year, with disability groups, and State
election officials, and others so that we can continue our
partnership. I believe that we have come a long way from when
folks were not looking favorably upon the EAC. I would ask that
you talk to--or ask the question to the secretaries of state.
I might be a little worried about this, but--about how we
are doing, and move forward. There are other things that we can
do to improve the process. But at the end of the day, this is a
partnership where we hope to do what is best for the American
people, and ensure that the confidence remains high.
I journeyed to your State in--in December to go down to Bay
County and talk to folks, and find out what actually happened,
and how they prepared for the election, since they were--things
were destroyed. They were cleaning out voting equipment with
toothbrushes, basically. But they still pulled the election
off. We want to be able to provide them resources, not just
monetarily, but advice on how to prepare for 2020, and moving
forward.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you. Director Krebs.
Mr. Krebs. Briefly, I have the advantage of having a field
force, 140 folks out in field. Their top priority, as these new
secretaries were being sworn in, was to get meetings on the
books. Unfortunately, some of those meetings were disrupted by
the shutdown. But those are back on the books. We are engaging
full speed ahead.
Mrs. Demings. Great. Thank you so much. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Reverend Cleaver.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank you for being
here today. I--this is not a trick question, but I would like
for both of you, if you could answer the question. Do you think
that we have an election process that is equal in this country?
Mr. Krebs. I am sorry. Could you repeat the question?
Mr. Cleaver. Is the--are the elections in the United States
of America equal? If we have a Presidential election, are all
votes equal?
Mr. Hicks. One person, one vote. So every vote counts
equally.
Mr. Cleaver. Yes.
Mr. Krebs. I would agree with that.
Mr. Cleaver. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Krebs. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cleaver. So, everybody who votes should have equal
access to the voting booth?
Mr. Krebs. Every eligible voter should have access to a
ballot. Not necessarily going into a voting booth, as well. But
have access----
Mr. Cleaver. That is good. That is fine. That is OK.
Mr. Krebs. Yes sir.
Mr. Cleaver. OK. I don't think--I don't think elections are
equal. I think I can prove it rather easily. If you live in
Oregon you can vote on Sundays. You can register all the way up
to the election. If you are in South Carolina--and I even think
Florida, you can vote on--on Souls to the Polls, where you vote
on Sundays.
In Missouri you can't do that. In the neighboring State of
Kansas, you can't do that. In Iowa you can't do that. So
something is not right, in terms of having equal access to the
ballot--I mean, to the voting precinct. Some people have a
greater opportunity to vote--vote than others. Am I wrong or am
I right? Thank you. No, go ahead.
Mr. Hicks. I was going to say that I believe that there--if
Congress wants to give the EAC more direction on how to improve
the process, then we are more than willing to help it. I
believe that States are moving toward early voting.
I believe that States are moving, with the $380 million, to
refine voter registration processes. We will continually work
with States to improve the process. The U.S. Postal Service
does a great job, in terms of vote by mail. But I think there
are other aspects that we all can improve upon.
Mr. Cleaver. But you do understand that does some vote--
some States fighting it?
Mr. Hicks. Yes.
Mr. Cleaver. So am I right or am I wrong, Mr. Krebs?
Mr. Krebs. Sir, my job is regardless of the jurisdiction,
whatever the--whatever the system is, that that vote is being
cast and counted, and it is done in a secure and resilient
manner.
Mr. Cleaver. OK. I understand. I appreciate it. That is--I
like that, a good American. OK, I will declare I am right.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Cleaver. I think I can prove it, empirically, that we
don't all have equal access to the voting booth. OK. The other
thing--our conduct is always based on cost. We do something,
there is a cost to it, or for the most part there is a cost to
everything.
I am wondering, we all have been told by our intelligence
agencies that Vladimir Putin ordered interference with our
elections. We have been--this is a direct quote, they will be
back in 2020, FBI. In your opinion, Mr. Krebs, has--have the
Russians paid a price for interfering with our elections?
Mr. Krebs. There has certainly been a significant amount of
pressure and pain put upon the Putin administration, sanctions,
other diplomatic actions, and a number of indictments against
GRU actors. We will continue to push them, we will continue to
defend.
My mission is to help State and local officials protect
their networks, defend their networks and that is what we focus
on every single day.
Mr. Cleaver. Mr. Hicks.
Mr. Hicks. Our middle name is assistance and so we want to
help as much as we can.
Mr. Cleaver. OK. I am not sure that they--that they paid a
high enough price for doing what they have done but my
suggestion here is that they will come back again because the
price wasn't high enough.
All those people who have been indicted, all they have to
do to avoid going to jail is to--is never coming back to the
United States or not being caught visiting another country with
which we can have access to an arrest. Anyway, Mr. Chairman, I
appreciate the opportunity. I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. I thank the
witnesses for their testimony. I now call up the second panel.
I welcome the second panel of witnesses. First I--let me
thank all of you for being so patient. I woul like to welcome
our California Secretary of State Alex Padilla to the panel.
Secretary Padilla has been a leading voice on election
security and has done a number of innovative things in
California to train up officials at the local level, raise
public awareness about misinformation, and make the most of
Federal partnerships.
Second we will hear from Noah Praetz. OK. There is an issue
with a Mississippian and an Alabamian in pronunciation. Who
until very recently served as the director of elections for
Cook County, Illinois where he oversaw elections in one of the
largest counties in the United States.
Third, I am excited to hear from Mr. Jake Braun, the
executive director of the cyber policy initiative at the
University of Chicago Harris School of Public Policy and also a
co-founder of a DEFCON Voting Machine Hacking Village, the
world's only public third-party inspection of voting equipment.
The research we have seen come out of DEFCON has been
instrumental in helping us understand our vulnerabilities and
help us move the conversation on election security forward.
Finally, I now recognize a Ranking Member Mr. Rogers to
introduce Mr. Merrill, our minority witness today.
Mr. Rogers. Yes, I am very happy to have Secretary Merrill
with us today. He is in his second term as Alabama Secretary of
State and is one of--if not one of, he is the hardest-working
politician in Alabama. He has done such a fine job and I am
happy to have him here with us today.
Chairman Thompson. Without objection, the witnesses' full
statements will be inserted into the record. I will now ask
each witness to summarize his statement for 5 minutes beginning
with Mr. Padilla.
STATEMENT OF ALEX PADILLA, SECRETARY OF STATE, CALIFORNIA
Mr. Padilla. Thank you Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Rogers,
and Members of the committee. The defense of our Nation's
elections must be a top priority for all of government;
Federal, State, and local. After all, our democracy is under
attack.
Elections officials have taken seriously the warnings from
intelligence agencies. Our elections have been and will
continue to be targeted by bad actors both foreign and domestic
who seek to disrupt and undermine public confidence in our
democracy.
We know these threats to be real because we see them every
day. If we agree that defending the integrity of our elections
is a matter of National security, then we must act accordingly.
Yet, despite the warnings and advice, our National response
has been lacking. I have been to discuss what the Federal
Government can do to help and to share what we are doing in
California to better secure our elections.
I will begin by recognizing that both DHS Director Krebs
and Senior Advisor Masterson are tremendously valuable
partners. They have honored their commitment to timely
communication with us when issues or concerns arise.
I will note that the importance of this partnership
underscores the danger of unnecessary Government shutdowns.
With the 2020 elections quickly approaching, our collaboration
must not be interrupted. Now this partnership is only one
component of a comprehensive defense strategy. We must also
invest in election administration.
The last time Congress approved new funding for elections
was 17 years ago through the Help America Vote Act. The
investments made as a result were buying in large equipment and
technology that are now 20 years old.
Today it is not uncommon for elections officials to be
searching on-line for replacement parts for voting systems that
are no longer supported by manufacturers. Others are stuck
utilizing old operating systems that cannot be patched or
updated with the latest security software.
So if we truly value our democracy, then we must commit
consistent Federal funding for elections administration and
security. Yes, Congress did appropriate $380 million last year
in grants to States, but that wasn't new money, and it
certainly wasn't enough. Last year's appropriation was the last
of butterfly ballot, hanging chad, money that was never
intended for modern-day cyber threats.
Next, Congress has the opportunity to make the best
practices for election security the National standards. Among
them, rigorous testing and certification of our voting systems,
requiring logic and accuracy testing of systems before every
election, requiring paper ballots and a voter-verified paper
trail, requiring voting systems to be kept off-line and
requiring post-election audits after every election.
This is a proven framework for securing elections and for
improving voter confidence. You see, if a voter begins to think
that their vote may not be counted or may not be counted as
cast, and they choose to not participate in an election as a
result of that doubt, that is a form of voter suppression.
Now these policies have served California well for years,
but since 2016, we have done more. We have established these
partnerships with DHS, FBI, the EAC, as well as State and local
agencies, to better coordinate in the event of a threat or
incident. We have engaged in security trainings, table-top
exercises, and information sharing.
We have upgraded our State technology infrastructure and
established an office of election cybersecurity and an office
of enterprise risk management. We have dedicated staff to
monitoring social media for erroneous information about voting.
We have launched the public education campaign to raise
awareness about election misinformation.
We have created a web portal with resources for voters,
including the ability to verify their registration status, find
their polling place and to report suspected misinformation.
Finally, we piloted a voter status alert tool which notifies a
voter whenever their voter registration record is updated.
We plan to deploy this tool State-wide, in time for the
2020 elections. Thankfully, the 2018 election went smoothly,
but we know that those who seek to undermine our Democracy will
continue to try with increased frequency and sophistication. It
is not enough to keep up with nefarious actors; we must stay
ahead.
This requires us to continue to work together, to implement
the best standards, and to make the necessary investments.
Thank you for this opportunity; I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Padilla follows:]
Prepared Statement of Alex Padilla
February 12, 2019
Good morning and thank you Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member
Rogers, and Members of the committee for the opportunity to be before
you today.
And thank you for convening this hearing to discuss our Nation's
election security readiness. For me, and for my colleagues in State and
local government, this conversation could not be any more urgent.
The defense of our Nation's election systems and infrastructure
must be a top priority for all of government--Federal, State, and
local. After all, our democracy is under attack.
Elections officials throughout the Nation have taken seriously the
warnings we have received from Federal intelligence agencies--that our
elections have been and will continue to be a target for bad actors,
foreign and domestic, who seek to disrupt our democratic process and
undermine public confidence in our elections.
Elections officials know these threats to be true, because we see
them every day. For example, in California, our internet-facing systems
are pinged or scanned constantly. This activity is the equivalent of
someone walking through a neighborhood, checking doorknobs, looking for
unlocked doors. While these are not hacks or breaches, those conducting
this unauthorized activity certainly have intentions.
If we agree that the integrity of our elections is a matter of
National security, then we must act accordingly and recognize that
elections officials are on the front lines. We are the first responders
to attacks on our democracy.
Yet despite consistent warnings and evidence, our National response
is severely lacking.
Most critically, we must rethink how we fund and administer
elections.
In my testimony today, I will discuss what the Federal Government
can do to further support States and local jurisdictions, and I will
share what we are doing in California to better secure our elections.
I want to start by saying that DHS Director Chris Krebs and DHS
Senior Advisor Matt Masterson have become tremendously valuable
partners. They have demonstrated their commitment to quality and timely
communication and coordination with State and local elections officials
when issues or concerns arise.
When potential threat information has surfaced, they have reached
out to us. When we read or hear of new threats, they are there to
inform us of potential exposure.
The importance of this partnership underscores the danger of
unnecessary Government shutdowns. During the recent shutdown,
secretaries across the Nation were notified that email responses and
phone contact with DHS personnel would be suspended or delayed. As the
2020 election cycle is already ramping up, we cannot afford to lose
critical contact with our Federal partners.
Partnership with DHS and other National security agencies is only
one necessary component of a comprehensive defense strategy.
Let's be honest, elections are underfunded and are too often a low
priority for Federal, State, and local governments. The last time
Congress approved new funding for elections was through the Help
America Vote Act (HAVA), 17 years ago, in the wake of the 2000
Presidential election. And the investments made as a result of HAVA
were by and large in equipment and technology that is now 20 years old.
Members of the committee, you would not settle for 20-year-old
technology and reliability on your cell phones; our voting systems
should be no different.
The lack of sustained investment has resulted in outdated election
infrastructure and understaffed elections offices. Across the country
there are many elections officials in counties with small populations--
and therefore small budgets--that don't even have their own IT staff.
In addition to being outdated, voting equipment in many
jurisdictions is at or beyond life expectancy. As we meet here today,
there are some elections officials searching on eBay for replacement
parts for systems that are no longer supported by manufacturers. Others
are utilizing operating systems that are so old, their vendor no longer
provides tech support--meaning some voting machines cannot be patched
or updated with the latest security software.
Simply put, too many elections officials are ill-equipped to defend
against 21st Century threats.
We often say that our budgets are a reflection of our values.
If we genuinely value our democracy, then we must commit consistent
Federal support for election security and administration.
Members of the committee, respectfully, last year's appropriation
of $380 million in cybersecurity grants to States was not new money,
and it certainly was not enough. The $380 million was simply the final
appropriation of HAVA funds. That was the last of the butterfly ballot
and hanging chad money. That was not 2016, 2018, or 2020 cyber threat
funding.
In addition to funding, Congress also has a tremendous opportunity
to make the proven best practices for election security the National
standard.
Among them:
Rigorous testing and certification of voting systems with
up-to-date security standards;
Requiring testing of voting systems for logic and accuracy
before every election;
Paper ballots and a voter-verified paper trail, for
auditing, recount, and manual tally purposes;
Keeping elections infrastructure off-line;
Post-election audits after every election.
I suggest to you that this is the proven framework for better
securing our elections as well as improving voter confidence.
Deficiencies in our election security infrastructure can jeopardize
public confidence in our democracy. If voters begin to think that their
vote may not be counted, or may not be counted as cast, and they decide
to not participate in an election as a result of that doubt, that is a
form of voter suppression.
These are just some of the best practices that have served
California well since long before the 2016 election.
And in response to the 2016 election, we doubled down on our
efforts.
We established intergovernmental partnerships with the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security, the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
the Elections Assistance Commission, the California Department of
Technology, the California Office of Emergency Services, the California
Highway Patrol, and county governments to ensure coordinated responses
to cyber threats and incidents.
My office has engaged local elections officials in cybersecurity
trainings, table-top exercises, and information sharing. And I
personally visited fusion centers in all regions of California to
better position ourselves to coordinate in the event of a threat or
incident.
We upgraded our technology infrastructure and established both an
Office of Election Cybersecurity and an Office of Enterprise Risk
Management within our agency.
Another lesson I've taken to heart is that your technology is only
as strong as the staff that uses it. Cybersecurity tools are just that,
tools--tools for our staff to utilize. This is why we have invested in
specialized staff dedicated to cybersecurity and trainings for
elections staff at the State level and with our local partners.
As part of our strategies in the new Office of Election
Cybersecurity, last fall we launched ``VoteSure,'' a first of its kind
in the Nation public education campaign to increase voter awareness
about election misinformation on-line and to promote official, trusted
election resources. The campaign included the launch of a new web
portal with a variety of tools and resources for voters including the
ability to verify registration status before going to vote, reliable
polling place look-up tools, and a dedicated email address for voters
to report suspected misinformation. And in a first-in-State history
effort, we emailed official election information and resources directly
to voters.
In the days leading up to the 2018 General Election, our staff
identified nearly 300 Facebook posts and Tweets with inaccurate and
misleading information about the voting process. We reported them to
their respective social media companies for review. Ninety-eight
percent of the posts and tweets we reported were promptly removed by
their respective platforms for not meeting their standards.
Our office also piloted a new voter status email alert program in 7
counties--Madera, Napa, Orange, Sacramento, San Mateo, San Bernardino,
and Solano--for the 2018 General Election.
This new system automatically notifies voters whenever we have
received a new registration or update to their registration record
through our on-line voter registration website or a paper voter
registration form. We plan to expand the program State-wide ahead of
the 2020 elections.
California's share of last year's HAVA appropriation was $34
million. Funds in the current year's budget is helping counties with
costs of upgrading security of their connection to our State-wide
centralized voter registration database, known as VoteCal, and polling
place accessibility.
At the State level, we are using a portion of the funds for:
Support of county efforts associated with cybersecurity
risks and infrastructure needs related to the State-wide voter
registration system, including important activities such as
security assessments, penetration testing, and staff training.
Support for county improvement of polling place
accessibility and administration of elections.
Support for county vote center implementation, which
includes costs associated with new voting technology like
ballot on demand, electronic pollbooks, remote accessible vote
by mail systems and voting systems.
Enhancements to VoteCal State-wide voter registration
system.
Development of security training curriculum and training of
counties.
Support and guidance for counties implementing risk limiting
audits.
By all accounts, 2018 was a success. In California, voters
responded with record-high voter registration and the highest voter
turnout in a midterm election since 1982. And the election went as
smooth as we could have hoped for.
But, the threats to our elections are ever-evolving. And those who
seek to undermine our democracy will increase their efforts both in
frequency and sophistication.
My colleague, Minnesota Secretary of State Steve Simon, puts it
best, ``Election cybersecurity is like running a race without a finish
line.'' It's not enough to keep up with nefarious actors who seek to
undermine our democracy, we need to stay ahead.
To do that, we must constantly be learning, scrutinizing, testing,
and upgrading our security--and that requires Federal, State, and local
entities to keep working together and to make the necessary
investments.
Thank you again for your work to address these issues head on. I
appreciate your leadership and look forward to answering your
questions.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. Next, we will hear
from Mr. Praetz, who will--until very recently, served as the
director of elections for Cook County, Illinois.
STATEMENT OF NOAH PRAETZ, FORMER DIRECTOR OF ELECTIONS, COOK
COUNTY, ILLINOIS
Mr. Praetz. Thank you, Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member
Rogers, distinguished Members. My name is Noah, and I was
director of elections in Cook County, Illinois. I speak to you
from that experience today, and it is a real honor to do so.
You know, when election officials certify results, they
bestow, not just power, but legitimacy that comes from the
essential American belief that our elections reflect a trusted
and true accounting of the votes. We secure that legitimacy by
protecting two--two virtues, truth and trust, along two
different fronts, infrastructure and information.
Truth can be protected with policies and practices that
ensure a fair and accurate account. Trust is protected by
continuing to deliver services to our voters as expected.
Election officials have been security votes in voter records
for a very long time. When I started, prior to 2000, we served
mostly as logistics managers--kind-of like wedding planners
making sure the right list of people came together at the right
place with the right stuff.
After Bush v. Gore, a whole new era was foisted on us with
voting technology, new rules--and we become I.T. managers. Now,
since 2016, we must become cybersecurity managers. Spurred by
the need to defend against foreign adversaries, Federal and
State officials have been working very successfully to find a
good balance of Federal involvement in elections, without
trampling on authority that the States zealously guard.
State election officials who protect State-wide voter
registration lists everywhere and more systems in some States
and are often the spokespeople defending our institution
deserve great credit, particularly their lead blocking in 2016,
but also their leadership in the lead-up to 2018, when
accepting the premise that we are a target and that we are
vulnerable.
The Federal agency, led by Director Krebs and with
Masterson's help, charged with providing direct support in this
area, has also met the continuing demand for information and
for services.
Election officials remain committed to the security effort
even though there were no known impactful attacks against us in
2018, because we believe that good news is probably more a
function of our adversaries not engaging than it is a result of
our significant efforts over the last 2 years.
At the risk of being overly broad, I wish to underscore
that local election officials are the ones who control, secure,
and run elections. One hundred and eight in Illinois; and over
8,000 nationally are on the front lines. We deploy a variety of
connected digital systems--poll books, voter registration
systems, informational websites, election results websites,
Election Day command centers, not to mention voting systems.
Each of these are a ripe target. Most local election
officials are city or county officers, 2 or 3 people, and they
are facing down shadowy, powerful adversaries; kind-of like
Andy in Mayberry sent to repel an invading army. Locals need
advice, support, and resources, for modern defendable
technology and routine hand-counted audits, which can give
confidence that the digital results are accurate.
But second, and I think more critically today, they have a
pressing need for top-notch personnel with the skills to
navigate the current cyber battlefield. In Cook County, we
undertook significant efforts in securing the infrastructure
and helping raise awareness within the ecosystem.
We concluded that, to decrease the likelihood of a
successful attack, each local election official must have
access to an election security officer. We suggested this be
handled by a brigade of cyber-navigators, supporting local
election officials. These navigators would adopt the mantra of
defend, detect, recover.
They help improve defenses, following specific
recommendations already out there from the Center for Internet
Security or the Defending Digital Democracy program at Harvard.
They establish breach detection techniques and they help
develop recovery plans for when attackers do successfully
penetrate the first or second line.
To accomplish this, navigators secure free support on
offers from Homeland Security, State governments and companies
like Google, Cloudflare, and Microsoft. They work with State
and county I.T. staff, and critically, they will work with the
deeply-embedded election vendors who are strategic partners
that provide locals with much of their current support.
Incidentally, Illinois lawmakers spent the HAVA funds you
released on a navigator program, with $7 million allocated to
support each county, 108, more or less equally, with human
expertise--9 navigators, each supporting about 12 counties and
serving as their election security officer.
The remaining HAVA funds were to be spent with some
recognition that bigger counties, like Cook County, are likely
more high-value targets. Voters should feel broadly confident
that we have resilient systems and that election officials are
taking this problem very serious. But they should also
understand that without continued investment, and people and
products, the possibility of a successful attack increases.
Some losing candidates are already apt to call their
defeats into doubt. A new digital breach, no matter how far
removed from the vote counting system, could turn sore losers
to cynicism, disbelief, even revolt. That is the reaction our
adversaries are looking for.
The bottom line is we cannot eliminate every chance of
breach. We can make sure that successful attacks are rare, and
we can provide assurances that we are prepared to recover
quickly when they happen. We do this with support at the local
level. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Praetz follows:]
Prepared Statement of Noah Praetz
February 12, 2019
biography
Noah Praetz was the director of elections working under Cook County
Clerk David Orr and then under Clerk Karen A. Yarbrough. He was
responsible for the overall management of elections in Cook County,
Illinois, one of the largest jurisdictions in the country serving 1.6
million voters.
He started as temporary worker hired to do data entry prior to the
2000 Presidential election. In 2007 he became deputy director and in
2013 he was appointed director.
Mr. Praetz currently runs an elections consulting practice. He
teaches election law at DePaul University College of Law. He is an
advisory board member at the University of Chicago's Cyber Initiative.
Mr. Praetz was on the executive committee of the Government
Coordinating Council representing the local election officials as
Homeland Security sought guidance on how best to support the election
community. He was the treasurer of the International Association of
Government Officials. He was also co-chair of the Election Center Cyber
Security committee. He was active in the Illinois Association of County
Clerks and Recorders. He has presented on election security,
sustainability, election day management, on-line registration, voter
registration modernization and other election-related items.
executive summary
Election officials have been securing our Nation's votes and voter
records for a very long time. We have been securing digital
infrastructure for a more than a decade. But the changed environment
and the expectation of continued sophisticated attacks forces them to
up their game.
Spurred by the need to defend against foreign enemies, Federal and
State officials have been working successfully to find a good balance
of Federal involvement in elections, without trampling on authority
that the States zealously guard. Good progress is being made.
However, even as the community of election officials appreciate
that election 2018 was free of any known incidents, they largely
recognize that those successes are probably less a function of their
efforts than they are a function of our Nation's adversaries' probable
choice to hold back. The fundamentals of election security, and the
investments neeeded to ensure improved security, have not changed since
the summer of 2016.
Broadly, the fundamentals are these, local election officials are
the ones who control, secure, and run elections. Locals--108 in
Illinois and over 8,000 Nation-wide--are on the front lines of this new
battlefield. Locals control almost the entire election infrastructure.
Locals are the entities most in need of support and attention. Locals
need help to fortify themselves, and our most important institution,
against the high-probability threat actors they've been warned of. The
States, with partnership from the Federal Government, are the entities
that are now, and will continue to be, the leaders needed to support
the security efforts to the local election officials.
While in Cook County we studied and undertook significant efforts
at securing the infrastructure and helping raise awareness within the
ecosystem. We concluded that to decrease the likelihood of successful
attack on digital services, each local election official must have
ready access to a savvy dedicated partner--an election infrastructure
security officer. Most locals don't have that capacity today.
Local election officials cannot master this problem without direct
support of skilled experts. We suggested this be handled by a brigade
of digital defenders, or what the Government coordinating council calls
``cyber navigators,'' supporting local election officials into the
future.
These ``navigators'' should adopt the mantra of Defend, Detect,
Recover. They need to accomplish these three vital goals. They can help
improve defenses within election offices, following the specific
recommendations of Center for Internet Security or Defending Digital
Democracy--we believe they'll quickly bring up the floor of the
elections security ecosystem. They'll also establish detection
techniques. And they'll develop recovery plans for when attackers
penetrate the first and second line.
To accomplish this, the ``Navigators'' will secure free support on
offer from public and private organizations, like Homeland Security,
State governments, and companies like Google and Cloudflare. They will
also work with outside vendors who provide much of the elections
infrastructure and support to local officials. Third, they will build a
culture of security that can adapt to evolving threats through training
and constant re-assessment.
Voters should feel confident that we have resilient election
systems, with paper ballots and good audits almost everywhere. But
voters should also understand that without continued investment in
people and products the possibility of a successful attack increases.
As does the likelihood that losing campaigns may cultivate cynicism
about the integrity of our elections for their own purposes. Democracy
is not perfect. As Churchill said, it is the worst form of government
except for all the others. We need to protect it. We will regret it if
our democracy is damaged because we looked away at a critical moment.
testimony
Thank you, Chairman Thompson and Ranking Member Rogers, as well as
all Members. It is an honor to be here. I am reminded as an election
administrator that when we certify results we are an essential part of
the process that bestows not just power, but legitimacy. And that
legitimacy attaches because of the essential American belief that our
elections reflect a trusted and true accounting of each election. I
speak to you today in support of efforts to ensure that legitimacy
remains the key virtue in our elections.
My name is Noah Praetz. Two weeks ago I stepped down as director of
elections in Cook County, Illinois where I worked for Cook County Clerk
David Orr, and recently Clerk Karen Yarbrough. I began my career in
2000 and during that time our office tried to lead on technology and
security--using applied forensics in elections; creating widely-
circulated cybersecurity checklists in advance of the 2016 elections;
and publishing the first white paper written by election officials in
the wake of the 2016 attacks. Recently, I helped the Center for
Internet Security (CIS) adapt their digital security expertise to the
unique context of elections and also spent a little time talking to the
Defending Digital Democracy program at Harvard's Belfer Center (DDD).
As co-chair of the Government Coordinating Council (GCC) that the
Department of Homeland Security created to help address election
security, I worked with Federal, State, and local leaders in elections,
technology, intelligence, and law enforcement.
In the past 18 months I have testified before the U.S. Senate Rules
and Administration committee once. On two occasions I testified before
the United States Election Assistance Commission (EAC) and on two
occasions I testified before Illinois legislative committees. I have
presented before the numerous meetings of election officials from
Illinois and from around the country. Every time, I strive to deliver
the same message:
The threats to election infrastructure are real.
Elections are largely run and secured locally, so security
efforts, let by the States and augmented by the Federal
Government, need to be concentrated locally.
As election officials, we must accept the conclusion of the
intelligence community--our elections were attacked and are vulnerable.
And while enemy hostile probes of our news and influence systems appear
to have been more successful than those on election administration, we
have to expect the attacks will evolve. We, as election administrators,
must defend our section of the line--by securing all elements of our
voting infrastructure.
Cybersecurity--One More Sword to Juggle
Prior to 2000, election administrators served mostly as wedding
planners, making sure the right list of people came together in the
right place with the right stuff. After Bush v. Gore, the Help America
Vote Act (HAVA) heralded in new era of voting technology, and we became
legal compliance and IT managers. We've been working to protect digital
technology since then. But the 2016 election showed irrefutably that
sophisticated attacks are to be expected and that we must also be
cybersecurity managers.
Foreign governments, foreign non-state actors, and domestic
troublemakers have the capacity and desire to corrode the essential
public belief that our election outcomes are true and reliable. To very
different degrees, this threat applies to both preliminary returns
announced on election night and to official, final results. Beyond
corrupting election results, the threat also reaches the large variety
of systems used to run seamless elections.
Therefore, the new security mantra, or security framework, for
local election officials must be ``defend, detect, recover.''
Security isn't just about defense. Perfect defense is difficult or
even impossible. I could cite a list of our best companies and
Government entities that have been breached despite significant
defensive investments. Instead, the challenge of security is to ensure
no attack exceeds our resilience--our ability to detect and recover--
whether that requires restoring lost data or even recounting ballots--
to establish election results that are trusted and true.
Because State laws vary, local election officials confront a
different security matrix in each State, affecting their ability to
defend, detect, and/or recover. States with great audits (detection)
and paper ballots (recovery) are much more resilient by definition; and
the burden of defending their voting system perfectly is consequently
much lower. On the other hand, States without great audits and without
paper ballots place the unenviable burden of perfect defense on their
local election administrators.
In 2017, Cook County Clerk David Orr and I published a white paper
called ``2020 Vision: Election Security in the Age of Committed Foreign
Threats.'' It is included at the back of this testimony. But I want to
acknowledge that different bodies of this Congress have already taken
action that broadly agrees with our vision and I commend that work.
Elections are Secured Locally
I have tremendous appreciation and respect for State election
officials and their responsibilities and efforts. They are often the
mouthpiece of our institution and responsible for managing the
regulatory framework. For the past 16 years many have also managed
their State's voter registration systems. In some States they take a
far more active role in protecting other parts of the infrastructure.
And it was States that were the named targets in 2016. But let there be
no mistake--local election officials are on the front lines of this new
battlefield: 108 in Illinois and over 8,000 Nationally. So, by and
large, local election officials secure the Nation's election
infrastructure. Locals install, store, monitor, test, deploy, run, and
audit the voting machines and software. Locals install, store, monitor,
test, deploy, run, and audit the electronic pollbooks. It is locals who
manage warehouses, informational websites, voter databases, polling
places, GIS Systems, results reporting systems, military voting
systems, command centers, and the myriad digital services we rely upon
in modern American elections. It is a local job to defend these
systems, to institute controls that would detect breach, and to deploy
mitigation strategies that can guarantee election processes and results
that are trusted and true. It is their job to ensure recovery.
Most of us are county officers, and we are facing down powerful,
shadowy adversaries, like Andy of Mayberry sent to repel an invading
army. We need advice, support, and resources--first, for better
technology and routine hand-counted audits which can give additional
confidence that digital results are accurate. Second, and most
critically today, we have a pressing need for top-notch personnel with
the skills to navigate the current cyber battlefield. Our country's
local election officials need direct human support as we work to defend
ourselves against the onslaught of digital threats we've been warned
about.
Cook County Efforts
Since the summer of 2016 we stepped up our efforts to protect
ourselves and to protect the broader ecosystem: We introduced
additional hand-counted audits to our State-mandated 5 percent machine
re-tabulation. And we are pushing State legislation to add additional
audits to election results--in the form of Risk-Limiting Audits.
We did a complete mapping of all our systems and conducted a point
analysis of potential vulnerabilities. We have documented all defensive
measures employed and created a list of those we hope to employ going
forward. We also documented all methods of detecting breach, as well as
those we hope to employ in the future. Finally, we are developing our
recovery plans for any breach at any point on any system. Before
November of this year, we will practice every recovery method.
We began installing new election equipment that will be easier to
defend and will make detection and recovery significantly easier.
We introduced State legislation to help local election officials
bring in more expertise and cyber monitoring capability.
We worked to create a communication structure in Illinois with
Federal, State, and local cyber experts, technology experts, law
enforcement officials, and election officials.
We teamed with our neighbors at the Chicago Board of Elections to
hire an election infrastructure and information security officer.
We worked with MS-ISAC to get rapid intelligence on vulnerabilities
and specific threat information to our networks. And we have pushed our
colleagues around the State to join it and the elections ISAC.
Additionally, we have gotten threat briefings from DHS and FBI.
We worked with DHS to conduct cyber scans of our websites--and to
run a full risk and vulnerability assessment. And let me say that I am
glad the folks working for homeland security are on our team. I firmly
believe if every election official, State or local, undertook a similar
effort, there would be a deafening roar from my colleagues for more
resources to procure modern technology and institute modern controls.
We worked with the folks at DEFCON on some of their activities
related to training election officials on the defense of networks.
I co-chaired the newly-created Government Coordinating Council
(GCC) set up with DHS to help drive Federal policy and resource
allocation. I sit alongside the chairman of the Election Assistance
Commission (EAC), the president of the National Association of
Secretaries of State (NASS), the president of the National Association
of State Election Directors (NASED), and from DHS deputy assistant
secretary, Infrastructure Protection, National Protection and Programs
Directorate (NPPD). In that role I tried to continually push for the
advancement of local official's concerns.
In all efforts we learned that coordinating efforts is critical to
our individual and ecosystem success.
Coordinated Efforts
There has been a tremendous amount of attention on the States, and
their relationship to the Federal Government and it's great to see that
relationship mending and great information starting to be shared
between the two groups. On the GCC we have worked hard to refine a plan
for securing our sector as well as protocols for sharing information
throughout the ecosystem. We are working with the private-sector vendor
community to ensure we have a common approach to protecting the sector.
Federal Government agencies now know how to communicate to the
State-level election professionals and vice versa. What remains
unfulfilled is the assurance that the information can get all the way
down to the local level and that the locals are prepared to digest the
information and take necessary action.
It is time to ensure that the successful effort to normalize
relations with State officials be duplicated with local election
officials. Like an iceberg, the mass, and indeed most of the risks to
the Nation's election infrastructure, lies below the surface. And its
security lies in the hands of women and men who run elections at the
local level.
Given concerns with Federalism, the most likely path for
successfully fortifying local election officials is through State
government and State election officials. But it's important that they
envision their job as helping ensure locals are resourced appropriately
and meeting important security metrics. I have no doubt that our State
officials are up for the challenge and I look forward to assisting our
industry mature in this direction quickly.
Increased Stable Investment & Short-Term Spending
We have looked to our State and Federal funders and regulators to
fortify locals on this battlefield. Given the costs of regular
technology refreshes and support for human resources with cyber
capacity, the needed investment is very large. And locals need a signal
that they can invest now for security and not squirrel away recent
money for some future episode.
Nevertheless, the recent investment is greatly appreciated.
Congress just released $380 million to combat the election
cybersecurity threat. And that is an important start. It may be
necessary for the States, Federal Government, and locals to
collectively invest that much annually. Meanwhile, Americans justly
concerned about the costs need confidence this money will be spent
well. In my mind there are two top priorities. First, a handful of
States and counties still have paperless voting systems. These should
be replaced as soon as possible.
Second, everywhere, we must improve the security capacities of
local election offices. Most are run by a just handful of incredibly
dedicated and hardworking heroes. But a handful of people making
critical security decisions are outmatched against the threats we've
been warned of.
In a local newspaper last year we called for a brigade of digital
defenders to be deployed to serve election offices around Illinois and
the Nation, starting now and working through the 2020 Presidential
election and beyond. Recently, the Government Coordinating Council,
comprised of the leadership of America's election organizations,
suggested a similar construct, suggesting that States employ ``cyber
navigators'' to help fortify local election officials.
Illinois Approach
In Illinois we formulated a loose security group consisting of
representatives of Homeland Security, FBI, the Illinois State Police
and their Cyber Team, Illinois Information Security Office, the
leadership of the local election official associations, and the State
Board of Elections. Originally our some of local officials and the
State Board of Elections had desired to pass through the HAVA funds to
the local election officials based largely upon voting age population.
But as our group and State legislators digested the cybersecurity
problem, we recognized that such a distribution would not be effective
in fortifying most of the locals. First, regardless of the number of
voters served, all 108 election officials had nearly identical cyber
footprint, in that they had the same number of networked-attached
digitally exposed systems. Second, the larger offices already had some
capacity to tackle this problem--whereas the smaller offices are
squeezed so tightly they can barely comply with the current
requirements, let alone secure the entire elections threat surface
area.
After the GCC issued guidance suggesting ``Cyber Navigators'', the
State legislature mandated that at least one-half of the HAVA funds
just released be expended on a ``Cyber Navigator'' program to be
administered by the State Board of Elections. The State Board is likely
to get help fulfilling this mandate from other organizations with cyber
expertise. By and large, local election officials supported the bill.
And our State board is eminently capable of fulfilling the mandate.
These ``Navigators'' need to accomplish three vital goals. First,
they should work to institute the election security framework--defend,
detect, recover. They can help improve defenses within election
offices, following the specific recommendations of CIS. We believe
they'll quickly bring up the floor of the elections security ecosystem.
Appropriately supported, we can see massive improvement very quickly.
There is low-hanging fruit, but even low-hanging fruit needs to be
plucked. They'll also work to support locals' efforts at instituting
detection techniques and recovery plans. Second, the ``Navigators''
will do the work necessary to secure the free support being offered by
public and private organizations, like the Department of Homeland
Security, State resources, Google and Cloudflare, or the Elections
Information Sharing & Analysis Center; they will also work with the
outside vendors who provide much of the elections infrastructure and
support to local officials. More importantly, they will help build a
culture of security that adapts to the evolving threats we face through
training and constant assessment efforts. Illinois' 108 local election
offices will mature quickly with this reinforcement. As specific
mitigations and upgrades are identified by Navigators, the State Board
should be positioned to quickly provide that investment.
It is expected that the State Board of Elections will take some
small portion of the remainder of the HAVA funds to support their own
infrastructure, naturally, since they manage and maintain the State-
wide voter database. Everything else shall be distributed to the local
election officials to invest as they see fit, subject to the
guidelines. I'll note that our legislature sought to compel
participation in the Navigator program by making receipt of future
grants contingent upon local official participation.
In Illinois, we recognized that this is inherently a local problem.
But we also recognize that locals cannot solve this problem themselves.
This coordinated, managed approach assures appropriate assessment and
remediation efforts can be efficiently implemented. We are utilizing
existing expertise from other areas of Federal, State, and local
government as force multipliers. And we are excited that our State
Board of Elections is taking on this new mandate and moving quickly to
implement it.
This massive reinforcement effort can be accomplished here and
Nation-wide. And it can be done now. It will require the States to cut
through the red tape that can delay action. This may mean relying on
existing contracts, or even emergency procurements. But States must do
whatever they need to do to get the army of ``Navigators'' on the
ground this summer. After all, the danger is not hypothetical. We're
bracing against the renewed attacks we've been told to expect.
Supporting a Resilient Public
One job of an election administrator is to conduct elections so
that losing candidates accept the fact that they lost fairly. Anything
that hinders our ability to do that decreases confidence in the system.
And undermines our ability to bestow legitimacy--not just victory.
Election officials deploy a variety of networked connected digital
services, such as voter registration systems, and unofficial election
results displays. Each of these is a ripe target for our adversaries. A
successful attack against those services may not change a single vote,
but could still damage public confidence. This is particularly true in
a time of great public suspicion, exacerbated by a disappointing
proliferation of gracelessness and grandstanding.
Our public confidence is already weaker than it should be.
Vacillating voting rights rules, no matter how marginal the effect, are
disconcerting to many people, naturally suspect given our history.
Additionally, some media, activist groups and politicians have acted in
ways that ultimately prey on Americans' insecurities about their most
cherished institution, either through outlandish claims of fraud, or
overstated claims of suppression. Such actions have done a disservice
to the institution we serve and consequently to our ability to bestow
not just victory, but legitimacy. We must be very careful to calculate
not just the relative effects on power that election rule changes can
have, but also the relative effects on legitimacy. Or put another way--
will losers be more or less likely to accept that they lost fairly.
Some losing candidates are already apt to call their defeats into
doubt. A new digital breach--no matter how far removed from the vote
counting system--could turn sore losers to cynicism, disbelief, even
revolt. That's the reaction the enemies of the United States want.
In fact, in the face of direct targeting of a State or local
election office it is very possible that there will be some service
disruptions--most likely to the network connected digital services like
election results websites.
The bottom line is we can't eliminate every chance of breach, but
we can make sure that successful attacks rare. And we can provide
assurances that we are prepared to recover quickly when they happen. We
can do this with support at the local level. I support Federal efforts
like the Secure Elections Act. While I would always advocate for more
local participation, in the current environment, doing something
imperfect now is greatly superior to doing something perfect at some
point in the future.
As Americans, we get to choose how we want to respond to potential
disruptions. The damage of a foreign attack on our elections
infrastructure will be greatly diminished if the targeted institution
is also being supported internally with respect.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear today. I look forward to
your questions.
Attachment.--White Paper
2020 vision: election security in the age of committed foreign threats
Sponsored by: Cook County Clerk David Orr
Authored by: Noah Praetz, Director of Elections
December 2017
The entire National security establishment admonishes that threats
to our election infrastructure are real. Foreign governments, foreign
non-state actors, and domestic troublemakers have the capacity and
desire to corrode the essential public belief that our election
outcomes are true and reliable. To very different degrees this threat
applies to both preliminary returns announced on election night and to
official, final results.
Beyond results, the threat applies to the large variety of systems
used to run seamless elections. These include electronic and paper
pollbooks; voter registration and election management systems; websites
with voter tools and public information; and a variety of other
subsystems such as: GIS, ballot printing system, mail ballot
preparation and processing system and a variety of essential election
support systems like election day control centers.
Local election officials--nearly 9,000 of them in the country--are
the shock troops on this new battlefield. They desperately need
resources, including Federal Government resources.
Policymakers and funders must act now to ensure election security
The new security mantra for local election officials is ``defend,
detect, recover.''
Perfect defense is difficult or even impossible. Instead the
challenge of security is to ensure no attack exceeds our resilience--
our ability to detect and recover--whether that means restoring lost
data or even recounting ballots to establish election results that are
trusted and true.
Each State has a varying security matrix to operate in; their mix
of ability to defend, detect, and recover. States with great audits
(detect) and paper ballots (recover) are much more resilient by
definition; and the burden of defending their voting system is
consequently much lower. On the other hand, States without good audits
and without paper ballots place the unenviable burden of perfect
defense on their election administrators.
Below is a challenging, comprehensive, yet achievable list of
actions to protect the integrity of these multiple systems. Make no
mistake, this will be a painful and expensive undertaking. But the
protection of our foundational institution requires this sacrifice.
responsibilities of policy makers and funders
Defend
Increase the defensive capacity of local and State election
officials by:
1. Supporting a digital network for all local election officials
that will facilitate rapid sharing of threats and incidents, as
well as supporting increased training and resiliency;
2. Financing an Election Infrastructure and Information Security
Officer (EIISO) (or consultant) servicing every local and State
election official in the country;
3. Ensuring that threat and incident information known to
Government is shared appropriately throughout the election
ecosystem.
Detect
Increase the catastrophic breach detection capacity by
incentivizing:
1. The use of modern public audits of all elections;
2. The use of modern voting technology that captures a digital
image of each ballot that can be tied to the original ballot
and the cast ballot record;
3. The use of monitoring sensors on the networks of all willing
election officials.
Recover
Eliminate even the most remote possibility of an undetectable
catastrophic breach by replacing all paperless voting systems that
currently serve nearly 20 percent of the country.
Release election officials from their burden of being perfect every
single time!
potential approach for election officials and their election
infrastructure and information security officer
Defend
Get experts into the office. Engage outside cybersecurity
resources & professionals. No election offices can handle this
problem on their own. Inside most elections offices, there
simply is not the complete capacity to accept the threat,
assess the vulnerability, digest recommendations, manage
mitigations, and perfect recovery.
Utilize as many free local, State, and Federal (DHS, CIS,
and MS-ISAC) tools as possible.
If Government resources are unavailable, or
underwhelming, hire private firms or partner with academic
institutions.
Collaborate with resources inside local, State, and
Federal Government because we are not alone in facing this
type of threat include the fusion centers.
Bring in outside resources to partner with information
technology and information security teams, with a focus
solely on election security.
The reality is that most election officials share their
internal information technology and security resources with
every other county office engaged in critical activities,
such as health and public safety. It can be nearly
impossible to get the attention necessary for election
security unless it is the primary focus of those resources.
Understand and limit the threat surface area; or all
possible points of vulnerability for malicious attack.
Inventory all election-related systems: e.g. voting machine
and vote counting system; e-pollbook system; voter
registration/election management system; mail ballot delivery
and processing system; and on-line systems such as voter
registration, mail ballot request tools, voter information
look-up.
Map how systems work and data flows, and mark every single
point of vulnerability.
Limit the threat surface area by making policy decisions
that reduce points of vulnerability wherever possible (this is
about managing risk, not eliminating it.)
Employ defense tactics and policies for each system--on-line
or not.
Implement the Center for Internet Security's top 20 cyber
controls. Do the top 5 first. These include:
1. Inventory of Authorized and Unauthorized Devices; 2. Inventory
of Authorized and Unauthorized Software; 3. Secure
Configurations for Hardware and Software; 4. Continuous
Vulnerability Assessment and Remediation; 5. Controlled Use
of Administrative Privileges; 6. Maintenance, Monitoring,
and Analysis of Audit Logs; 7. Email and Web Browser
Protections; 8. Malware Defenses; 9. Limitation and Control
of Network Ports; 10. Data Recovery Capability; 11. Secure
Configurations for Network Devices; 12. Boundary Defense;
13. Data Protection; 14. Controlled Access Based on the
Need to Know; 15. Wireless Access Control; 16. Account
Monitoring and Control; 17. Security Skills Assessment and
Appropriate Training to Fill Gaps; 18. Application Software
Security; 19. Incident Response and Management; 20.
Penetration Tests and Red Team Exercises.
Employ election system-specific defense and detection
tactics across specific systems.
These can include all the hardening options that systems
may have, such as locks, seals, chain of custody, advanced
authentication, etc.
Detect
For each vulnerability point identified in the mapping
process, consider a method of detecting whether something
anomalous has happened; or brainstorm the first place such an
intrusion might be detectable.
Validate everything; every available log should be checked
including: Seals, time sheets, cameras, swipe cards, login
data, registration statistics, etc.
Behavioral analysis tools and procedures can and will
point out what is going on. For example, voter registration
follows a natural pattern year over year. Identifying the
pattern and watching for anomalous behavior works.
Use forensics when possible.
A forensics analysis of the software system employed can
offer a high level of confidence that it is operating as
certified. This is particularly true in the voting system
environment. Comparing snapshots of deployed software with
a clean reference copy during a live election is a powerful
verification technique.
Conduct public audits of the election results that allow for
a visual comparison of the cast ballot record with the ballot
itself.
Be transparent and brace for public scrutiny.
Crowdsourcing the election brings the greatest confidence,
but also the greatest public scrutiny. ``Sausage making''
will be on full display. Consider publishing ballot images
scrubbed of identifying marks. In the short run this can
create volatility, and people may scrutinize the office and
the software used, but ultimately the confidence levels
will be increased.
Work to investigate audit styles that bring the highest
level of confidence to the most stakeholders. Consider the
use of sophisticated yet efficient testing algorithms, such
as risk-limiting audits.
Recover
For each vulnerability point, assume a successful breach and
determine how to recover.
Where possible, make policy decisions and investments that
yield the clearest path to recovery.
For example, on electronic voting machines: After removing
paperless systems consider that ballot marking devices are
better than machines with paper audit trails. Digital
scanning devices that create images of ballots are better
than scanning devices that don't.
Build in redundancy that doesn't rely on technology.
For example, paper pollbooks backup electronic pollbooks.
Emergency paper ballots backup corrupted (or just
malfunctioning) touch-screen or ballot marking devices.
Practice recovery with professional staff, advisors, and
vendors by running drills and exercises. Theory is only theory.
Practice makes it real.
local election officials need support
It must be underscored--local election officials are the front-line
troops in this battle. Those who control Federal, State, and local
spending must provide local election officials with resources to do
their job in this environment. Those who drive State election policies
must make choices to fortify local officials for their new cyber
mission.
Election officials are serving valiantly and professionally. They
are talented and capable. They are holding the line. But they are
operating with limited resources under sometimes unfair burdens placed
upon them by policy makers in their respective States. Like good
servants, they will say they can continue to hold the line. And they'll
mean it.
But they need to be asked to hold a reasonable line. And holding a
line that requires perfect defense every time is not reasonable.
It is impossible to defend against every conceivable attack. But if
we detect breaches and recover from them quickly, we will survive any
incident.
And so will faith in our democracy.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. With much
excitement, we have been anticipating Mr. Braun's testimony.
STATEMENT OF JAKE BRAUN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, CYBER POLICY
INITIATIVE
Mr. Braun. Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Rogers, and
distinguished Members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak to you today on this important issue. I
also want to thank my co-panelists, Secretary Padilla, Noah
Praetz, Secretary Merrill, they have led this Nation in
securing elections and have become a model for other election
officials around the country to follow.
So with that, I am Jake Braun. I am the executive director
of the University of Chicago, Cyber Policy Initiative at the
Harris School of Public Policy. I am neither a technologist nor
an election administrator, however, I have been working this
issue for about 15 years from 3, kind-of, distinct vantage
points.
A few years ago, I worked on voter protection issues for
multiple Presidential campaigns. Then, during my time at DHS I
worked on this issue from both the Homeland and National
security perspective.
Then most recently, I co-founded the DEF CON Voting Machine
Hacking Village. DEF CON is the largest hacker conference in
the world and the Voting Village, as we like to call it, is the
only public, third-party assessment of voting equipment on the
planet that we are aware of.
One thing that has become clear to us, clear to me, as I
have worked on these issues from these different--very
different perspectives over the years, is that this is a
National security issue. This is not, kind-of, an election
administration nuisance.
What I would argue that the committee is solving for here
is, they are not solving for dangling chads, they are solving
for: How do we stop an existential threat to the United States
from undermining our elections? So let me give you a few kind-
of key findings from the most recent DEF CONs that help
elucidate that point.
So thing one, the supply chain for the equipment, both the
software and the machines is global. Many of these parts are
made in places--nations that are unfriendly to the United
States, like China.
Hackers--nation-state hacks could put malware on firmware
for these machines and other devices used to implement
elections, and hack whole classes of machines all across the
United States, all at once and never have to leave the Kremlin.
That is not something that any local election official can be
expected to deal with on their own. That is a National security
issue and, therefore, Congress must act to support them.
Second, both DEF CON, the Senate Intelligence Committee,
and OAS, which is the National--or global head of website
security, have identified nearly identical threats to website
attacks across the country. On top of that, as was stated
previously in this hearing, there are multiple States that
don't have paper trails, much less audits in place to re-
engender trust if there was an attack on their elections. So it
may be simply an attack on election reporting website that
undermines trust in an election, especially in States like
those without paper trails and audits.
On top of that, there has been reports since 2016 that
Russia has actually hacked election results-reporting websites
in the United States already. On top of that, we know that
Russia did this in the Ukraine, where they coupled their
attacks on the election reporting websites with fake news they
put out saying that their candidate had won, when, in fact, he
had not.
This--all of this together, fighting back an onslaught of
attacks from both the cyber and media perspective from a
nation-state is something that no local election official can
be expected to do. That is a National security threat and,
therefore, Congress must act to help State and locals deal with
it.
Finally, the cyber industry itself is--I mean, sorry--the
election industry itself is cyber immature, as we may say.
Meaning that, oftentimes, even when vulnerabilities are told to
vendors, they don't get fixed.
For example, back in 2007 there was a vulnerability
disclosed to a vendor and--for a specific machine. This machine
is used in 23 States, counts millions of ballots in a National
election, often thousands of ballots locally at a particular
jurisdiction. We went back and looked at that same machine at
DEF CON last year, and that same vulnerability still persisted.
So over a decade later, the vulnerability's still not been
fixed.
To be clear, the--the attack that was used on this machine
is attack to be--could be carried out remotely by foreign
hackers on foreign soil. It is an attack that can jump the
erroneously-named air gap, and take over a machine completely
to delete or add whatever types of votes you would want.
By the way, this all may sound very hard, however, most of
these attacks were done by hackers that are generalists, with
no previous access to the machines, no knowledge of the
machines and no specialized training on how to attack these
machines.
OK. So that is all the bad news but there is--there is a
few good things to highlight here. One of those things is the
security measures in this bill, they are very good.
I think that my colleagues have highlighted some incredibly
important things like audits, paper trails, improving cyber
hygiene, money to State and locals who desperate need it to
improve their cyber hygiene posture.
But there is also a few other things; No. 1, there is money
for R&D. The current state of the machines Nationally is such
that they are essentially un-securable and we desperately need
new machines around the country. However, the market for
machines is such that the margins are so slim for the vendors
that they will never be able to put the money needed into R&D
to create machines of the future that can secure our elections.
So Congress, thus, needs to help with that.
No. 2, there is a very innovative bug bounty program in
there, which I think creatively helps solve the cyber work
force problem, which is a very serious problem. Then, finally,
there is vulnerability disclosure component to it.
So thank you very much. I am happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Braun follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jake Braun
February 12, 2019
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Rogers, and distinguished Members
of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today
on this important issue.
I would also like to thank my co-panelists, Secretary Padilla and
Noah Praetz. They have led the Nation in securing their elections and
have become a model for other election officials around the country to
follow.
My name is Jake Braun and I am executive director for the Cyber
Policy Initiative at the University of Chicago Harris School of Public
Policy.
I am also co-founder of the DEF CON Voting Machine Hacking Village.
DEF CON is the largest hacker conference in the world and the Voting
Village is the only public, third-party inspection of voting equipment
in the world, that we are aware of.
Moreover, for the last 2 years, I have worked with leaders in the
National security establishment to release an annual report on the
National security implications of our findings at DEF CON. The reports
have won multiple awards and our efforts have been hailed by people as
diverse as President Trump's former White House Cyber Czar, Rob Joyce;
then-Chairman of the Cyber Caucus, Congressman Will Hurd; and
Congresswoman Jackie Speier; as well as a bipartisan group of Senators
from the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, led by Senators
Harris and Lankford.
The main question relevant for this committee is whether any of our
findings are useful to the legislation you are now considering. The
answer, in my estimation, is emphatically yes.
To that end, I have one overarching finding I want to highlight as
well as a few key vulnerabilities which clarify the importance of the
finding. Finally, I would humbly like to make a couple recommendations
as to how these problems can be addressed.
The overarching finding is that attacks on our election
infrastructure are NOT solely an election administration nuisance but
rather a National security threat. Time and again this conclusion
manifests itself in our research. This threat is not about how to
eradicate hanging chads. This is about our National security apparatus
marshalling its resources to do what our Nation expects it to do, which
is protect our country from existential threats to the United States. A
county clerk or secretary of state is not equipped to defend our
democracy from nation-state hackers. These nation-state adversaries may
attempt to change vote totals or they may simply try and erode our
confidence in the integrity of American elections. Either way, this is
a National security threat and thus Congress must act.
Let me give you a few examples of specific key findings that draw
us to the conclusion that this is a National security threat:
1. The voting machine supply chain is global and parts are made in
nations unfriendly to the United States, like China. If an
adversary were to infect the firmware made at a plant in China
or elsewhere, which we know has happened with other products,
whole classes of voting machines could be hacked all at once on
Election Day from the Kremlin. No election clerk or secretary
of state alone can defend against these global supply chain
issues. This is a National security threat and thus Congress
must act.
2. Second, we have highlighted well-known vulnerabilities in
websites. The global leader on website security, The Open Web
Application Security Project (OWASP), and the 2018 report by
the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence have highlighted
similar threats to election websites. The bottom line is no one
can defend a website from a determined nation-state actor. Just
ask the top 25 banks in the country who collectively spend
billions on security but failed to stop members of the Iranian
Revolutionary Guard from attacking their websites consistently
over the course of 2 years. Further, since 2016, the media has
reported successful attacks on election websites in the United
States by Russia. Russia also executed an attack against
Ukraine's Central Election Commission website in 2014, rigging
the website to announce the Russian-supported candidate won.
Ukrainian officials detected the breach before the election
results went live, but Russian media still erroneously named
their candidate the winner. In U.S. States where there are no
paper audits possible, hacking a website may be all that's
necessary to cast doubt on an election's integrity. Moreover,
no clerk or secretary of state alone can defend themselves
against a multi-layered cyber and media campaign to cast doubt
on the integrity of a National election. Rather, this is a
National security threat and thus Congress must act.
3. Finally, perhaps the most disconcerting ``flaw'' we found is
that vendors don't fix vulnerabilities when they are disclosed
to them. A significant flaw with the M650 machine, which was
used in 23 States as of 2018, was disclosed to the vendor in
2007. However, to our knowledge the vendor neither told its
customers about the flaw nor did they fix the flaw at the time
it was disclosed. Nor did they fix it after the 2016 elections
when they supposedly started taking security much more
seriously. Nor did they fix it, to our knowledge, after we
pointed it out again at DEF CON in 2018. To be clear, this
attack would allow an attacker, through a remote hack that
could be carried out from abroad, to jump the so-called ``air
gap'' and hack into a voting tabulator processing ballots for
key counties in battleground States. This attack could flip the
Electoral College and determine the outcome of a Presidential
election. Obviously no clerk or secretary of state alone can
defend against adversaries who can change large number of votes
without needing physical or network access to the machines.''
Clearly, this is a National security threat and thus Congress
must act.
One might think these attacks sound pretty hard to carry out.
However, most of these attacks and dozens of others we found were
carried out by generalists with no specialized training on election
equipment or previous knowledge of the machines or networks.
Some have claimed that the setting at DEF CON does not represent a
real election environment, thus diminishing the utility of our
findings. However, as said at the outset, DEF CON is the only public,
third-party inspection of election equipment, so it's the best we have
for now. Further, as former White House Cyber Czar Rob Joyce, said,
``We know our adversaries have a room just like the one at DEF CON.''
By which he meant that our adversaries are researching all the voting
equipment we have and more because they don't have to get the machines
legally, like we do at DEF CON. However, they aren't doing the research
3 days a year, they are doing it 365 days a year. They also don't
disclose the vulnerabilities they find, like we do. Yet they are
looking for the same flaws we are: Hacks that are quick, remote, and
scalable.
So what can be done about these problems?
First, I would encourage you all to study the recommendations of a
new report on election security from the National Academies of
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Their recommendations are
comprehensive and sound.
Second, pass this bill. The measures in the H.R. 1 proposed
legislation provide for auditable paper trails and local implementation
of at least the top 5 of the 20 Critical Security Controls, as well as
funding for cyber assessments and remediation. Congress must support
State and local administrators' efforts by providing funding and
assistance to implement cyber best practices that reduce America's
vulnerability to these clear threats to our election infrastructure.
Finally, the election industry desperately needs funding for R&D to
build voting equipment that can stand up to these modern threats. The
current equipment is essentially unsecurable. The vendors will never
have the enough money to fund the R&D necessary to develop equipment
that can defend against nation-state attackers. H.R. 1 provides R&D
funding for voting technology of the future, and I would strongly
encourage the committee to keep that funding in whatever version
hopefully passes.
Again, not solely an election administration nuisance but rather a
National security threat. Thus Congress needs to act and fund a
solution. I thank you for your efforts to pass this critically
important legislation.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much for your testimony.
I now recognize, Mr. Merrill, to summarize his statement
for 5 minutes--or do the best you can do.
STATEMENT OF JOHN H. MERRILL, SECRETARY OF STATE, ALABAMA
Mr. Merrill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I will. I appreciate
that. I am honored to be with you. Ranking Member Rogers, thank
you so much for the invitation to come and share with you all
today.
I am John Merrill. For the last 4 years and 25 days, I have
had the privilege to serve as Alabama's secretary of state. In
our State, as in 35-plus other States in the Union, the
secretary of state is the person that is responsible for the
election system in that particular jurisdiction.
I think it is important for you to know some of the things
we have done in Alabama and some of the thoughts of some of the
people that I represent that have similar positions to the one
that I hold.
As far as secretary of state's role is concerned; we have
pre-election, Election Day, and post-election activities that
we are responsible for. We coordinate all voter registration
efforts in our State, we certify the ballots, we also monitor
and enforce campaign finance laws at the State level.
We ensure participation in the election's process through
awareness campaigns. We have Election Day and election night
reporting systems that we have created and compile and certify
election results. We also engage in partnerships with our
public and private partners and independent partners in
different ways.
We work with our county and municipal governments as well
as Federal agencies when it is appropriate including but not
limited to the election's systems commission, the Department of
Justice, the National Guard, the Department of Homeland
Security.
Our relationship with those entities has improved over the
last 3 years since we had this type situation first introduced
to us. In our preparation for the 2018 election cycle, we
concentrated in the areas of cybersecurity, election integrity,
which also includes enforcing the laws, and we use paper
ballots in Alabama. We are going to continue to do that and by
Federal law, anybody has to retain the Federal ballots for a
period of not less than 2 years. That is the Federal law
already. Voter confidence and voter participation is
extraordinarily important.
Now we have heard a lot of different things today. But one
of the things I think is so important for us to remember and to
acknowledge and this has come from the Department of Homeland
Security most recent report that there was no breach of any
incident in the tabulation that occurred in the 2016 general
election.
That has been researched, it has been documented, and no
breach has occurred and no tabulation change occurred in any
election in any State in the Union in the 2016 cycle. I also
think that it is important to know that there is some serious
concerns and issues with H.R. 1 in our opinion.
No. 1, significant Federal overreach has been indicated
through the introduction of this legislation and it appears to
provide certain things that need to be done but the lack of
resources in order to be able to do those effectively.
So they are strictly underfunded or unfunded mandates. No.
2, there are many prescriptive requirements that have been
indicated that States that would accept these funds would face
significant difficulty in enacting those new programs without
the resources necessary to do that.
They include but are not limited to some things that are
already on-going in our State and other States in the Union,
which are electronic poll books, paper ballots, automatic voter
registration, audits, same-day registration. Those things are
strictly prescribed that they need to be adhered to regardless
of what the local jurisdiction would like to do. No. 3, the
amount of time that the States have to meet the requirements is
not something that is going to be able to be met.
One of the questions was asked earlier is that something
that is going to be able to be adhered to and the answer to
that question is no. If you want to know why it is because at
the Federal level and at most State levels they move at the
speed of Government and if you move at the speed of Government
you know why it is not going to be done. You have to create
RFPs and other things but we can talk about that later if you
are interested.
As far as--the most important thing that I could share with
you about a good election security bill, it would be one that
would create the necessary resources to the States without
creating unfunded or underfunded mandates and strangling
restrictions that would introduce Federal overreach. I yield
back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Merrill follows:]
Prepared Statement of John H. Merrill
February 13, 2019
My name is John Merrill, and I am Alabama's 53rd secretary of
state.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to address
how we, as the States' chief State election officials, work diligently
each and every day in our State, and with our counties, municipalities,
and other local jurisdictions to ensure we elect our leaders in free,
fair, and accessible elections. This work can be complimented by
effective partnerships at the Federal level, like those we have today
with the Elections Assistance Commission (EAC), and the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS), the National Guard, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI), and other groups and associations like the
National Association of Secretaries of State (NASS).
My goal as Alabama's 53rd secretary of state is to ensure that each
and every eligible U.S. Citizen that is a resident of Alabama is
registered to vote and receives a photo ID.
During my time as Alabama's secretary of state, my team and I have
changed the paradigm for voting in the State of Alabama. Since I took
office on January 19, 2015, we have worked with notable Alabamians,
local officials, interested agencies, key communicators, and interested
citizens to encourage voter registration and voter participation. The
results are that we have registered 1,199,909 new voters, which brings
our total number of registered voters to 3,473,030. Thirty of our 67
counties use electronic poll books, which expedites the check-in
process and offers greater security for the voter and greater
efficiencies and accountability for the poll worker. Our stated goal is
to have electronic poll books in every county in the State by 2022. As
a part of our efforts to ensure voter integrity, we have worked to
secure 6 convictions of criminal activity related to voter fraud and
will continue to document, investigate, and prosecute those
individuals' intent on disrupting our democratic institutions for
personal or political gain.
All of these efforts have helped our citizens become more involved
and engaged in the process to elect officials that represent them in
local, State, and Federal positions. We have broken every record in the
history of the State for voter participation as Alabamians have turned
out to vote in record numbers. In March 2016, we set a record for voter
participation in a Presidential preference primary with 1.25 million
Alabamians casting a ballot. In the General Election on November 8,
2016 with 2.1 million Alabamians casting a ballot. Alabama then broke
the record for participation in a Special Election during the 2017 U.S.
Senate Special Election, held on December 12, 2017, with 1.3 million
Alabamians casting a ballot for their choice for the next U.S. Senator
from Alabama. Most recently, we broke the record for turnout in a non-
Presidential general election year during the 2018 General Election
with more than 1.7 million Alabamians going to the polls.
In Alabama, we are making it easy to vote and hard to cheat.
As we prepared for the 2018 General Election, we worked to ensure
our systems were protected by requiring 2-Factor Authentication for any
State or local user who accesses the voter registration system. We
secured our networks and our election night reporting system with
resources provided through the Department of Homeland Security, our
local information systems team, and other third-party vendors. Our work
to conduct elections efficiently and effectively is supported both by
the Elections Assistance Commission and the Department of Homeland
Security. The EAC provides guidance and support, as we prepare our
local election officials to administer their elections. Our
relationship with DHS is a relatively new one, but it is one that has
been home to significant growth over the last 2 years. Prior to the
Senate Special Election in December 2017, we had very little
interaction with DHS. However, as that election approached, we were
able to work closely with DHS to ensure our systems were secure. We
wanted to make sure that any vulnerabilities that we could identify
were resolved and any new issues were mitigated before they disrupted
an election in Alabama. We have also hosted a team from DHS on-site
with us throughout election day to ensure issues are resolved in real
time.
The most significant support that the Federal Government has
provided to my State has been access to Federal grants and other
resources to modernize and to increase the accessibility of our State's
voting systems. Additional funding is imperative to ensure voting
equipment can remain up-to-date and voting systems can remain secure to
protect the data of those citizens.
Another area in which I have continued to advocate is for the EAC
to provide guidance, testing, and verification of vendors, equipment,
and systems much like the Federal Government does for other aspects of
our Nation's critical infrastructure.
The impact of the enactment of H.R. 1 could possibly damage the
credible elections process we have worked hard to build in Alabama by
creating a series of administrative concerns for the State to enforce.
Title I of this bill creates significant concerns for me and the
people of our State. This bill makes any process currently in place in
our State to update and maintain the voter registration system illegal,
while expanding the process of voter registration. Empirical data shows
that no State in the union has done more, per capita, in the past 4
years to increase voter registration than Alabama. This bill would
create massive errors in the States' voter rolls and would be a
disservice to voters that often benefit from the reminders sent from
election offices encouraging them to update their registration
information.
In Alabama, more than 94 percent of the eligible population is
registered to vote. Therefore, our biggest responsibility when it comes
to maintaining the voter registration system is to keep voter
information accurate and current. Providing awareness efforts and
teaching our citizens how to effectively participate in their
democratic institutions is a much more effective method to get voters
to the polls. That is exemplified in Alabama and was reconfirmed
through a recent ruling from the Federal court on Alabama's photo voter
ID law and its implementation. The judge in that case wrote that if
every State in the union did what Alabama has done, then every State
could have photo voter ID in their State because Alabama makes it so
easy to be able to vote.
Title V of this bill is troubling, as it amends the Federal
Election Campaign Act of 1971 to turn the Federal Election Commission
(FEC) into a powerful, Government tool that provides a balance to big
money donors and distribute resources to candidates unable to raise
funds from those donors. However, this bill will not have the desired
impact that the authors intend. The bill attempts to provide this
balance to candidate fundraising by giving power to the FEC to
redistribute tax-payer money to citizens that qualify and by providing
matching funds to candidates who only accept small-dollar donations.
This change would transform campaign financing and would enact into law
excessive Federal intervention in a system that, is by law, to be
administered by the State.
Under this bill, if the Commission finds, by themselves, that a
candidate has failed to comply with any of the requirements of this
program, the commission has the ability to simply revoke the
certification of a candidate. This revocation could come in the middle
of an election cycle allowing the FEC to become a partisan tool to be
used as a weapon to completely eliminate a candidate's ability to
campaign. This bill has the potential to make the FEC one of the most
powerful entities in the U.S. Government.
A candidate that has been revoked by the FEC would then be unable
to receive public funds and may have to repay all the resources
received by their campaigns into an account the FEC controls to then
use to conduct further audits or, if used improperly, to conduct
unmitigated harassment of candidates they disagree with based on
partisan, political, or philosophical differences. Past experiences
involving the Internal Revenue Service indicate that this is not only
plausible but likely.
By taking the ability to financially support a candidate away from
the electorate, the most important person in our Nation--a citizen of
the United States--and placing it with the Federal Election Commission,
brings us one step closer toward the Federal Government dictating
winners and losers in elections.
The most important feature to a good election security bill is to
create one that provides necessary resources to the States without
creating unfunded or underfunded mandates and strangling restrictions
through Federal overreach.
United States Senators and Members of Congress that are unwilling
or unable to consider the fact that each State has unique laws and
circumstances with different levels of resources must understand that
they are creating an ineffective system that will create additional
hardships for the entities responsible for administering and conducting
elections in their State, and potentially cause unnecessary damage to
the credibility and security of our electoral process. State leaders
must be given the opportunity to build their system around their
State's laws and citizens regarding elections as is indicated in the
United States Constitution.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. Let me thank all
the witnesses for their testimony and we have about 20 minutes
to kind-of run this before they call votes so we are going to
move very fast.
Mr. Braun, when you brought--who did you bring to the
attention of that there was some vulnerabilities in equipment
and you found that going back later the vulnerability was still
there. Who do you make aware of that vulnerability?
Mr. Braun. Sir, we--we put it in a report that we released
both to the press and to--we actually released it here on
Capitol Hill in our building and gave it to multiple
stakeholders in Government as well as the private sector. We
dispersed it widely.
Chairman Thompson. OK. Did you make it available to DHS?
Mr. Braun. Yes, we sent them advanced copies as well as the
final copy.
Chairman Thompson. OK. Did you get a comment back from them
in any way?
Mr. Braun. I did not, sir.
Chairman Thompson. OK. Thank you. Mr. Merrill.
Mr. Merrill. Yes, sir.
Chairman Thompson. Did you apply for any of the funds from
the Election Assistance Commission?
Mr. Merrill. Yes, sir. To get our balance from the original
HAVA appropriation we did so.
Chairman Thompson. How much did you get?
Mr. Merrill. About $6.2 million for the State of Alabama.
Chairman Thompson. Could you have done what you did without
that money?
Mr. Merrill. Well, we have. Congressman, we have not spent
a dime of that money yet because the things that we are
planning on introducing, the continuation of the purchase for
electronic poll booths, which we have 30 of our 67 counties
that are currently using it and the introduction of additional
audit procedures that will be in place that will cost us some
resources.
Some other things that we are doing in the area of
cybersecurity where we have to provide an appropriate match for
that purpose. Everything that we have done so far and we have
done a number of things, as a matter of fact, if you will let
me just mention some of these.
Chairman Thompson. No. No. You just answer my question.
Mr. Merrill. Yes, sir. Yes, sir.
Chairman Thompson. You got $6.2 million right?
Mr. Merrill. That is correct.
Chairman Thompson. You anticipate to spend it?
Mr. Merrill. We going to spend it.
Chairman Thompson. OK. That is what--that is what I am
trying--trying to get at.
Mr. Merrill. Yes, sir.
Chairman Thompson. So--so you saw the need for additional
resources.
Mr. Merrill. Congressman, I always see the need for
additional resources.
Chairman Thompson. OK. Mr. Padilla, could you tell us how
much California received?
Mr. Padilla. California's share of last year's
appropriation was about $34 million. It is pretty much being
spent if it is not already been spent in the current fiscal
year budget. It is in a number of areas.
Some of it is in hardware; software upgrades to our
VoteCal, which is our centralized voter registration database,
others for security improvements and counties' access to that
same database.
We have dedicated some of the funding per EAC DHS
recommendation on training. Cyber training is as important as
cybersecurity to make sure staff at the State and at the local
level are practicing all the best cyber hygiene practices as
well.
I want to make a special comment on the timing of this
because I have heard this about the Q&A of the first panel. Is
there enough time, is there enough time, is there enough time
as if--sounds like an argument to not move forward with
offering States additional resources.
There are ways to expedite how that money gets from the
Federal Government to the State government down to the locals
who need it the most. You know first of all, Florida 2000
triggered HAVA. HAVA was 17 years ago and the final
disbursement of those dollars was just last year.
The Federal Government can move more quickly and
appropriate and not just approving but appropriating the monies
to States. The 2016 election kind-of revived a lot of these
conversations. Yet, it wasn't until April 2018 that those final
HAVA dollars were moved. So the Federal Government can move a
little bit quicker. At the State level we have learned how to
accelerate that--that money the investment added to local level
by entering into contracts with counties to move their money to
on a reimbursement basis. So the fact that the check is not in
hand should not hold up counties being able to make the
investments that they need to make.
Once they know that they can count on being reimbursed, a
lot of counties are willing to move more quickly and bring
those security benefits to the elections.
Chairman Thompson. So, thank you very much. Mr. Braun,
supply chain is important also. I mentioned it to the last
panel and I was given this assurance that we are in a global
economy and everything was fine. I heard a little something
from your comment. Can you elaborate on that?
Mr. Braun. Sure. This is kind-of a known thing that Russian
hackers as well as other nation-states hack parts in the supply
chain all the time. I think anybody who questions whether
supply chain or remote hacks are possible just look at Stuxnet.
Those centrifuges were buried in concrete vaults underground in
the desert and folks were still able to get in there and take
those out. Anybody who thinks that undermining our institutions
and our democracy is any less of a strategic importance to
Putin than taking out the Iranian nuclear program was to those
who did that is very mistaken----
Chairman Thompson. I agree so have to on that end pay close
attention to who's providing the equipment for our elections.
Mr. Braun. Without question there needs to be assessments
of the parts and where they came from and inspections of them
and a whole regime put in place for that.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you. I yield to the Ranking
Member.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. What I have been
making the point in my earlier questioning and trying to
emphasize is as Secretary Merrill said, he hasn't spent any of
his money yet and Secretary Padilla said he started spending
it. It just takes time. This money is not going to fix anything
just in 1 year. It is going to be a process. In most cases it
is going to take several years and that has been my only point.
Secretary Merrill, the purpose of this hearing is to review
H.R. 1 even though we are not going to be marking it up. Is
there anything in H.R. 1 that you can find helpful to you in
securing elections?
Mr. Merrill. No, Congressman, there are some things that we
find restrictive because of what we would have to do to adhere
to certain guidelines that are in the bill that are associated
with the allocation that would accompany it.
Mr. Rogers. If we were marking it up, which we are not,
what would you suggest we do to improve it?
Mr. Merrill. Well one of the things that I would encourage
the Members to do is to make an appropriation that establish
some level of guidelines but did not have strict adherence that
had to be met so that the local State or the local jurisdiction
would be able to purchase equipment or be able to purchase
services or be able to purchase types of products that were
necessary for them to administer their elections in a way that
they saw fit and in a way that was best for them.
Because in my mind, it is always best to make those
decisions at the local level as opposed to the National or the
State level going down to the local jurisdiction.
Mr. Rogers. Secretary Padilla, the same question. What
would you do if we were marking up H.R. 1 to improve it, if
anything?
Mr. Padilla. I appreciate the opportunity. So there is an
element to H.R. 1 that establishes not just time tables for
EAC--or excuse me--DHS testing and certification of voting
systems prior to their being used by States. That element fails
to recognize there is a handful of States, California being
one, that has established testing and certification at the
State level where we statutorily require our 12 State standards
to meet or exceed the Federal guidelines.
So an allowance for those States to test at the State
versus requiring a duplicative Federal testing or certification
and as long as the time table suits us in terms of properly
administering the elections, that flexibility will be helpful
as well.
Mr. Rogers. Let me ask this, you heard Mr. Higgins earlier
in the questioning and the previous panel emphasized that there
are scores of thousands of voting locations around the country.
When you get the HAVA funds, and this is for Secretary Padilla
or Merrill, do you prescribe standards that counties must
adhere to for you to fund their purchase of equipment or
training?
Mr. Merrill. Yes, sir, actually that is done, Congressman,
in the legislation that was approved when HAVA was first
adopted. One of the things that we discovered was that that was
not always being adhered to whenever that appropriation came
and it was approved at the State level. So we have made sure
that we even had training and we provided training to our local
jurisdictions as well.
Mr. Rogers. You just don't write a check to the local city
or county.
Mr. Merrill. Certainly not. Certainly not.
Mr. Rogers. You say that is a Federal requirement?
Mr. Merrill. Yes, sir. There are certain guidelines that
were established in the HAVA appropriation that said these are
permissible expenses and if you go outside of that then
somebody should be held liable for that. That has not happened
in the past.
Another frustration that we have experienced is when those
additional dollars came, they were complimenting what happened
in 2003. Well what happened in 2003, and of course that--that
was your first session in the Congress, was that there was no
deadline on when those funds had to be expended at the State or
local level.
We have a number of counties in our State that received an
appropriation 15 years ago and that money is still sitting in
their bank account. Now it looks good to those people that live
in that county but those resources are not spent--they are
supposed to be used to benefit all of the constituents that
live in that county in that particular jurisdiction. In our
instance in the 2,401 individual jurisdictions where we have
voting precincts.
Mr. Rogers. Mr. Braun----
Mr. Padilla. If I may--if I may add?
Mr. Rogers. Certainly.
Mr. Padilla. So similarly and in agreement that the
guidelines that are established at the EAC or at the Federal
level as those monies move. We mentioned earlier how this
contract reimbursement basis with counties allows the
investments to be made earlier. It also provides to those
contract reviews an additional point of compliance, if you
will, or a verification that indeed the expenditure is being
made or consistent with those Federal requirements.
Mr. Rogers. Right. Mr. Braun, we all know that Russia has
been meddling in our elections by disinformation for decades
and just like they do countries all around the world for
decades particularly in eastern and western Europe. But you
made a point a few minutes ago that the Chairman addressed but
you said that there have been instance--and my understanding
there have been no incidents of hacking in the 2016 or 2018
elections but you said that there have been some incidents
prior to that where Russia had hacked some machines in this
country. Can you expand on that please?
Mr. Braun. It was actually a website I was referring to.
Vox Media reported, I believe it was actually 2017 instance
where Russian bots I think took down an election reporting
website in Tennessee.
Mr. Rogers. OK.
Mr. Braun. Multiple Federal sources were cited in the
report.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. The Chair yields to
the gentlelady from New York, Miss Rice.
Miss Rice. Thank you Mr. Chairman and thank you all for
coming today. Over the past couple of weeks I have heard some
people refer to H.R. 1 as a Federal takeover of our elections.
But I hope that everyone on Panel II would agree that the
Federal Government has a Constitutionally-protected role in
advising and helping to administer elections.
I think 2016 should have established that once and for all.
I think the previous panel, both Mr. Krebs and Mr. Hicks, laid
out the fallacy of that claim by showing that they were able to
build relationships with States and localities to work together
without infringing upon the State's ultimate ability and right
to set election standards in their own States.
My concern is the--what--and this is to everyone on the
panel, what are States doing to work with social media
companies to combat wide-spread disinformation campaigns
targeting our elections? What do you think the Congress and the
Federal Government can do to better prepare States and local
election officials for these dynamic hybrid warfare attacks?
Mr. Merrill. Outstanding question. I will tell you this. I
don't think--well, there is nobody at this table that has had a
higher-profile situation than we did in Alabama when Senator
Jones was elected December 12, 2017.
I attended a presentation that was made by Facebook and
Twitter in February 2018. They were talking about all they had
done to help folks, and how they had made it easier for people
to understand when bots were removed, and how it was helping
the electoral process.
I said to them--after I waited patiently in line, I said,
now friends, let me say this to you. I said, if you will tell
me what you did to help us in Alabama, we will both know
because they were talking about what they done in ours,
specifically. They didn't do anything to help us.
Now, subsequently, we came to Washington and had a meeting
with Facebook, and talked to them about what they could do, and
how they could be more helpful. One of the things they have
introduced now is that whenever you get ready to purchase an ad
on Facebook, they communicate with you directly through a card
that is mailed to a particular location so you know if that
individual is making the purchase as a United States Citizen.
There are other mechanisms that they have put in place that
I think are appropriate now. But we have got to have some
cooperation with the people at the social media level. That
will enable us to be more effective.
We were actually able to have ads removed from YouTube and
Google because of the work that we did, but we had a difficult
time with Facebook. Twitter was also very supportive in what
they did to help us.
Mr. Padilla. In my oral remarks I made reference to the
creation of an Office of Election Cybersecurity, as well as
Office of Enterprise Risk Management in California. In my
written remarks, I expand on that a little bit. Some of the
initiatives within the election cybersecurity effort included:
We branded a voucher. We put up a specific web portal with a
lot of important voter tools, the find your polling place,
verify your registration status, and a dedicated email address
for the public to report suspected misinformation.
In addition to that, some of our additional State funding
allowed us to hire staff strictly dedicated to social media
monitoring. Not to censure candidates or campaigns, but to
specifically look for erroneous information about the election
or the voting process.
Some are to--a lot of secretaries benefited from a mass
conversation--the National Association of Secretaries of State
conversation with representatives from Facebook, and Twitter,
and others. I mean, we have the benefit that they are based in
California. So we have a little bit quicker access to them.
Creating specific protocols for being able to report to them,
where these specific complaints, kind-of, jump to the front of
the line for review because, you know, if you submit something
on Election Day, you can't wait for 7 days for it to be
addressed.
We--we ended up reporting close to 300 who we felt were
misleading or inaccurate posts, tweets, et cetera, 98 percent
of which the social media companies, themselves, took down
because it violated their policies. So it is one example of
monitoring, reporting, and relationship.
Mr. Praetz. If I might? We have looked at this as, sort-of,
defending our institution on two fronts; one is mis- and
disinformation front. It is a place where as election officials
we don't have a tremendous amount of control.
Then, there is the other front, which is the infrastructure
front, which is the place where we have 100 percent control on.
So that is where a lot of our focus has been. But there is a
bit of overlap, and it comes in the form of information about
where people vote, when you vote, what you need to vote, I.D.
requirements, things like that.
So, it is really key that, as election officials, as more
and more folks drive voters back to the trusted sources, like
us, that we remain trusted sources and are providing fully
accurate information.
That means that we have got to, sort-of, up the notch again
on the infrastructure that we are protecting. One other note is
that we have got to expand the services we provide. I think
social media steps in where they think there are gaps, in terms
of driving registration outreach, or driving--showing up at the
polling place outreach.
They are filling gaps that they perceive in the
administration of elections. To the extent that we don't fill
those ourselves, there are going to be third-party providers
that continue to do so. That--that can result in challenging
relationships because sometimes the information they rely upon
can be inaccurate.
Miss Rice. Go ahead. Mr. Braun.
Mr. Braun. Congresswoman, thank you for that question
because I think it hits on the head of--of how this is such a
National security problem. At the University of Chicago, we
spend a lot of time trying to update concepts like nuclear
deterrents or cyber deterrents, which has really not happened
yet in the National security world.
I think that the point that you are making, it is nearly
impossible for us to stop Russia from doing something like they
did in the Ukraine where--imagine election night 2020 and 12
battleground State websites are down because they have hacked
the websites. Then, Russian media is announcing that their
preferred candidate had won the election. It would be chaos.
We can't really stop it from happening without a strong
deterrence regime. That is not in place yet. I--and it is
something that, you know, the National security establishment
really needs to think through, and implement. Thank you.
Miss Rice. Mr. Braun, I couldn't agree with you more. Let
me just end with this thought. Everything that I have heard
today over the past 3 hours and 15 minutes, I hope has
established, in all of our minds, the need to address this
issue from a non-partisan stance because this gets to the very
heart of maintaining the democracy. That, whether you are a
Republican or a Democrat, you love and you want to maintain.
I really hope that, thanks to smart brains like you, and
the prior panel, and hopefully the--the commitment of everyone
on this committee, and throughout this body, we recognize how
important it is to maintain the integrity of our democracy.
Thank you and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you. The Chair recognizes the
gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is interesting to
have my colleague, Miss Rice, mention that--the smart brain in
the room mentioned by the smartest brain in the room.
Gentlemen, thank you for your service. My question is going to
be to both secretaries of state, Secretary of State Padilla and
Merrill.
I had mentioned in an earlier round of questioning that
there were over 174,000 precincts, Mr. Chairman, voting
precincts in America. My brilliant staff has advised me the
actual number is 178,217 in the 2016 voting cycle. That is
just--this is a tremendous endeavor.
Our goal here in this committee is--is shared on--from both
sides of the aisle, we want every legal vote to have access to
the poll, easy and fair access to the poll and we want their
vote to be accurately counted, whether they are Democrats,
Republicans, or anything in between. We have that same goal.
You, gentlemen, have the incredible task of ensuring that that
happens in your individual States.
The--your colleague from the State of Texas, secretary of
state has stated that in Texas it has been identified 58,000
non-U.S. citizens who are illegally in the country voted in one
way or another in elections over the last two decades.
May I remind all of us that sometimes even Federal
elections are determined by very, very few number of votes. Our
colleague Will Hurd from Texas 23rd district, his election was
determined by 926 votes. So to say that it is a--that it is a
small problem is not a--I don't think it is intellectually
sound, when--when that is--when that response is measured
against elections that are determined by very few votes.
So Secretary of State Padilla, is seems to me, since we are
dealing with Title III, election security. That is our
jurisdictional authority in this committee. Security has--as
it--to establish a perimeter. That you want to control access
to that perimeter first and then control action within that
perimeter.
So how do you, good sir, in California, how can--how do you
guarantee the citizens of your State that access to a
controlled voting environment or precinct is limited to a legal
vote? I--and, sir, I will be asking you the same question.
This is--this is a spectrum beyond the control of the
action. We spent a lot of time talking about how we confirm the
accuracy of a vote and cyber interference, et cetera. How do we
control legal access to that voting perimeter, good sir, in
your State?
Mr. Padilla. I very much appreciate the question. I know
Congress at times deals with public safety issues and debates
about the balance between public safety and civil liberties. I
put that out there just as a framework to consider when it
comes to elections. We value security and we value
accessibility, right? Those two are not mutually exclusive.
Mr. Higgins. They are difficult, yes.
Mr. Padilla. So when it comes to the security of the voting
process and the actions taken within, just look at the data. I
mean, there have been numerous reports, numerous studies,
numerous investigations that, when it comes to the baseless
allegations of massive voter fraud, show that voter fraud is
exceedingly rare.
So the safeguards are working, by and large. Does that mean
that we should not take it seriously? No, we do take
allegations very seriously. But the measures that have been--
technology and otherwise----
Mr. Higgins. Intelligent response. So let me give time to
your--to your colleague from Alabama. Before he answers, let me
state that what we seek is reassurance at the State and the
local level as we are dealing with 178,000 precincts that legal
access to that voting environment is recognized as a security
concern, if we are talking about jurisdiction over the security
of the--and the sanctity of our elections in America. This is
certainly--any reasonable man or woman would recognize this.
Sir, in Alabama, how would--how would you handle that?
Mr. Merrill. Congressman, 2,401 of those are in Alabama and
I want to share this with you, too. I want to be perfectly
clear about this----
Chairman Thompson. You have 10 seconds.
Mr. Merrill. OK. The only people that need to be voting in
U.S. elections are United States citizens.
Mr. Higgins. Well, that would--that indentify the legal
access.
Thank you, gentlemen, for your service to your country. Mr.
Chairman, I yield.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. The reason I said
that, Mr. Secretary of State, they have called votes and we
trying to finish----
Mr. Merrill. Yes, sir.
Chairman Thompson. That is the good news. The bad news is
all the questions going forward will be yielded to 2 minutes.
Mr. Correa.
Mr. Correa. Mr. Chair, just a quick question. Mr. Padilla,
Mr. Merrill, H.R. 1, help or not help with voter system
integrity?
Mr. Padilla. Help. Additional resources on the table that
are desperately needed, we have offered under our previous
question some specifics on how to maybe improve upon the
language to make it even more strategic for State investment.
Mr. Merrill. Congressman, it has a potential to, but not in
the current form.
Mr. Correa. Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
Chair yields to the gentlelady from Arizona, Ms. Lesko.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Very quickly I am just going to ask one of the questions
and it will be to you, Mr. Merrill. Section 1302 of this bill
H.R. 1 criminalizes false statements or misinformation
regarding elections and candidates.
Much of how, in this bill it determines if a person is in
violation of these provisions is to their intent. The penalty
written in the bill is a fine of up to $100,000 or up to 5
years in prison, or both.
I guess, my question is and--how are we going to
determine--who's going to be the arbitrator and determining if
something is misinformation or not? I know, I can tell you in
my election, my opponent did a lot of misinformation about me.
Are they going to be a criminal now as well?
Mr. Merrill. Well, Congresswoman, I want to make sure
that--that you know this. We take voter fraud, which that would
be a part of voter fraud, very seriously in our State.
Since I have been the secretary, we have had 6 convictions
and we have had 3 elections that have been overturned. Prior to
the time that I became the secretary, we had not had an
incident of occurrence that was reported, identified,
investigated, and prosecuted.
I brought a sheet, if you would like to have it I will be
happy to share it with you, we have had 874 unique instances
reported in our office since we have been there and all but 4
have been fully taken care of in one way or the other. I have
got a way to show you what we have done on that.
I think it is important to know that we have a number of
prosecutors in our State that are not really interested in
advancing investigations into voter fraud because they think
the penalties are too stiff. So the penalties that are outlined
in the code section that you just identified, I don't know that
they are really commensurate with what the crime may be.
So I think there is a number of people who may be concerned
about the implementation of that at any level.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, perhaps I had got
misinformation. The information I got was on that particular
section. It also included like misinformation like you would
put out on Facebook or something like that, and it would
criminalize it. So perhaps I am wrong, because that would be
concerning to me. Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. Will the gentleman
provide that----
Mr. Merrill. Oh, yes----
Chairman Thompson. Document for the--for the committee.
Mr. Merrill. I can be--I can do so, sir.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. I yield 2 minutes
to the gentlelady from California, Ms. Barragan.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I first want to
thank everybody for being here. I have a bias here; I am from
California. Thank you, Secretary Padilla, for everything you
are doing. In 2016, several media reports claim that 21 States
had been targeted or hacked. Was California one of them, and if
so, what happened?
Mr. Padilla. So California was not hacked, if you are
talking about a hack or a specific type of breach. You know,
the question brings to mind another valuable lesson that to
think all secretaries have learned and local elections
officials have learned in our partnership with DHS and others.
We talk cybersecurity and we reference cyber hygiene
earlier, but cyber vocabulary is also critical. When there is
an incident, it is important to be specific and precise about
what has or has not happened, right. We don't want to downplay
incidents because that would be irresponsible for, you know,
accountability to the public, but we also can't blow it up
either.
So, the stories that came out in 2016, about 21 States,
from my understanding, California was on the list of States
that were ``scanned'' by entities that trace back to agents of
the Russian government. So what is scanning? You know, scanning
has been described in lay terms as the equivalent of somebody
in the neighborhood shaking doorknobs to see if the doors are
locked, right.
You are looking for vulnerabilities that scan in and of
itself; it is not compromising a system--it is not flipping
votes--it is not a theft of data. So, frankly, scanning is
very, very common in this day and age, given the technology
that we all depend on now, not just in the election space, you
know, across industries. So that is a long way to answer your
question. California was on that list, but we know what it was;
we know what it wasn't, and our integrity of our missions are
intact.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you. I will yield back, given the short
time.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. I am sure
Congressman Cleaver appreciates it. You have 2 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Merrill----
Mr. Merrill. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cleaver. Gave us a short answer, if you can. You kind-
of confused me. Were you--were you suggesting that there were a
lot of--much more voter fraud in the State of Alabama, but you
didn't--that was another attempt to prosecute because it was
this--the penalties were too stiff?
Mr. Merrill. Yes, sir. We have some; actually, I have two
incidents that I could share with you just briefly. One, 119
absentee ballot applications were mailed to one location and
nobody lives in that home. In another jurisdiction, 109
absentee ballot applications were mailed to the mayoral
candidate's mother's home, and neither one of those had been
prosecuted yet.
Mr. Cleaver. Were there many--many more?
Mr. Merrill. Sir?
Mr. Cleaver. Were there many more of such cases?
Mr. Merrill. Oh, yes sir. Yes, sir; we have them
frequently. They are not just related to certain parts of our
State either.
Mr. Cleaver. No, that was just interesting, because most of
the----
Mr. Merrill. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cleaver. Studies showed that we didn't have a lot of
mass votes in----
Mr. Merrill. Yes, sir. The main instances kind-of that we
see are in the area of absentee balloting, not in walk-up, in-
person voting.
Mr. Cleaver. OK. But my final question; I want you to tell
me whether or not I am right. Our elections equal--we have
8,000 voting jurisdictions--8,000. Forty-three States use
electronic voting machines--and I go on to list a lot of
different things that are different. So, you can't--I am having
difficulty. I went to--somebody already tried to--you have--
when you do--you have to make things match.
So, I can't fit it. If all these things were having--all
these different States and territories are doing things
differently, how can we all be equal? Anybody? Am I right or am
I wrong? Am I right or wrong?
Mr. Padilla. If your premise is, look, this is the United
States of America, and if you are 18 years or older and a
citizen with minimal exceptions, you have the right to vote,
exercise that right vote without any--without any unnecessary
obstacles, then it is, how we achieve those in each State?
Do some States have easier ways to be a registered voter if
you are eligible? Yes, some have better than others. Do some
States offer more options for when, where, and how to cast a
ballot? Unfortunately, yes; some States do better than others.
My work in California is to try make California, you know, the
leader of the pack when it comes to, yes, being secure, being
as accessible and voter-friendly as possible.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. Thirty seconds for the gentleman from
Alabama.
Mr. Merrill. Yes, sir. Congressman, one of the things that
I wanted to share was that, since January 19, 2015, we have
registered 1,199,909 new voters; we now have 3,473,030
registered voters.
We have exceeded and surpassed any voter registration and
voter participation records in the history of our State. In
that period of time, we have done more per capita than any
State in the union, to ensure that all of our eligible citizens
are registered to vote and have an I.D.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much. Thank you,
gentleman from Missouri, for his question.
Let me thank all of the witnesses for your expert
testimony. We will probably have some additional questions for
you--for you to respond back to us. I would like unanimous
consent to--to the record, that final report on a Democratic
Congressional Task Force*** on election security and article on
voting participation. Without objection.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
*** The document has been retained in committee files.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
[The information follows:]
Article, www.vox.com, ``Civil rights leaders fought to make voting
easier. An Alabama Republican didn't get the memo''
John Merrill thinks guaranteeing people the right to vote ``cheapens''
the civil rights movement's fight to, well, vote.
By Victoria M. Massie, @vmmassie, Nov 3, 2016, 5:10pm EDT
Alabama Secretary of State John Merrill says that automatically
registering people to vote ``cheapens'' civil rights leaders' efforts
to maximize people's rights to, well, vote, Slate reported.
In an interview published Wednesday by Answering the Call, a voting
rights initiative, Merrill was asked to explain why he opposes
automatic voter registration, a move that could help fix America's
paltry voter turnout rate.
Merrill didn't waver. First he name-dropped ``civil rights
pioneers'' like Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Rosa Parks, noted his
friendship with Rep. John Lewis (D-GA), and touted the fact his
daughter interned for African-American Congress member Terri Sewell (D-
AL). Then Merrill argued that granting people the right to vote
``cheapens'' these people's work by rewarding folks who are ``too sorry
to get up off of their rear to go register to vote'':
``These people fought--some of them were beaten, some of them were
killed--because of their desire to ensure that everybody that wanted to
had the right to register to vote and participate in the process. I'm
not going to cheapen the work that they did. I'm not going to embarrass
them by allowing somebody that's too sorry to get up off of their rear
to go register to vote.''
To make his point abundantly clear, Merrill compared automatic
registration to ``giving [people] a trophy because they've played on
the ball team.''
For Merrill, automatic voter registration feeds into the taboo
notion of entitlements, rewarding people with services when they didn't
put in the initiative to earn them.
There's just one problem: American citizens who are at least 18
years old should be entitled to the right to vote if they meet the age
and citizenship requirement.
Rather, the major barrier standing between people and the polls
tends to be policies trying to keep select groups far away, as civil
rights leaders demonstrated half a century ago.
Despite having the constitutional right to vote, African Americans
in Southern States like Alabama faced insidious Jim Crow-era policies
like poll taxes and literacy tests that were damn near impossible to
pass. In 1965, a 25-year-old Lewis and other civil rights activists of
the time were brutally beaten by Alabama State troopers for attempting
to March from Selma to Montgomery for that right.
The slew of voter ID laws passed to the fix nonexistent voter fraud
that dubiously suppresses voters of color is one of the latest 21st-
century examples. Others include some States like Alabama denying
felons and people with mental disabilities the right to cast a ballot.
Historically, the right to vote has never been about effort. It's
been about access, and is likely one of the reasons Lewis has been a
fierce advocate for automatic voter registration--even if he's
allegedly Merrill's pal.
Merrill's dog-whistle politicking about ``entitlements'' doesn't
change that.
Chairman Thompson. I thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony and Members for their questions. The Members of the
committee, as I indicated, may have additional questions for
the witnesses, and we ask you respond expeditiously, in
writing, to those questions.
Hearing no further business, the committee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:30 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Christopher C. Krebs
Question 1. You testified that disabling or removing wireless
modems from voting systems is a best practice recognized by DHS. Has
DHS communicated this best practice in writing to election
administrators? Can DHS share any written material on this?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. You testified that all 13 States that currently use
paperless voting systems as their primary voting equipment in at least
one jurisdiction are on a path to transition to voter-verified paper
ballots throughout their States.
Please confirm this is accurate.
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2b. Please provide an estimated time line (rough) for each
State to complete the transition to paper ballots.
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for Christopher C. Krebs
Question 1. Are we taking a fail-safe approach to determining which
election systems or processes are critical to the successful conduct of
a public election?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Would you consider State-wide Centralized Voter
Registration Databases a critical system to the administration and
conduct of any public election?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. What fail-safe measures are in place to assure that if
the voter registration database is compromised and thereby make data
records untrustworthy; or rendered unavailable for early voting or on
election day the casting of ballots will continue?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. How many States have plans in place to hold or continue
an election should their voter registration databases become
compromised?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. How many States and jurisdictions within each State use
electronic poll books?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. Are there instances when electronic poll books have
failed to operate as intended?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 7. What recovery plan is in place should a polling
location's electronic poll books fail or for periods of time not
function?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 8. How well does same-day voter registration during early
voting and on election day create meet fail-safe objectives for the
successful conduct of a public election?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 9. Are you providing any guidance on security and wireless
non-voting system technology?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 10. Do election administrators plan for 100% voter
participation during early voting or on election day? If not, why not?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 11. Are there best practices that should be used to
determine the number of ballots and ballot marking technology, or
voting machine that should be provided to support voting?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 12. Are there best practices to address when a natural or
man-made event makes a polling location unavailable for voting?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 13. How does allowing voters to vote at locations other
than at a single voting location impact the ability of election
services to serve voters in a county or State?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Christopher C. Krebs
Question 1a. How have you engaged local and State media outlets to
ensure that unofficial vote reporting is protected from malicious
interference?
How many affiliates has CISA worked with?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1b. How have you coordinated defense or information
sharing related to the defense of State and local media outlet
networks?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1c. How have you coordinated dissemination of information
regarding attempts to interfere with other aspects of elections?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. Have you observed any change in public confidence as a
result of efforts to increase election security?
How does DHS/CISA assess confidence in election integrity?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2b. What outcomes does DHS/CISA use to determine success
in protecting elections?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3a. Does DHS have any outstanding requests for risk and
vulnerability assessments from States or local election officials? Is
there a wait for new assessments?
Have States/localities been implementing the policies that DHS
recommended based on these assessments?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3b. How often does DHS/CISA conduct reassessments of
jurisdictions? How often does CISA recommend refreshing RVAs?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Dina Titus for Christopher C. Krebs
Question 1. In my home State of Nevada there have been thousands of
attempts by various actors to breach our voter registration database.
Fortunately, our State and local election officials have managed to
thwart every single one of these attacks. They have utilized Albert
sensors to identify suspicious IP addresses and known malware
signatures and alert the appropriate authorities. How important is it
that each State deploy these Election-system sensors?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Acknowledging the importance of coordinating Federal,
State, and local election security efforts, what kind of barriers exist
that slow or prevent the Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis
Center from coordinating with local and State IT personnel to inform
them about the types of attacks that occur and where they came from so
local officials can better prepare for future attacks?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. What sort of obstacles have you experienced when trying
to share sensitive information about imminent threats with State and
local election officials?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. H.R. 1 aims to create channels for interagency
collaboration by, among other things, requiring DHS, EAC, the
intelligence community, the State Department, and other Federal
partners to develop a comprehensive National strategy to protect our
elections and our democratic institutions, perhaps through broad
initiatives around media literacy or studying the effects of influence
campaigns. Who is responsible for convening and coordinating
interagency efforts to secure elections, and to what extent is there
leadership from the White House?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Yvette D. Clarke for Christopher C. Krebs
Question 1. In November 2018, Senator Ron Wyden wrote to DHS,
asking the agency to ``forensically examine paperless voting machines
used in the November 6, 2018 general election for signs of tampering or
other manipulation by foreign governments or other malicious actors.''
On December 18, 2018, DHS responded to Senator Wyden, stating that
``under our existing authorities, DHS cannot mandate that States submit
to comprehensive forensic examinations of their voting machines.'' But
last week, the DOJ and DHS issued a public statement saying there was
``no evidence to date that . . . a foreign government or foreign agent
had a material impact on the integrity or security of election
infrastructure or political/campaign infrastructure used in the 2018
midterm election.'' If DHS didn't have the authority to examine
paperless voting machines used in the November 2018 election for
evidence of hacking, which is what you informed Senator Wyden in your
letter, what is the basis for your public statement last week saying
there is no evidence that foreign governments hacked our election
infrastructure?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Last year, the FBI uncovered that a Russian oligarch,
with close ties to President Putin, had acquired an ownership interest
in a vendor which hosted State-wide election data for Maryland.\1\
Until the FBI alerted them, State election authorities were unaware of
the vendor's ties to Russia. Even if no tampering occurred, this raises
important questions about foreign ownership of firms providing
election-related services. To the best of your knowledge, is the
Federal Government undertaking any efforts, other than the CFIUS
process, to assess potential existing foreign ownership of firms that
produce voting machines or provide other election-related services? If
so, please describe these efforts. If not, do you believe foreign
actors may seek to invest in this sector with the intent of interfering
in our elections?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/bs-md-
election-russia-20180713-story.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Michael T. McCaul for Christopher C. Krebs
Question 1a. Foreign states, including Russia and other malicious
actors have and will continue to attempt to interfere with U.S.
elections. In fact, I encouraged, in a Classified space, both the Obama
administration and the Trump administration to call out Russia for
their targeted attacks on our Nation. Their activities have injected
chaos and doubt into foundation of our democracy. An issue of this
gravity requires Congress to act in a deliberate and bipartisan manner.
Now, all eyes are on 2020.
What do you see as the major vulnerabilities in our election
security as we look to the future? How do we address these?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1b. Can you outline the major lessons learned and the
steps your agency has taken to effectively provide Federal assistance
to the local election level?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. Last Congress, my bill, the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency Act, was signed into law to streamline
National Protection and Program's Directorate's (NPPD) efforts to
execute cybersecurity and critical infrastructure missions and
establish it as the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Agency (CISA).
How has CISA been effective at combatting cyber threats? What are
the major successes?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2b. What do you anticipate are the upcoming roadblocks and
how can Congress be helpful?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Thomas Hicks
Question 1a. In response to questioning from Congresswoman Clarke,
you testified that it is possible to audit a Direct Recording
Electronic (DRE) voting machine to determine if the system has been
hacked. Yet that appears inconsistent with the findings of research
performed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
at the request of the EAC.
Is there new research that suggests it is possible to audit DREs?
Answer. All voting systems certified by the U.S. Election
Assistance Commission (EAC) to meet the Voluntary Voting System
Guidelines (VVSG) are required to have redundant memory. All voting
systems, including Direct Recording Electronic (DRE) voting machines,
are required to have two, separate sources for memory. A comparison
audit of these two separate sources of memory, including a DRE's
internal memory that stores voting results, could identify
discrepancies, and thus reveal that a system had been compromised.
With that stated, because both sources of memory for DREs without
VVPATs are electronic, it is fathomable that a sophisticated attack
could alter both sources of memory to make them identical and cause
alterations to the data to be undetected. The EAC recognizes the
possibility of this threat is real, which is why the VVSG 2.0 has
Principles and Guidelines requiring software independence. At the
moment, paper is the best way to audit a voting system, but all systems
utilizing paper must comport with HAVA's mandate for all voters to be
able to cast their ballot privately and independently.
The EAC is not aware of new research to this point, however the
Commission is aware that jurisdictions have in the past conducted
parallel audits with DREs to ensure votes are being tallied accurately.
Question 1b. What is the source of that information?
Answer. Vendors have identified this process, and the EAC is aware
that the University of Connecticut's Center for Voting Technology
Research has numerous post-election audit reports that utilize such
data.
Question 1c. Should this new research override NIST's findings?
Answer. No. This research should not be depicted as contrary to the
findings of NIST. In order to meet the National standard set by the
Voluntary Voting System Guidelines (VVSG), all tabulators, including
DREs, are required to have redundant memory that can be independently
verified in order to meet the National standard set by Voluntary Voting
System Guidelines (VVSG). However, it is also feasible that such a
system could be compromised via a significant attack that would alter
both sources of electronic data. This is why the VVSG 2.0 recommends
software independence. It is also why election offices customarily
follow the principle known as ``Defense in Depth'' by building in
multiple layers of security to prevent such an attack from happening,
assess damage created by such an attack, and mitigate the fallout if a
system was compromised.
Question 2a. You testified that you had little concern regarding
the risk of corruption of voting systems through the supply chain
because of the EAC Testing and Certification program. But the EAC
Testing and Certification program which lacks Full Formal Verification
(FFV) or full source code review. Moreover, the EAC Testing and
Certification Program does not evaluate voter-registration systems, e-
poll books, election night reporting systems, and other critical
components that run elections.
Can you elaborate on how the EAC Testing and Certification Program
is capable of detecting supply chain corruption in voting systems
without FFV?
Answer. When the Help America Vote Act of 2002 established the U.S.
Election Assistance Commission, it also created the EAC's Testing &
Certification Program to certify, decertify, and recertify voting
system hardware and software, as well as accredit test laboratories.
The Testing & Certification Program has a very specific mandate that
defines its work as helping to develop guidelines for, and certifying,
voting equipment. This mandate does not include voter registration
systems, e-poll books, and election night reporting systems.
To the question of risk management in the supply chains of systems,
the EAC test labs review the source code, hardware, and software
components of all voting systems tested under the EAC's Testing and
Certification Program. The EAC maintains an on-going Quality Monitoring
Program to identify and correct issues in the field. Additional details
on these programs are included below.
The EAC's Testing and Certification Program conducts a full review
of vendor-developed hardware, software, and source code for every
system it certifies. Also required by the VVSG is a technical data
package (TDP) that includes an approved parts list and/or the bill of
materials documentation.
After a voting system is certified, there is a process for on-going
validation and verification through the Quality Monitoring Program.
This is an audit and analysis of issues reported from the field, issues
discovered by the vendors from their internal testing, and quality
audits that are performed on the voting system manufacturers. Also, as
manufacturers have hardware that reaches the end of its useful life,
they are required to submit engineering change orders to update the
approved parts list and/or bill of materials. In accordance with the
system certification, these engineering change orders must be approved
by the EAC before the vendor can implement the new parts into their
manufacturing process.
That being said, the EAC's Testing and Certification Program cannot
mitigate all supply chain threats. As with all security, including
cybersecurity, there is not one mechanism that can thwart all threats.
This is why the election community should focus on building resiliency
and security through the principle of ``Defense in Depth.''
The EAC's Testing and Certification Program does, however, provide
built-in layers of security for supporting the methodology of ``Defense
in Depth'' for mitigating the supply chain threats for EAC-certified
voting systems via the mechanisms previously described. The EAC also
recommends and assists jurisdictions in working with Federal partners
so they can benefit from the ``whole of Government'' approach to
securing our Nation's election systems.
For example, the EAC has played an instrumental role in providing
opportunities for State and local election officials, as well as
election vendors and other key stakeholders, to interact with
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) officials following the
designation of elections as part of the Nation's critical
infrastructure. The Commission led the establishment of the Government
Coordinating Council for the Election Infrastructure Subsector (GCC)
and the Sector Coordinating Council (SCC). Both councils were
functioning within 1 year of the critical infrastructure designation.
OHS has said that the GCC was formed faster than any other similar
critical infrastructure sector council to date.
Since then, the GCC has launched an Information Sharing and
Analysis Center (ISACs) that allows election officials to receive
timely notifications of potential threats, real-time monitoring of
malicious activity on their networks and access to cybersecurity
experts. Such working groups are exemplary proof-points of how local,
State, and Federal governments can work together toward the shared goal
of protecting our Nation's election systems.
Question 2b. Please explain how the EAC Testing and Certification
Program is capable of detecting potential corruption by vendors
servicing and programming systems that have already been certified.
Answer. The EAC's Testing and Certification Program cannot mitigate
all supply chain threats; not even for threats to the one system of the
elections process it oversees, which is the voting systems. As with all
security, including cybersecurity, there is not one mechanism that can
thwart all threats, which is why election officials should focus on
building resiliency and security through the principle of ``Defense in
Depth.'' The EAC's Testing and Certification Program does, however,
provide built-in layers of depth for mitigating the supply chain
threats for EAC-certified voting system via the mechanisms detailed
below.
All voting systems tested under the EAC's Testing and Certification
Program go through a full review of all vendor-developed source code.
The software and hardware, as certified, has been validated and
verified to be programmed for its intended use. Also required by the
VVSG is a technical data package (TDP) that includes an approved parts
list and/or the bill of materials documentation.
Additionally, after a voting system is certified, there is a
process for on-going validation and verification through the Quality
Monitoring Program. This is an audit and analysis of issues reported
from the field, issues discovered by the vendors from their internal
testing, and quality audits that are performed on the voting system
manufacturers. Also, as manufacturers have hardware that becomes end of
life, they are required to submit engineering change orders to update
the approved parts list and/or bill of materials. In accordance with
the system certification, these engineering change orders must be
approved by the EAC before the vendor can implement the new parts into
their manufacturing process.
Question 2c. Please explain how the EAC Testing and Certification
program is capable of protecting voter-registration databases, election
night reporting systems and e-poll books from supply chain corruption?
Answer. These particular systems are outside of the scope of the
EAC's Testing and Certification program as detailed in the Help America
Vote Act. It should be noted that a number of States have independent
certification programs for electronic poll books and provide their own
certification testing requirements for e-poll books and voting systems.
In addition, States and local election agencies have resources to
protect voter registration databases and other technology, including
servers. For example, voter registration databases are periodically
audited by State or independent experts.
Questions From Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for Thomas Hicks
Question 1. Are we taking a fail-safe approach to determining which
election systems or processes are critical to the successful conduct of
a public election?
Answer. State and local election officials would likely tell you
that each of their election systems and processes play a critical role
in the administration of successful elections, which is why they invest
time and resources into contingency planning and establishing practices
that ensure eligible voters have the ability to successfully cast their
ballot. For example, the availability of provisional ballots at the
polls is the ultimate fail-safe step that election officials offer on
Election Day to ensure that eligible voters impacted by unforeseen
circumstances or issues are able to cast their ballots and have them
counted. In addition, election officials often have contingency plans
in place that include roving technicians who are able to quickly
identify and resolve issues with voting equipment or provide
replacement voting systems if there is a failure. Another example of
State and local election leaders creating fail-safe processes is the
usage of audits to verify election results and confirm that election
systems functioned properly to produce an accurate result.
Question 2. Would you consider State-wide Centralized Voter
Registration Databases a critical system to the administration and
conduct of any public election?
Answer. Yes. Voter registration databases play a critical role in
the administration of elections. State and local election leaders
secure these systems by implementing controls to maintain
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the system and its
data. Each election office has its own procedures and requirements for
how these systems are managed, but the EAC does provide best practices
regarding these systems.
Question 3. What fail-safe measures are in place to assure that if
the voter registration database is compromised and thereby make data
records untrustworthy; or rendered unavailable for early voting or on
election day the casting of ballots will continue?
Answer. The availability of provisional ballots at the polling
place is a key fail-safe measure to ensure that voters have the ability
to participate in an election should voter registration databases not
be available for any reason. In addition, jurisdictions frequently
conduct a back-up of their voter registration database so, if a problem
detected, the administrator is able to retrieve the back-ups to a
specific date and time to review and began remediation if necessary.
Question 4. How many States have plans in place to hold or continue
an election should their voter registration databases become
compromised?
Answer. State and local election leaders across the Nation have
contingency plans in place for events that could impact Election Day,
including a compromised voter registration database. The availability
of provisional ballots at the polls is a safeguard that ensures an
election can still take place under these circumstances. In addition,
election jurisdictions typically have a back-up of their voter
registration list at the local level, and many election officials
provide paper back-ups at polling places or election offices.
Question 5. How many States and jurisdictions within each State use
electronic poll books?
Answer. According to the 2016 EAC's Election Administration and
Voting Survey (EAVS), from 2012 to 2016, there was a significant
increase in the use of electronic poll books Nation-wide. The number of
in-person voters checked in with e-poll books more than doubled during
this time span, increasing 110 percent from 19.7 million to 41.4.
million voters. The EA VS also found that 32 States, the District of
Columbia, and U.S. Virgin Islands reported using e-poll books in at
least one jurisdiction in the 2016 election. Five States used e-poll
books State-wide.
Question 6. Are there instances when electronic poll books have
failed to operate as intended?
Answer. The EAC is aware of some specific instances reported in the
media, but the Commission does not track such data related to
electronic poll books. State and local election administrators are
better positioned to provide detailed responses to this question.
Question 7. What recovery plan is in place should a polling
location's electronic poll books fail or for periods of time not
function?
Answer. Typically, as part of election officials' on-going
contingency planning efforts, jurisdictions using electronic poll books
prepare a paper back-up system in the event of an issue with the
electronic poll books. Some jurisdictions may send the paper back-up to
the polling place with the e-poll books, while others send them only if
needed. The issuance of provisional ballots is one way that election
officials ensure that voters have the ability to cast their ballot when
electronic poll books fail. State and local election administrators
develop and implement their own recovery plans and are better
positioned to provide detailed responses to this question.
Question 8. How well does same-day voter registration during early
voting and on Election Day create meet fail-safe objectives for the
successful conduct of a public election?
Answer. Same-day voter registration is a policy choice made by the
States. Its potential impact on the successful administration of an
election is a question better posed to the election officials charged
with carrying out elections.
Question 9. Are you providing any guidance on security and wireless
non-voting system technology?
Answer. The EAC, often in conjunction with DHS, provides election
officials training on election technology and security. In that
training, the EAC highlights the best practice of disconnecting all
portions of the voting system from the internet. Further, that training
highlights best practices for securing systems that are networked, such
as two-factor authentication, implementing integrity checks such as
digital signatures and hashing, as well as the utilization of
encryption.
In addition, the EAC has issued best practices and checklists for
securing networked systems, such as election night reporting systems,
as well as how to protect data that is on network systems. These
resources include the EAC's Checklist for Securing Voter Registration
Data and other handbooks, playbooks, and best practices documents.
Question 10. Do election administrators plan for 100 percent voter
participation during early voting or on Election Day? If not, why not?
Answer. Election administrators forecast turnout across advance
voting sites, by mail, and at polling locations. This forecasted mix
allows election administrators to ensure proper resources are applied.
Overall, election administrators plan to ensure that each and every
voter is provided the ability to cast a ballot. In addition, States
have laws and regulations to guide the number of pre-printed ballots
required for election day, and many States also have in-house or
polling place ballot-on-demand systems to provide additional ballots as
needed.
Question 11. Are there best practices that should be used to
determine the number of ballots and ballot-marking technology, or
voting machine that should be provided to support voting?
Answer. State election offices often create guidance and procedures
for local jurisdictions to follow. The EAC provides tools that can be
used as part of this process, most notably the EAC's Election
Administration and Voting Survey interactive portal that allows
jurisdictions to compare their own election data with that of
jurisdictions with similar characteristics. In addition, there are on-
line tools available to assist election officials seeking to identify
the number of voting systems and check-in stations they need to
mitigate the chance of lines.
Question 12. Are there best practices to address when a natural or
man-made event makes a polling location unavailable for voting?
Answer. Yes. Contingency planning is a key function of election
administration. Election officials must prepare for the unexpected and
have plans in place to conduct elections when disaster strikes. The EAC
is committed to helping election officials prepare for everything from
wildfires and hurricanes to terrorist threats and electricity outages.
In fact, the Commission has launched a new initiative to more
rigorously engage election officials who can help to shape the
Commission's more robust suite of services and resources for election
administrators who face natural or man-made disasters.
Question 13. How does allowing voters to vote at locations other
than at a single voting location impact the ability of election
services to serve voters in a county or State?
Answer. The impact of these procedures is different in the States
and jurisdictions that may offer these services, and, therefore, the
State election offices would be the best source to answer this
question.
Questions From Honorable Dina Titus for Thomas Hicks
Question 1. In my home State of Nevada there have been thousands of
attempts by various actors to breach our voter registration database.
Fortunately, our State and local election officials have managed to
thwart every single one of these attacks. They have utilized Albert
sensors to identify suspicious IP addresses and known malware
signatures and alert the appropriate authorities. How important is it
that each State deploy these Election-system sensors?
Answer. Every State and local election official has the duty to
securely protect their election systems. Nevada's election officials
have availed themselves to many security-focused services provided by
the OHS. The EAC recommends that it all States use the Federal
resources available--including those provided by the OHS and those that
might be funded as part of the $380 million in HAVA Funds passed last
year by Congress and administered by the EAC--to address election
security threats.
Question 2. Acknowledging the importance of coordinating Federal,
State, and local election security efforts, what kind of barriers exist
that slow or prevent the Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis
Center from coordinating with local and State IT personnel to inform
them about the types of attacks that occur and where they came from so
local officials can better prepare for future attacks?
Answer. Because OHS manages the Election Infrastructure Information
Sharing and Analysis Center (EI-ISAC), this question would best be
answered by OHS.
Question 3. What sort of obstacles have you experienced when trying
to share sensitive information about imminent threats with State and
local election officials?
Answer. For the most part, the EAC has not experienced obstacles
when charged with sharing information about imminent threats with State
and local election officials. This is something the EAC did even ahead
of the 2016 election and prior to DHS's decision to designation
elections as part of the Nation's critical infrastructure. That said,
the delay in issuance of security clearances for the EAC Commissioners
remains an issue that hopefully will be resolved quickly to allow the
EAC to receive and share sensitive information when necessary.
Question 4. H.R. 1 aims to create channels for interagency
collaboration by, among other things, requiring DHS, EAC, the
intelligence community, the State Department, and other Federal
partners to develop a comprehensive National strategy to protect our
elections and our democratic institutions, perhaps through broad
initiatives around media literacy or studying the effects of influence
campaigns. Who is responsible for convening and coordinating
interagency efforts to secure elections, and to what extent is there
leadership from the White House?
Answer. The DHS Government Coordinating Council (GCC), of which the
EAC Commissioners are members, is the primary body to share information
related to securing elections. Aside from that body, under the Help
America Vote Act, the EAC is the only Federal agency authorized to
assist election officials with all aspects of elections, including
security.
Question From Honorable Yvette D. Clarke for Thomas Hicks
Question. Last year, the FBI uncovered that a Russian oligarch,
with close ties to President Putin, had acquired an ownership interest
in a vendor which hosted State-wide election data for Maryland. Until
the FBI alerted them, State election authorities were unaware of the
vendor's ties to Russia. Even if no tampering occurred, this raises
important questions about foreign ownership of firms providing
election-related services. To the best of your knowledge, is the
Federal Government undertaking any efforts, other than the CFIUS
process, to assess potential existing foreign ownership of firms that
produce voting machines or provide other election-related services? If
so, please describe these efforts. If not, do you believe foreign
actors may seek to invest in this sector with the intent of interfering
in our elections?
Answer. The EAC agrees that the question of foreign ownership is an
important one. As such, foreign interference in elections should always
be treated as a credible threat. That's why the Commission's Testing
and Certification Program provides built-in layers of security and
quality assurance on voting system manufacturers, including a
registration process that requires disclosure of ownership and on-going
quality monitoring audits. Since the EAC cannot mitigate all threats
from its registered voting system manufacturers, it recommends that
election officials focus on building resiliency and security through
the principle of ``Defense in Depth'' and by taking advantage of
resources offered by Federal partners.
As a clearinghouse of information on best practices in election
administration, the EAC has also provided officials with real-life
examples of how to mitigate threats potentially posed by foreign
ownership. For example, the EAC has posted security language from a
Request for Proposal requiring voting equipment vendors, and their
parent and holding companies, to be based in the United States. Our
office, in conjunction with the Department of Homeland Security (DHS),
has also offered election officials training on election technology and
security, including best practices for contracting and the selection of
vendors.
Questions From Honorable Michael T. McCaul for Thomas Hicks
Question 1. Voting machine challenges remain a chronic problem. How
can local officials who are the center of gravity for running and
securing elections ensure electric voting machines are secure?
Answer. The goal of every election official is to ensure not only
voting machines, but the entire election system, is secure. Security
has always been at the heart of what election officials do. Each State
and jurisdiction has measures in place to ensure security in all phases
of the election process. Every jurisdiction is different. This is one
of the great strengths of our election system--that there is no one
central point of access that could render the system vulnerable to a
massive attack.
Since the EAC's inception, our HAVA-mandated Testing &
Certification Program has been a critical first step in the process of
maintaining the reliability and security of the voting systems used in
our Nation's elections. The Commission also produces guidelines and
checklists, posts Requests for Proposals, elevates best practices and
administers an IT Management course to help election officials take a
holistic approach to securing their election systems. Through our
partnership with the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST), the EAC has also maintained the Voluntary Voting System
Guidelines (VVSG), which sets the National standard for voting
equipment around the country.
However, as stated above, the EAC is not the only security solution
for election officials. As secure voting systems must have many layers
of security and resiliency built into every component, election
officials must also have a ``Defense in Depth'' in terms of
partnerships and resources they can draw from to secure their systems.
Question 2. What incentives are in place for election equipment
companies to improve their security?
Answer. The best incentive for election equipment companies to
improve security is in response to a requirement by their customers,
State and local election officials who administer elections. The EAC
produces guidelines and checklists, posts on-line sample Requests for
Proposals, elevates best practices, and administers an IT management
course to help election officials take a holistic approach to securing
their election systems, including making sure best practices are
required of their contractors and vendors in addition to their own
election staff.
Another incentive for election equipment vendors is the EAC's
Testing and Certification Program. In order for a voting system vendor
to have the ability to submit a voting system to be tested and
certified by the EAC, it must first become a registered manufacturer.
This requires disclosure of ownership, as well as on-going quality
monitoring audits. The Testing and Certification Program also oversees
the Voluntary Voting System Guidelines (VVSG), which the EAC maintains
with our partners at NIST. The VVSG are a set of standards against
which voting systems can be tested to determine if the systems meet
those standards. Some factors examined under these tests include
functionality, accessibility, accuracy, auditability, and security
capabilities. These principles, and the best practices disseminated as
part of the EAC's Clearinghouse function help set and maintain the
standard for voting equipment around the country.
Questions From Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for Alex Padilla
Question 1. Are we taking a fail-safe approach to determining which
election systems or processes are critical to the successful conduct of
a public election?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Would you consider State-wide Centralized Voter
Registration Databases a critical system to the administration and
conduct of any public election?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. What fail-safe measures are in place to assure that if
the voter registration database is compromised and thereby make data
records untrustworthy; or rendered unavailable for early voting or on
election day the casting of ballots will continue?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. How many States have plans in place to hold or continue
an election should their voter registration databases become
compromised?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. How many States and jurisdictions within each State use
electronic poll books?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. Are there instances when electronic poll books have
failed to operate as intended?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 7. What recovery plan is in place should a polling
location's electronic poll books fail or for periods of time not
function?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 8. How well does same-day voter registration during early
voting and on election day create meet fail-safe objectives for the
successful conduct of a public election?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 9. Are you providing any guidance on security and wireless
non-voting system technology?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 10. Do election administrators plan for 100 percent voter
participation during early voting or on election day? If not, why not?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 11. Are there best practices that should be used to
determine the number of ballots and ballot marking technology, or
voting machine that should be provided to support voting?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 12. Are there best practices to address when a natural or
man-made event makes a polling location unavailable for voting?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 13. How does allowing voters to vote at locations other
than at a single voting location impact the ability of election
services to serve voters in a county or State?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Alex Padilla
Question 1. Our system is only as strong as its weakest link, and
we need to ensure everyone has this ``cyber hygiene'' knowledge. Have
you found that there's a general lack of knowledge of security
vulnerabilities and best practices at the staff level?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. Have the trainings you've conducted for staff been
productive?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2b. What are some lessons learned from these trainings?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. The risk and vulnerability assessments offered by DHS
can be extremely valuable for States and localities. Have you found
these assessments for States and local election officials to be useful
as you work to secure your election systems, and have you implemented
DHS's recommendations?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. Do you have the resources you need to implement the
recommendations, and if not, what more do you need to do so?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question From Honorable Dina Titus for Alex Padilla
Question. When speaking with State and local election officials in
Nevada, I have heard that while urban areas like Las Vegas may have the
IT workforce available to recruit individuals to implement new
cybersecurity measures like Albert sensors, rural areas have been
struggling to find trained personnel. Have you experienced this
shortage in other parts of the country, and do you believe further
investment in STEM education is necessary to effectively mitigate this
skills gap and secure our most vulnerable election sites?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Yvette D. Clarke for Alex Padilla
Question 1a. Last year, the FBI uncovered that a Russian oligarch,
with close ties to President Putin, had acquired an ownership interest
in a vendor which hosted State-wide election data for Maryland.\1\
Until the FBI alerted them, State election authorities were unaware of
the vendor's ties to Russia. Even if no tampering occurred, this raises
important questions about foreign ownership of firms providing
election-related services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/bs-md-
election-russia-20180713-story.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To the best of your knowledge, does your State have any election-
related contracts with vendors backed by Russian or Chinese investors?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1b. What measures, if any, does your State undertake to
assess foreign ownership of election vendors prior to signing contracts
with them?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question From Honorable Michael T. McCaul for Alex Padilla
Question. Foreign states, including Russia and other malicious
actors have and will continue to attempt to interfere with U.S.
elections. In fact, I encouraged, in a Classified space, both the Obama
administration and the Trump administration to call out Russia for
their targeted attacks on our Nation. Their activities have injected
chaos and doubt into foundation of our democracy. An issue of this
gravity requires Congress to act in a deliberate and bipartisan manner.
Now, all eyes are on 2020. How has the cooperation with DHS and
Director Krebs strengthened California's election security?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for Noah Praetz
Question 1. Are we taking a fail-safe approach to determining which
election systems or processes are critical to the successful conduct of
a public election?
Answer. Most election systems and processes are managed at the
local level and therefore the fail-safe approach is often determined
and implemented locally, though often State-wide guidance is provided.
Election officials do try and ensure business continuity and therefore
they do build in redundancies to many processes. However, there are
large variations in the degree to which election officials are able to
identify critical path systems, prioritize efforts, and build in
sustainable redundancies.
Prioritizing the most critical systems is incredibly important.
Most foundationally people need to be able to vote and administrators
need to be able to count those votes accurately. Voter Registration
System and Voting Systems are therefore the two most critical systems,
without which elections could not be run. However, within those two
umbrella systems, and around the edges, election officials rely on a
variety of other system to aid in the seamless efficient administration
of elections. Successful attacks on any of those systems can have a
detrimental effect on the voter experience--and therefore in their
level of trust. Some of these others connected systems that election
officials rely upon to deliver expected services include:
Voting Systems for casting and counting votes, as noted
above
Voter Registration Systems for managing the list of voters
and what they are--entitled to vote upon, as noted above
Election Management Systems for handling data necessary to
facilitate the two above and to facilitate the various other
duties
Electronic Pollbook Systems
Ballot Printing Systems
Ballot Envelope Scanner
Election Day Command Centers
Election Information Websites
Election Service Websites--registration--ballot requests w/
or without marking--sample ballots
Election Night Reporting Websites
Election Auditing Tools
Other miscellaneous tools.
Question 2. Would you consider State-wide Centralized Voter
Registration Databases a critical system to the administration and
conduct of any public election?
Answer. Yes, I consider a State-wide voter registration database to
be a critical system to the administration of elections. However, the
particular level of criticality can vary depending upon whether the
State has a centralized singular top-down voter database construction,
or a diffuse, bottom-up construction. In Illinois the system was
considered ``bottom-up'' meaning each county had their own primary
database.
Question 3. What fail-safe measures are in place to assure that if
the voter registration database is compromised and thereby make data
records untrustworthy; or rendered unavailable for early voting or on
election day the casting of ballots will continue?
Answer. One fail-safe operation available Nation-wide is the use of
provisional ballots that can be counted after the election in the event
voter data in the over registration database is not 100% accurate at
point of service. Additionally, some States, like Illinois, offer same-
day registration (SDR) options. SDR as a service offering and fail-safe
process also offers a significant amount of resiliency. There are
policy decisions that can impact business continuity when the software
is not operating as expected. However, there is wide latitude and
variance in how these fail-safe programs are managed and
consequentially in how impactful such a major event would be. For
example, in Cook County we implemented a registration process that was
only marginally longer than a normal check-in process and believed we
could have managed a significant data problem without equally
significant impacts on lines and voter expectations. However, to do so
we relied on electronic pollbooks (e-pollbooks). Were the e-pollbooks
rendered inoperable entirely, the tertiary paper-based backup would
have had a significant negative impact on the amount of time voters
would have had to wait in line to check-in.
Question 4. How many States have plans in place to hold or continue
an election should their voter registration databases become
compromised?
Answer. I do not know how many places have a specific detailed plan
for this type of occurrence. But every State and local election
official knows how to administer provisional ballots and many times in
large numbers. Whether most are outfitted for wholesale failure of the
primary voter registration system is unlikely. In Cook County we could
have likely handled a wholesale data failure given our use of
electronic poll books and streamlined registration process. However,
should we have had to revert to our back-up paper provisional and
registration system there would have been significant service impacts.
Question 5. How many States and jurisdictions within each State use
electronic poll books?
Answer. I do not know Nation-wide. In Illinois there are between 20
and 30 election jurisdictions that have electronic poll books,
including all counties with over 100,000 voters. This accounts for over
83% of the State's registered voters.
Question 6. Are there instances when electronic poll books have
failed to operate as intended?
Answer. I'm sure there are many cases of them not operating as
expected or intended. They are computers operated by humans. And while
the root cause most often comes back to user issues, the effect on a
voter is the same. We certainly had sporadic episodes of having to
revert to our back-up systems and even our paper registration books.
This occurred in far fewer than 1 percent of our precincts and the
issues was resolved at some point during the day in almost every case;
the digital services and data became reliable once again.
Question 7. What recovery plan is in place should a polling
location's electronic poll books fail or for periods of time not
function?
Answer. Recovery plans are different everywhere. In suburban Cook
County we had a number of back-ups. First, if the specific primary e-
poll book software was inoperable, but the device worked, we utilized a
redundant digital file of voters. We were able to do this because we
capture actual signatures for every voter on paper and kept a full
paper record. If the device failed entirely or workers felt most
comfortable with paper back-ups we had a printed version of the poll
book for emergency use. And finally, there was a process for Election
Day Registration or Provisional Voting which guarantee all voters cast
a ballot.
Question 8. How well does same-day voter registration during early
voting and on election day create meet fail-safe objectives for the
successful conduct of a public election?
Answer. Same-day voter registration relieved a tremendous amount of
pressure in Cook County on election day and during early voting. It
allowed for instant correction of operational voter registration
mistakes (things like typos, and jr/sr problems, which always occur at
some small rate) and provided a large fail-safe process for malicious
activities.
Question 9. Are you providing any guidance on security and wireless
non-voting system technology?
Answer. Cook County issued no guidance to other election officials
other than the white paper that was attached to the testimony I
delivered. It did not include a prohibition on wireless. In fact, Cook
County used wireless technology in different contexts. While there was
increased marginal risk Cook County accepted it because of the
significant operational & voter list maintenance advantages. Ultimately
the team believe that it had the ability to mitigate the potential
security consequences through back up plans and solid audits.
The e-poll books communicated wirelessly with the central servers.
Aside from embedded security like encryption, because Cook County had
same-day registration, the team believed that the downside risk
increase due to this communication method was covered for, and
therefore Cook chose to allow wireless communications between e-
pollbooks and the central office.
Cook County also transmitted encrypted unofficial election results
from the precincts. However, before publishing those results Cook
County validated that the results were not being systematically altered
in any way during the transmission process. And before certifying the
official results Cook County validated that the transmitted results
matched the precinct printed results 100% of the time. In an
environment where there are audits and auditable materials, the level
of acceptable risk changes. It was the team's judgment that the
decision to utilize technology to solve some operational and trust
problems was acceptable even if they increased risk marginally to other
areas. But it was only acceptable because Cook County believed they
would find and be able to correct exploitation of those risk areas.
Question 10. Do election administrators plan for 100% voter
participation during early voting or on election day? If not, why not?
Answer. In Cook County voters voted early on touch screens with
audit trails and Cook County could accommodate 100% turnout,
technically. However, Cook understood that they only had to outfit
themselves for around a 30% voting in that early voting time period.
With respect to printing paper ballots and resourcing with machines and
staff, some officials do plan for complete turnout. Others do not. In
Illinois officials are technically required to print ballots for 110
percent of the registered voters on election day. Many don't however,
because they subtract the number of people using vote by mail and early
voting, and they also rely on historical numbers as a valid offset.
Finally, the ability to vote people on the ADA touch-screen devises
offers some bandwith protection if turnout is full. Paper ballots are
not cheap and in odd-year local elections or in even-year primary
elections, with an expected turnout of maybe 30 percent, it has
historically not been viewed as imprudent to try to do some surgical
targeting of ballot printing numbers.
Question 11. Are there best practices that should be used to
determine the number of ballots and ballot-marking technology, or
voting machine that should be provided to support voting?
Answer. Yes. The best practice is to guarantee you can meet the
highest foreseeable demand at any location during any election. There
are available wait time calculators to maximize the resource
allocations. The Presidential Commission on Election Administration
collected and published these resources.
Question 12. Are there best practices to address when a natural or
man-made event makes a polling location unavailable for voting?
Answer. The Election Assistance Commission (EAC) provides some
clearinghouse information in this area. More would be valuable. And I
believe it is an upcoming effort of the agency. These are problems we
have been dealing with since the beginning of the republic. And taking
``Super Storm Sandy'' as an example it is evident that election
officials have been exceedingly resourceful during this type of event.
Question 13. How does allowing voters to vote at locations other
than at a single voting location impact the ability of election
services to serve voters in a county or State?
Answer. Increasing voting locations opportunities increases the
inherent resiliency of a system by distributing the available access
points such that there is no single point of failure that would
absolutely disenfranchise any one individual. But there are certainly
some voter costs associated with travelling further than expected to
vote on election day. Its also important to note that there are
marginal tradeoffs with changing the voting model away from precincts.
Some advocates and election officials believe that strong local
oversight at the precinct level provides the best election day
assurance against nefarious behavior by the very rare but committed bad
acting campaign or voter. Further, some security activists believe they
have the best chance of validating data and monitoring voting behavior
when elections are managed in digestible chunks, like in the precinct
unit.
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Noah Praetz
Question 1. Our system is only as strong as its weakest link, and
we need to ensure everyone has this ``cyber hygiene'' knowledge. Have
you found that there's a general lack of knowledge of security
vulnerabilities and best practices at the staff level?
Answer. In the past 2 years the overwhelming majority of the
profession has grown to fully accept the premise that we rely on
technologies and people that are inherently vulnerable. This has been a
sea change in our industry. However, there remains a tremendous
disparity in the degree to which election officials and their staff
will, or can, make the changes necessary to increase their security
posture to the highest levels. While there remains plenty to learn, the
biggest issue will always remain the operationalization of best
practices.
Question 2. The risk and vulnerability assessments offered by DHS
can be extremely valuable for States and localities. Have you found
these assessments for States and local election officials to be useful
as you work to secure your election systems, and have you implemented
DHS's recommendations?
Answer. The Risk and Vulnerability assessment conducted by DHS at
Cook County was tremendously valuable. Though Cook took the security
issue seriously for a long time we were still very surprised by what
committed, skilled, security tradespeople were able to accomplish on
the networks. The findings set the table for years of modernization and
transformation. It is critical to note that even with their findings,
Cook County was forced to layer the optimal situation on top of the
election calendar, resource constraints, probability of a successful
attack, and the consequences/risks of operational disruption due to
change and regression testing oversites. There are many risks, and
election administration is a matter of risk management, cyber and
otherwise.
Question 3. Do you have the resources you need to implement the
recommendations, and if not, what more do you need to do so?
Answer. There were certainly resource deficiencies in Cook County.
Those deficiencies are worse almost everywhere else. The demand is not
just for modern defensible technology, though that is in short supply.
There is a dearth in human skill necessary to operationalize
recommendations. Cook County long argued that every election official
should have access to an Election Infrastructure Security Officer. For
giant counties like Cook, they could hire their own. But that would
cost nearly a billion dollars a year to replicate Nation-wide--an
impossible and unnecessary investment. A huge security leap could be
accomplished by providing the same single human resource across
multiple local election official agencies. In Illinois this was handled
by a team of ``cyber navigators'' who have essentially adopted a dozen
counties and are helping them mature their election security. The
navigators are helping them operationalize the recommendations, not
just form DHS, but also from CIS and Belfer. They are helping them
procure free services and manage vendors. The key is to do the basics
now and utilize the best available shared resources and free resources
from the private and public sector.
Question From Honorable Dina Titus for Noah Praetz
Question. When speaking with State and local election officials in
Nevada, I have heard that while urban areas like Las Vegas may have the
IT workforce available to recruit individuals to implement new
cybersecurity measures like Albert sensors, rural areas have been
struggling to find trained personnel. Have you experienced this
shortage in other parts of the country, and do you believe further
investment in STEM education is necessary to effectively mitigate this
skills gap and secure our most vulnerable election sites?
Answer. There is no question that there is a skilled professional
gap between the workforce needed and that available. This runs not
simply through elections Nation-wide, but through the all sectors of
country. There are millions of jobs in the field unfiled because the
workers are not yet available. The demand will continue to grow. And
the supply must grow to meet the demand. Given that the cyber risk is
top of list from a National security perspective, it would seem
appropriate to throw everything including the kitchen sink at it.
Questions From Honorable Michael T. McCaul for Noah Praetz
Question 1a. Mr. Praetz, I share your assessment that we must
expect the attackers' methods aimed at our election system will evolve.
You described the large role that local officials play in running and
securing elections and the critical public partnership.
How can the Federal Government best support these efforts without
the all-too-common Federal overreach?
Answer. Overly proscribing tactics and specific actions to be taken
can create overreach or the perception thereof; and can lock in actions
that won't likely remain necessary or valuable over time. However, the
Federal Government could provide investments in the area to the States
and local election officials while simultaneously demanding some set of
measurable progress to prove the investment is worthy of the taxpayers'
sacrifice. I laid out my navigator program support. The Federal
Government could invest in such a program without proscribing how the
States do it--the model can be different everywhere--and the laboratory
effects of those differences highly valuable overtime. However, there
are some areas where prescription is more important, particularly
around ballot audits. Some level of hand-auditing seems necessary to
prove up that the machines are reading them correctly. That's not to
exclude additional audits that may be superior to a small hand-counted
audit in a vacuum.
Question 1b. How will Federal mandates from Washington address the
problems you outlined and not just add more bureaucracy?
Answer. A program initiated by the Federal Government which aims to
support the protection of the critical infrastructures is necessary. As
you rightly note, finding the right balance is critical. Investing in
principles is important. My top three principles are (1), sustained,
skilled human partnerships with local election officials; (2),
investment in technology that is easier to defend and provides the
services voter expect; (3), investments in audits that can prove
conclusively that trusted and true results are attainable even in the
event of software failure. Providing some administrative autonomy to
the States and local election officials in satisfying the principles
can help those Government bodies own the principles and the management
of the project. Retaining some requirements and measurements ensures
that the States are accountable for the Federal tax investment.
Questions from Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for Jake Braun
Question 1. Are we taking a fail-safe approach to determining which
election systems or processes are critical to the successful conduct of
a public election?
Answer. No.
Question 2. Would you consider State-wide Centralized Voter
Registration Databases a critical system to the administration and
conduct of any public election?
Answer. Yes. It is also important to note that the local
jurisdictions' voter registration databases are nearly as important as
those at the State level.
Question 3. What fail-safe measures are in place to assure that if
the voter registration database is compromised and thereby make data
records untrustworthy; or rendered unavailable for early voting or on
election day the casting of ballots will continue?
Answer. To my knowledge, there are no fail-safe technology measures
to accomplish this. Many election officials regularly back up their
systems and/or use an auditing regime to increase the likelihood that
they will be able to detect an attack and restore data that were
deleted or changed. However these procedures are not foolproof and
their implementation at the local level is just as important as at the
State level, yet far from uniform. That being said, same-day voter
registration would likely be a sound defense against this attack.
Question 4. How many States have plans in place to hold or continue
an election should their voter registration databases become
compromised?
Answer. I do not know. However, local laws are, in general, unequal
to the threat State and locals are facing.
Question 5. How many States and jurisdictions within each State use
electronic poll books?
Answer. According to the Brennan Center for Justice, at least 34
States plus Washington, DC used electronic pollbooks as of 2017.\1\
While it is is possible that some of those States have chosen to
discontinue their use due to the 2018 DEF CON report, our preliminary
research suggests the opposite. With updated information from State
action taken over the last 2 years, there are now at least 41 States
that have implemented the use of electronic pollbooks, conducted a
pilot program for their use, or approved funds to purchase them for
future use. There is no up-to-date accounting for how many
jurisdictions within each of those States uses electronic pollbooks, as
of 2018. The Brennan Center reports that 5 of the 34 States using
electronic pollbooks in 2017 were using them State-wide.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``VRM in the States: Electronic Poll-books.'' Brennan Center
for Justice, February 6, 2017. Accessed March 14, 2019.
www.brennancenter.org/analysis/vrm-states-electronic-poll-books.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 6. Are there instances when electronic poll books have
failed to operate as intended?
Answer. Yes. In our research at DEF CON, untrained hackers (with no
specialized skills or previous access to the machines) found that such
devices are vulnerable to hacks via wireless networks, bluetooth, or
cellular connections. These vulnerabilities give hackers the ability to
compromise such connections and intercept communications between the
jurisdiction's main database and a cloud backup service, such as Amazon
Web Service (AWS). If attackers can gain access to this cloud backup,
they can view the database and potentially control functions along the
line of communication. As a result, a single compromised connection in
a single polling place could result in unrestricted access to the
entire jurisdiction's voter registration database--thereby compromising
names, birth dates, addresses, social security numbers, driver's
license numbers, addresses, and voting history linked with the
individual's signature. In 2017, just such a security lapse was
discovered in Illinois when a cybersecurity analyst discovered a
database containing sensitive information for more than 1.8 million
Illinois voters that was downloadable from a publicly-available AWS
storage site controlled by ES&S, one of the major election equipment
vendors in the United States.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ O'Sullivan, Dan. ``The Chicago Way: An Electronic Voting Firm
Exposes 1.8M Chicagoans,'' Upguard (blog), December 13, 2018, https://
www.upguard.com/breaches/cloud-leak-chicago-voters.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, software vulnerabilities have been discovered by DEF
CON researchers in a line of Diebold electronic poll books, ExpressPoll
5000, which was purchased and is currently operated by ES&S.
Investigators at DEF CON discovered that not only were administrator
and root passwords to the pollbook's system stored without encryption,
but they could directly access and modify election parameters using a
free, widely available program called SQL Lite.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ University of Chicago Harris Cyber Policy Initiative. DEF CON
25 Voting Machine Hacking Village: Report on Cyber Vulnerabilities in
U.S. Election Equipment, Databases, and Infrastructure. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Harris Cyber Policy Initiative, 2017. Accessed
February 26, 2019. https://www.defcon.org/images/defcon-26/
DEF%20CON%2026%20voting%20vil- lage%20report.pdf, The University of
Chicago Harris Cyber Policy Initiative. DEF CON 26 Voting Village:
Report on Cyber Vulnerabilities in U.S. Election Equipment, Databases,
and Infrastructure. Chicago: The University of Chicago Harris Cyber
Policy Initiative, 2018. Accessed February 26, 2019. https://
www.defcon.org/images/defcon-26/DEF%20CON%2026%20-
voting%20village%20report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The biggest concern with compromising these devices is not just
corrupting data but also the multi-hour long lines for Election Day and
early voting it could cause as confused poll workers try to sort out
who can vote and who can't. These lines would further add to a sense
that the system doesn't operate properly or is ``rigged'' against the
voter's preferred candidate.
Question 7. What recovery plan is in place should a polling
location's electronic poll books fail or for periods of time not
function?
Answer. To my knowledge, such recovery plans vary dramatically
across jurisdictions. In previous elections, we advocated strongly to
have paper-based back-up poll books kept on-site in case there was a
problem with the machines. However, we often met strong resistance in
adopting even this simple fix.
Question 8. How well does same-day voter registration during early
voting and on election day create meet fail-safe objectives for the
successful conduct of a public election?
Answer. Same-day voter registration may be the only nearly fail-
safe option available today for mitigating voter registration database
and e-poll book attacks.
Question 9. Are you providing any guidance on security and wireless
non-voting system technology?
Answer. I am sorry, I do not understand the question.
Question 10. Do election administrators plan for 100% voter
participation during early voting or on election day? If not, why not?
Answer. No. Election administrators use several methods to predict
voter turnout, including looking at past voter history; consulting
turnout tables, which calculate a probability that an individual will
turn out to vote, based on her age and previous voting history; and
building regression models.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Malchow, Hal. ``Predicting Turnout in a Presidential
Election.'' Campaigns & Elections 25 (2004): 38-40.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 11. Are there best practices that should be used to
determine the number of ballots and ballot marking technology, or
voting machine that should be provided to support voting?
Answer. Yes. There is a tool maintained by MIT (here) that can help
an election administrator determine the optimal assets needed for a
precinct to administer an election.
Question 12. Are there best practices to address when a natural or
man-made event makes a polling location unavailable for voting?
Answer. Not to my knowledge. However, in past elections we
encouraged election administrators to treat as an ``emergency'' any
polling place with a line over 30 minutes long.
Question 13. How does allowing voters to vote at locations other
than at a single voting location impact the ability of election
services to serve voters in a county or State?
Answer. Multiple locations provide voters various options to
increase ease of voting. It has worked well with early voting but would
provide challenges for Election Day voting, especially as it may
necessitate more internet connections to devices being used to find
people in the registration database.
Questions from Honorable James R. Langevin for Jake Braun
Question 1. What can be done to improve the relationship between
the cybersecurity research community and the election system vendors
and ensure that the work of voting security researchers is not ignored
by vendors?
Answer. First, vendors can eliminate restrictions on third-party
security testing from their contracts. It's ridiculous that in order to
buy election equipment, local election officials have to sign away
their rights to have independent audits of equipment that they own. It
also creates significant risk for security researchers who want to work
with election officials, all of which is unnecessary.
Second, vendors could donate or sell voting equipment for us to
inspect at DEF CON and other such events. Fortunately some of the
vendors now seem interested in participating in events like DEF CON.
Further, there are many local election officials who have expressed
interest in holding cyber assessments of their systems, including
machines and software from the vendors but have not pursued such
efforts from fear of lawsuits from the vendors. Vendors should allow
and even facilitate this type of activity instead of quash it. The
industry needs all the help it can get with security and as NSA's Rob
Joyce said, ``Head-in-the-sand security is not security at all.''
Possibly the best way to improve relations with the vendors and
research community is to fund the development and piloting of open-
source voting software. Open-source voting software would allow all
interested security researchers to audit and suggest security
improvements to our election systems 365 days a year, not just the 3
days of DEF CON. In fact, DHS recently posted an RFP for grants to
vendors and researchers, requesting bids for building a ``voting system
of the future,'' which could have included open-source voting
equipment. Unfortunately, for an undisclosed reason, that RFP was taken
down and no one was allowed to bid on it. DHS should repost that RFP
and solicit bids to build an open-source voting system.
Further, I applaud DARPA's recent announcement of significant grant
dollars being disseminated to researchers to build a secure, open-
source voting system. In a welcome departure from the stance of current
vendors, the firms who received the DARPA funds have already reached
out to DEF CON attendees to engage us early in the process.
Question 2. Our system is only as strong as its weakest link, and
we need to ensure everyone has this ``cyber hygiene'' knowledge. Have
you found that there's a general lack of knowledge of security
vulnerabilities and best practices at the staff level?
Answer. As of 2017, there was a 350,000-person shortage in cyber
professionals Nationally.\5\ That number is projected to grow to more
than 3.5 million world-wide by 2021.\6\ It is nearly an impossible task
to hire the cyber professionals necessary to put in place the basic
cyber hygiene necessary to protect a network much less train the lay
people on staff as to their basic hygiene. Moreover, misconceptions as
to election officials' relative security, caused in part by words
erroneously used by the vendors like ``air-gapped,'' further lead to
confusion or a false sense of security.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ ``Cybersecurity Jobs Report 2018-2021.'' Cybersecurity
Ventures, May 31, 2017. Accessed March 13, 2019. https://
cybersecurityventures.com/jobs/
\6\ ``Cybersecurity Jobs Report 2018-2021.'' Cybersecurity
Ventures, May 31, 2017. Accessed March 13, 2019. https://
cybersecurityventures.com/jobs/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 3. The risk and vulnerability assessments offered by DHS
can be extremely valuable for States and localities. Have you found
these assessments for States and local election officials to be useful
as you work to secure your election systems, and have you implemented
DHS's recommendations?
Answer. I think these assessments have been invaluable in assisting
election officials to understand the depth and breadth of their risk.
The assessments also help dispel misconceptions promulgated by industry
as to the level of security each jurisdiction has achieved. The most
important improvement to make in the assessments is to increase the
number of them for local election jurisdictions, as they are the ones
who administer elections.
Question 4. Do you have the resources you need to implement the
recommendations, and if not, what more do you need to do so?
Answer. I believe this question is for the election officials.
However, in general, I believe the EAC money was an order of magnitude
lower than what is needed to begin to effectively mitigate this
problem. All the voter registration databases in the country should be
moved to one or more secure, American-owned and -operated clouds like
AWS, Google, or Microsoft (among others). Second, touchscreen voting
machines should be banned (except for use by the disabled) in favor of
paper ballots counted by secure optiscan machines. The DHS assessment
teams should be quintupled so that all 50 States and the top 30 largest
local jurisdictions (which vote nearly 85% of the U.S. population) can
be assessed biannually, and the other nearly 8,000 jurisdictions can
get at least a remote assessment once every other year. Further, these
teams should help train local IT staff to plan and implement
remediation plans based on the DHS assessments, especially including
election night reporting website security and breach protocols.
Finally, funding should be allocated for DHS to disseminate grants for
research and development on building the voting machines of the future.
Question From Honorable Dina Titus for Jake Braun
Question. When speaking with State and local election officials in
Nevada, I have heard that while urban areas like Las Vegas may have the
IT workforce available to recruit individuals to implement new
cybersecurity measures like Albert sensors, rural areas have been
struggling to find trained personnel. Have you experienced this
shortage in other parts of the country, and do you believe further
investment in STEM education is necessary to effectively mitigate this
skills gap and secure our most vulnerable election sites?
Answer. As of 2017, there was a 350,000-person shortage in cyber
professionals Nationally.\7\ That is projected to grow to more than 3.5
million world-wide by 2021.\8\ It is a LITERALLY impossible task to
hire the cyber professionals necessary to put in place the basic cyber
hygiene necessary to protect an election system. They simply can't
compete with industry and the Federal Government for the workforce.
Moreover, misconceptions as to election officials' relative security,
caused in part by words erroneously used by the vendors like ``air-
gapped,'' further lead to confusion or a false sense of security. While
further investment in STEAM is undoubtedly critical to solving this
problem long-term, those investments could take a decade to bear fruit.
We should still make the investments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ ``Cybersecurity Jobs Report 2018-2021.'' Cybersecurity
Ventures, May 31, 2017. Accessed March 13, 2019. https://
cybersecurityventures.com/jobs/
\8\ ``Cybersecurity Jobs Report 2018-2021.'' Cybersecurity
Ventures, May 31, 2017. Accessed March 13, 2019. https://
cybersecurityventures.com/jobs/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, we must find creative ways to ``hack'' the work force
problem for election officials. HB1 has a creative solution with its
provision for a bug bounty program, akin to ``Hack the Pentagon,'' that
crowdsources security for local election officials. Further, specifying
that some of the R&D funding in HB1 be allocated for development of
open-source voting equipment, would enable thousands of security
experts to audit the code of voting equipment and suggest fixes. Open-
source equipment offers an inexpensive, persistent, and adaptable
opportunity to dramatically increase the cyber workforce without local
election officials being required to recruit, hire, and retain cyber
professionals. Finally, outsourcing voter registration database
security by providing State and local election administrators grants to
migrate their data to a secure, American-owned and -operated cloud like
AWS, Google, or Microsoft would remove database security burdens from
local election officials and assign it to organizations who can afford
to recruit and retain the best security professionals in the business.
Questions From Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee for John H. Merrill
Question 1. Are we taking a fail-safe approach to determining which
election systems or processes are critical to the successful conduct of
a public election?
Answer. No. The Alabama Secretary of State's Office believes that
the only effective method to determine which election systems are
critical to the process is with direct guidance and input from the
Secretaries of State.
Question 2. Would you consider State-wide Centralized Voter
Registration Databases a critical system to the administration and
conduct of any public election?
Answer. State-wide Centralized Voter Registration Databases are the
most critical component to the current democratic institutions that we
have created for the people of this country to voice their political
preferences. These provide detailed information that allows Secretaries
of State to effective plan an election for the people of their State,
county, or local municipality.
Question 3. What fail-safe measures are in place to assure that if
the voter registration database is compromised and thereby make data
records untrustworthy; or rendered unavailable for early voting or on
election day the casting of ballots will continue?
Answer. There is no true fail-safe to ensure that a compromise does
not occur; however, a systematic approach to augment any system or user
data damage can only be accomplished with daily system back-ups,
additional layers of security including two-factor authentication, and
verification that even in the event of total loss of access or systems
locally would not eliminate the existence of those records and that can
be restored to a system without any down time.
Question 4. How many States have plans in place to hold or continue
an election should their voter registration databases become
compromised?
Answer. Alabama does.
I am unable to answer this question, but I am hopeful that each and
every State has a plan in place should their voter registration
databases be compromised.
Question 5. How many States and jurisdictions within each State use
electronic poll books?
Answer. As Alabama's Secretary of State I can only speak for
Alabama and at this time there are 30 of 67 Alabama counties utilizing
the electronic poll book systems.
Question 6. Are there instances when electronic poll books have
failed to operate as intended?
Answer. With a few minor exceptions electronic poll books have
worked as intended. Those minor exceptions have involved age-related
camera issues where the camera used to scan barcodes was not strong
enough to pick up the driver's license barcode in low light and another
issue occurred when a county employee failed to complete all of the
steps to load a voter's list onto the system.
Question 7. What recovery plan is in place should a polling
location's electronic poll books fail or for periods of time not
function?
Answer. The Secretary of State's Office recommends that every
county retain a paper copy of that precinct's poll list at each polling
site, but ultimately that is left up to the discretion of the Judge of
Probate in each county.
Question 8. How well does same-day voter registration during early
voting and on election day create meet fail-safe objectives for the
successful conduct of a public election?
Answer. In Alabama it does not meet or create fail-safe objectives,
it simply creates a system without security mechanisms and attempts to
pass it off as a solution.
Question 9. Are you providing any guidance on security and wireless
non-voting system technology?
Answer. We provide guidance and require cybersecurity and ethics
training to all the State and county users that work in the Secretary
of State's Office or have access to the voter registration system.
Additionally, Alabama's system utilizes paper ballots which once
voted are retained for at least 22 months following an election, as
required by Federal law.
Question 10. Do election administrators plan for 100% voter
participation during early voting or on election day? If not, why not?
Answer. In Alabama, electronic voting machines must be placed at
each polling location based on the number of voters assigned to that
polling place (2,400 voters per machine). So, pertaining to machines,
there is no projection involved. It is a set number.
Regarding the printing of ballots and ballot styles, some counties
choose to print the exact number of ballots for voters assigned to that
polling location, and some counties prefer to project the turnout,
obviously leaning towards the highest projected turnout number to
ensure enough ballots. The reason some counties would not print one
ballot per voter is due to the cost of ballots.
It is also important to have an understanding with the local ballot
printing vendor that they will deliver, in-person on election day,
additional ballots to any polling place that is getting low. This has
happened in the past in Alabama, and the vendor has done their part to
ensure enough ballots. Some States may not have the ballot printing
vendor in their State and would be forced to print one ballot per
voter.
Question 11. Are there best practices that should be used to
determine the number of ballots and ballot marking technology, or
voting machine that should be provided to support voting?
Answer. In Alabama according to State law and administrative rule,
an electronic voting machine must be assigned for every 2,400 voters in
each polling place. Working with vendors to determine the number of
voters that should be associated with a machine for proper flow on
Election Day is a must, as well as the number of ballots and ballot
styles should be printed for that polling place.
Question 12. Are there best practices to address when a natural or
man-made event makes a polling location unavailable for voting?
Answer. The best practice is preparation. In Alabama, County
Commissions should identify emergency back-up polling locations in each
area in the case that one or more assigned polling locations is
damaged. In the case in which a polling place must change, the county
would need to hold an emergency meeting, designate the new polling
place(s) to be used and the electronic voting machines to be placed in
those polling places, and provide the list of new polling places to the
judge of probate and board of registrars. Immediately upon changing the
polling place, the county must notify all affected voters and publicize
the change via newspaper and any/all other effective means of
communication including social media.
Question 13. How does allowing voters to vote at locations other
than at a single voting location impact the ability of election
services to serve voters in a county or State?
Answer. Alabama State law requires voters to vote at the polling
place assigned to them. Also, in Alabama, electronic voting machines
must be placed at each polling location based on the number of voters
assigned to that polling place (2,400 voters per machine).
The preparation and planning for the number of voting machines,
ballots, ballot styles, poll books and electronic books, election
workers, election supplies, parking and disabled ballot marking devices
per polling place is one of the most important aspects of an election.
Understanding the number of voters assigned to a specific polling place
and planning resources around that number is vital in our election
preparation.
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for John H. Merrill
Question 1. Our system is only as strong as its weakest link, and
we need to ensure everyone has this ``cyber hygiene'' knowledge. Have
you found that there's a general lack of knowledge of security
vulnerabilities and best practices at the staff level?
Answer. No. We have an outstanding team here at the Alabama
Secretary of State's Office, however, it is difficult to hire staff
that we can compensate based on the current salary schedule that is
available from the private sector.
Question 2. The risk and vulnerability assessments offered by DHS
can be extremely valuable for States and localities. Have you found
these assessments for States and local election officials to be useful
as you work to secure your election systems, and have you implemented
DHS's recommendations?
Answer. We have utilized the assessments from DHS on more than one
occasion to review our system and to ensure that any vulnerabilities
that existed were resolved prior to an election.
Question 3. Do you have the resources you need to implement the
recommendations, and if not, what more do you need to do so?
Answer. In all of the instances reported to the Secretary of
State's office we have had the resources to implement the
recommendations that were made from the cyber assessments. However,
many of those would not have been possible without the grant funds
already allotted to the Secretary of State's office.
Additionally, recently DHS has begun to undertake a review of
county offices. Many of those recommendations will be for things that
are much more expensive, and many are hesitant to schedule their review
because they know they will be made aware of a large number of issues.
Question From Honorable Dina Titus for John H. Merrill
Question. When speaking with State and local election officials in
Nevada, I have heard that while urban areas like Las Vegas may have the
IT workforce available to recruit individuals to implement new
cybersecurity measures like Albert sensors, rural areas have been
struggling to find trained personnel. Have you experienced this
shortage in other parts of the country, and do you believe further
investment in STEM education is necessary to effectively mitigate this
skills gap and secure our most vulnerable election sites?
Answer. Investment in education in rural areas is something that
would benefit the people of those locations but that would help solve
the problem in the long term. Short-term solutions to this problem
require additional resources and smart hiring processes.
Questions From Honorable Yvette D. Clarke for John H. Merrill
Question 1a. Last year, the FBI uncovered that a Russian oligarch,
with close ties to President Putin, had acquired an ownership interest
in a vendor which hosted State-wide election data for Maryland.\1\
Until the FBI alerted them, State election authorities were unaware of
the vendor's ties to Russia. Even if no tampering occurred, this raises
important questions about foreign ownership of firms providing
election-related services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/bs-md-
election-russia-20180713-story.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To the best of your knowledge, does your State have any election-
related contracts with vendors backed by Russian or Chinese investors?
Answer. To the best of my knowledge the State of Alabama does not
have any vendors backed by Russian or Chinese investors.
Question 1b. What measures, if any, does your State undertake to
assess foreign ownership of election vendors prior to signing contracts
with them?
Answer. The Alabama Secretary of State's office reviews all the
financial documentation associated with each company before entering
into a contract with them. Additionally, we require all business that
do business with us to be registered with the State of Alabama before
we enter into an agreement for services. The contract for Alabama's
current voter registration system is about to be put up for bid again
and will include requirements for all companies to disclose any foreign
ownership or investment in their company before they are considered by
the office for use in Alabama.
Question From Honorable Michael T. McCaul for John H. Merrill
Question. Foreign states, including Russia and other malicious
actors have and will continue to attempt to interfere with U.S.
elections. In fact, I encouraged, in a Classified space, both the Obama
administration and the Trump administration to call out Russia for
their targeted attacks on our Nation. Their activities have injected
chaos and doubt into foundation of our democracy. An issue of this
gravity requires Congress to act in a deliberate and bipartisan manner.
Now, all eyes are on 2020. How has the cooperation with DHS and
Director Krebs strengthened California's election security?
Answer. The Alabama Secretary of State's Office has benefited from
the increased relationship with the Department of Homeland Security.
This relationship has allowed us to secure our systems by implementing
a multitude of security equipment and tools to strengthen the States'
election systems. Additionally, DHS has provided a team from the
Department of Homeland Security that has been present with our IT staff
on election day to provide direct contact in the event of a breach or
other system problem.
[all]