- THE IMPACT OF CATEGORY MANAGEMENT ON THE SMALL BUSINESS INDUSTRIAL BASE
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
THE IMPACT OF CATEGORY MANAGEMENT ON THE SMALL BUSINESS INDUSTRIAL BASE
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
JUNE 13, 2018
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Small Business Committee Document Number 115-076
Available via the GPO Website: www.govinfo.gov
_________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-318
WASHINGTON : 2019
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ROD BLUM, Iowa
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto Rico
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
JOHN CURTIS, Utah
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
STEPHANIE MURPHY, Florida
AL LAWSON, JR., Florida
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
VACANT
Kevin Fitzpatrick, Majority Staff Director
Jan Oliver, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Adam Minehardt, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................
1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................
2
WITNESSES
Ms. Shirley Bailey, CEO and Managing Member, MSC Management
Services, LLC, Oakland, MD, testifying on behalf of the HUBZone
Contractors National Council...................................
4
Mr. Alan Chvotkin, Executive Vice President & Counsel,
Professional Services Council, Arlington, VA...................
6
Ms. Beth Laurie Strum, Vice President of Business Development, IT
WORKS, Washington, DC, testifying on behalf of the U.S. Women's
Chamber of Commerce............................................
7
Ms. ML Mackey, CEO, Beacon Interactive Systems, Waltham, MA,
testifying on behalf of the National Defense Industrial
Association....................................................
9
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Ms. Shirley Bailey, CEO and Managing Member, MSC Management
Services, LLC, Oakland, MD, testifying on behalf of the
HUBZone Contractors National Council.......................
26
Mr. Alan Chvotkin, Executive Vice President & Counsel,
Professional Services Council, Arlington, VA...............
36
Ms. Beth Laurie Strum, Vice President of Business
Development, IT WORKS, Washington, DC, testifying on behalf
of the U.S. Women's Chamber of Commerce....................
44
Ms. ML Mackey, CEO, Beacon Interactive Systems, Waltham, MA,
testifying on behalf of the National Defense Industrial
Association................................................
49
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
None.
THE IMPACT OF CATEGORY MANAGEMENT ON THE SMALL BUSINESS INDUSTRIAL BASE
----------
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 13, 2018
House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:02 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Steve Chabot
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Luetkemeyer, Knight, Blum,
Comer, Fitzpatrick, Marshall, Velazquez, Evans, Lawson, Adams,
Espaillat, and Schneider.
Chairman CHABOT. Good morning. The hearing will come to
order. I want to thank our witnesses for being here.
We are here today to continue this Committee's longstanding
oversight of Federal procurement initiatives impacting small
businesses. This Committee has long advocated for policies that
ensure a strong industrial base. As we all know, small
businesses play a critical role in increasing competition,
innovation, and stimulating our economy.
However, the industrial base has shrunk by as much as 27
percent over the last decade, even as total dollar amounts
awarded to small businesses remain level. Past Federal spending
initiatives applying contract consolidation principles have
contributed to this decline. The current Federal spending
management framework, also known as category management,
proposed by the Office of Management and Budget, raises some of
these concerns of the past.
While category management can be useful in tracking the
Federal Government's purchasing habits in order to identify
efficiencies and keep contracting costs down, the proposed plan
may be problematic. There is great concern among the small
business community that recent efforts steering spending
towards best-in-class contracting vehicles will restrict
competition and significantly reduce opportunities for the
majority of small businesses. Current category management
efforts seem to benefit the few, to the detriment of many.
In the struggle to simplify and manage Federal spending,
the Federal Government should not lose sight of its
responsibility to maximize opportunities for small businesses,
nor should it disregard the impact that this may have on the
industrial base. Merely paying lip service to the small
business community is not enough; the Federal Government should
take proactive steps to ensure the majority of small businesses
can thrive in this new environment.
I would like to thank our witnesses for being here this
morning and for their expert testimony that we will hear
shortly. And I would now like to yield to the Ranking Member,
Ms. Velazquez, for her opening statement.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing.
Our committee has long acknowledged small businesses'
critical role in the $500-billion-a-year federal marketplace.
When small firms are awarded federal contracts, the result is a
win-win. The government and the taxpayer receive good value for
their money, as small companies have the dexterity to provide
high-quality supplies and services at competitive prices.
It, therefore, comes as no surprise to those in this room
that small businesses are at the heart of the government's
supply chain. Recent data demonstrate that the average contract
size is increasing, meaning more revenue for small companies if
they get those contracts. However, this trend also suggests
that more contracts are being consolidated, resulting in fewer
opportunities for small businesses. I am particularly
interested in hearing witnesses' perspective on this
phenomenon.
More broadly, numerous policies and protections have been
implemented to ensure small firms' continued participation in
government contracting. Many of these initiatives have evolved
over the years to reflect the changing needs of small firms.
One such evolution is the adoption of strategic sourcing and
category management.
Category management is a broad concept used to optimize
acquisition vehicles, processes, and knowledge available to
best address agencies' needs and generate savings. There are
concerns that, despite any benefits, this model could result in
greater consolidation and bundling of contracts and a reduction
in the usage of the federal schedule system.
While category management is billed as the strategy to get
agencies the lowest price, our committee has heard the contrary
at previous hearings. Vendors on the multiple award schedule
continually provided lower prices than those offered by
category management contract holders. Yet, agencies and
contracting officers cannot take advantage of lower prices,
because some category management vehicles have become mandatory
by their agency.
The current course of this administration is increasing the
number of agencies heading in this direction. There is added
concern that the best-in-class criteria poses a threat to
emerging businesses that do not have the past performance to
enter a vehicle and might be effectively locked out of the
marketplace.
All of this is not to say that category management is
without merit. We certainly do not want agencies using less
efficient, more expensive procurement processes. However, if
small firms with a history of offering quality services are
being locked out, we must consider if this initiative is
achieving the intended result.
During today's hearing, I look forward to learning about
challenges facing small contractors and potential solutions.
Doing so is not only essential for small firms and our nation's
industrial base, but the overall economy.
I want to thank the witnesses for being here today. I yield
the balance of my time. And, Mr. Chairman, I would like to say
hello to Anastasia MacEwen, a New York University student who
was my district intern currently in the audience. Welcome.
[Applause.]
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
And if Committee members have an opening statement
prepared, I ask that they be submitted for the record.
And I will take just a moment to explain our rules here,
timing particularly. We operate under the 5-minute rule. Each
of you will have an opportunity to talk for 5 minutes, and
there will be a light on there. For 4 of those minutes, it is
green; it will go to yellow when you have 1 minute to wrap up;
then the red light will come on. And we ask that you try to
stay within those constraints if at all possible, and we
operate the same way. There will be 5-minute questions, and we
will stay within those parameters also.
And I would now like to introduce our distinguished panel
here today. Ms. Shirley Bailey is testifying in her capacity as
board chair of the HUBZone Contractors National Council. Ms.
Bailey appeared before this Committee last year, discussing
legislative reforms of the HUBZone Program undertaken by this
Committee, and we welcome you back today.
Our second witness will be Alan Chvotkin. Am I pronouncing
that correctly? Thank you. He is also a familiar face at the
Committee, and is testifying today in his role as the Vice
President and Counsel of the Professional Services Council,
where he is responsible for legislative and regulatory policy.
Mr. Chvotkin brings extensive experience on a multitude of
small business contracting issues, and we appreciate your
expertise and thank you for your testimony to begin shortly.
Our third witness is Ms. Beth Laurie Strum. Ms. Strum has
over 20 years of experience advising and supporting contractors
and government agencies on policy development and project
management. She currently serves as the Vice President of the
Business Development for Volanno.
Ms. STRUM. Volanno.
Chairman CHABOT. Volanno. Sorry about that. Volanno,
formerly known as IT WORKS, a women-owned small business
located in Washington, D.C. Volanno has successfully delivered
innovative solutions to the transportation industry over the
past 15 years, and we welcome you here, also.
And I would now yield to the Ranking Member for the purpose
of introducing our fourth and final witness.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is my pleasure to introduce Ms. ML Mackey, CEO of Beacon
Interactive Systems, a company she cofounded in 1994. Prior to
starting her company, she worked as an engineer at Digital
Equipment Corporation, where she was on both hardware and
software teams. Ms. Mackey is the past chair of the NDIA
National Small Business Conference. She is a powerful advocate
for women in business and a winner of the Women Entrepreneurs
in Science and Technology Leadership award. Ms. Mackey holds a
BS in electrical engineering from Lehigh University. Welcome,
and thank you for being here today.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you, Ms. Mackey.
And, Ms. Bailey, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF SHIRLEY BAILEY, CEO AND MANAGING MEMBER, MSC
MANAGEMENT SERVICES, LLC, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE HUBZONE
CONTRACTORS NATIONAL COUNCIL; ALAN CHVOTKIN, EXECUTIVE VICE
PRESIDENT & COUNSEL, PROFESSIONAL SERVICES Council; BETH LAURIE
STRUM, VICE PRESIDENT OF BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT, IT WORKS,
TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE U.S. WOMEN'S CHAMBER OF COMMERCE;
AND ML MACKEY, CEO, BEACON INTERACTIVE SYSTEMS, TESTIFYING ON
BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL DEFENSE INDUSTRIAL ASSOCIATION
STATEMENT OF SHIRLEY BAILEY
Ms. BAILEY. Thank you. Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and members of the Committee, my name is Shirley
Bailey and I appreciate the opportunity to be here today to
provide testimony on behalf of the HUBZone Contractors National
Council. I am also CEO and managing member of MSC Management
Services, LLC, a women-owned HUBZone small business located in
Garrett County, Maryland.
Today's topic, ``The Effect of Category Management on Small
Businesses,'' is a policy that greatly concerns the Council.
The cause for concern is pretty simple: small business access
to contracts. But understanding category management has been
difficult because there are so many moving parts and confusing
terms.
Category management is another iteration of the
government's desire to consolidate purchases to achieve cost
savings. Since 1997, Congress and small business advocates have
raised concerns about the effect procurement initiatives have
on small businesses. In 2005, the OMB directed agencies to use
strategic sourcing and establish the Federal Strategic Sourcing
Initiative Program to manage governmentwide efforts. Strategic
sourcing has now morphed into category management. So here we
are today, raising the same objections that these practices
shut out small businesses.
Category management breaks Federal buying into 10
categories, assigning different agencies the lead. The
government has put contracting vehicles in four categories:
Tier Zero, which are direct contracts with companies or termed
local by the OMB; Tier One, agency-wide contracts; Tier Two,
governmentwide contracts; Tier Three, best-in-class contracts.
The President's management agenda set two goals for Federal
agencies in fiscal year 2018. The first, a 20-percent
requirement for agencies to move contracts in Tier Zero to
agency-wide or governmentwide contracts. The second goal is to
move 35 percent of existing contracts in Tier Two and Three to
best in class.
Currently, there are 36 BIC contract vehicles identified on
the GSA acquisition gateway. These vehicles totaled
approximately $27 billion in spend in fiscal year 2017. Not to
be forgotten is the President's management agenda's goal of
meeting small business goals. According to the PMA, achievement
of category management goals is not an excuse for missing an
agency's small business goal. Every agency is expected to work
with solution providers and small business offices at the
agency to meet or exceed the baseline.
We are gratified that the small business goals apply to the
agencies and category management. That being said, the HUBZone
Council believes that relying on agency-wide or governmentwide
contracts erects barriers to small businesses. We want to raise
the following concerns: One, as the government moves away from
direct contract with businesses, the Tier Zero opportunities
decrease for smaller businesses. The vehicles used in category
management require substantial resources to bid and to win task
orders. These contract vehicles do not lend themselves to small
businesses trying to enter the market. So our concern is pretty
obvious: A strong industrial base requires a continuous
pipeline of emerging companies with innovative solutions.
Two, most big dollars go to a small share of companies,
meaning the same ones continue on managed contracts. In fiscal
year 2017, just 4.3 percent of BIC contract holders received 80
percent of all BIC dollars. Also, in fiscal year 2017, 63.5
percent of the fiscal year 2013 incumbents received 91 percent
of BIC spending. This is counter to other government
procurement objectives that seek to diversify the small
business base that performs in the Federal marketplace.
Three, we are concerned that category management
consolidates contracts into larger and longer term contracts
and task orders with limited, if any, on-ramping provisions. If
the government is going to issue larger and longer-term
contracts and task orders, small business size standards and
certification processes must reflect this new reality, and the
contracts should provide on-ramping to ensure adequate
competition and representation of all socioeconomic
classifications within contract vehicles.
Four, the criteria for a contract vehicle to be designated
as best in class is unclear, and we are unsure whether or not
there will be consistent criteria across contract vehicles. The
term itself, best in class, also raises concern.
Five, the Council believes the government policy of
counting a company with more than one certification multiple
times skews the reporting data. For example, 75 percent of all
HUBZone dollars credited towards goals are solicited under
other set-asides. We suggest Congress take a look at this
policy so that the true number of contracts awarded to
socioeconomic set-aside programs is accurate.
In conclusion, no one would disagree with the goals of
efficient government buying and saving the taxpayer money.
However, we believe that category management comes at a cost.
Fewer small business awards not only limits the supply of
vendors to the government, the ripple effect limits the ability
of small businesses to grow through Federal contracting. In our
view, category management will make reaching governmentwide
small business goals even more difficult. The utilization of
HUBZone companies already poses a problem for the government.
It has never reached the 3 percent goal. Further limiting
contract competition to utilize only multiple award contracts
through category management will have a devastating effect on
small business participation in Federal contracting.
The Council urges this Committee to exercise its authority
to ensure the government's procurement policies and
implementation of such policies, specifically category
management, utilizes small business to the maximum extent
practicable rather than limiting it. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chvotkin, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF ALAN CHVOTKIN
Mr. CHVOTKIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
the invitation to the Professional Services Council to testify
today.
Category management has evolved through four major phases.
It began as a Federal initiative intended to develop and
provide the Federal acquisition community with more efficient
acquisition strategies, based on major categories of Federal
procurement. It has transitioned into a combination of both
management information analysis and Federal purchasing
strategies.
Last November, Mr. Chairman, you and the Ranking Member
wrote to the Office of Management and Budget, challenging the
implementation of category management and raising concerns
about the ability of small business to fully and fairly compete
for Federal contracts. Those concerns remain valid.
The first phase, as I see it, of category management was
the establishment of the program. It was intended to provide
acquisition executives with better visibility into agencies'
spend, and, thereby, enable the Federal Government to approach
the purchase of goods and services as if the Federal Government
were a single enterprise. PSC has supported and continues to
support these goals, even though the metrics for success are
hard to articulate, and even harder to validate.
The second phase was the determination by OMB that certain
contract vehicles satisfy key criteria defined by OMB to earn
the designation of best in class. As of April 23rd, 32
contracts have been designated as best-in-class awards. But it
is also important to recognize that many of these best-in-class
contracts have very specific scopes of work or have limited
application in the Federal procurement world.
The third phase was the imposition of agency quotas for
spending through category management principles, referred to as
spend under management. Agency contract spend through any of
the three tiers of OMB-designated contracts counts as spend
under management. Where agency contract dollars are obligated
through contracts that do not fit into any of these categories,
awards are designated as unmanaged, and the agencies are urged
to do more to bring those opportunities under that spend under
management concept.
OMB, as you know, has established governmentwide targets of
awarding 35 percent of available spend through best-in-class
contracts, and decreasing the available spend categorized as
unmanaged by 20 percent. But nothing, just to remind the
Committee, nothing in the category management evolution alters
the agencies' responsibility to achieve their individually
negotiated small business contracting and subcontracting goals,
pursuant to the Small Business Act.
The fourth phase, and for us, the most troubling, is the
requirement for the mandatory use of specifically designated
best-in-class contracts. These vehicles are the exclusive
method by which agencies must purchase goods and services. As
of February, only six contracts across four of the 10
categories in the category management ecosystem have been
designated for mandatory use. Mandatory use of certain
contracts is certainly not new, but it remains controversial.
With CM's focus on lower prices, PSC is concerned that the
government may begin to purchase complex services in the same
manner as common office supplies, which will limit the value
and reduce the innovation available to the agencies. In
addition, as this Committee has previously addressed, these
techniques may have the effect of limiting the number of firms,
small or other than small, able to compete for the specific
goods or services provided for under these mandatory use and
spend under management contracts.
Five years ago today, PSC testified before this Committee
on the use of strategic sourcing. We stated that the
government's goal should be to foster an environment of robust
competition, higher performance, agility, innovation, balanced
opportunity for companies of all sizes, and accountability.
We cautioned then, and we do so again today, that more
needs to be done to prevent the unintended consequences on the
small and other than smaller companies that are, or are capable
of meeting the government's needs. Particularly, as category
management has transitioned into a procurement policy, there
have been negative consequences for the supplier base and for
the marketplace.
Additionally, many of these competitions and awards for
what are now designated as best-in-class contracts occurred
before the best-in-class designation was even made, and
certainly, in many cases, before any mandatory use designation
was established.
This raises two additional important questions: Are the
contracts structured in a way to provide on-ramps for companies
who are not currently a holder of that vehicle? And secondly,
when a best-in-class contract is recompeted, will noncontract
holders be able to successfully compete for any of the future
opportunities?
On behalf of the Professional Services Council and our
members, I thank you for your attention in holding this hearing
on this important issue. I would be happy to try to answer any
questions you may have.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. Strum, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF BETH LAURIE STRUM
Ms. STRUM. Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez,
members of the House Small Business Committee, thank you for
the opportunity to speak here today.
To begin, I must convey to you a fervent message of concern
from the U.S. Women's Chamber of Commerce. We have never
encountered a threat to small business' full and fair access to
Federal contracts like what is confronting us now. The
anticompetitive contracting practice, known as category
management through best-in-class acquisition vehicles, has been
quickly, summarily, and without consideration and regulatory
authority, inserted in front of the Federal acquisition
practice, seemingly as a predicate to the existing FAR and
requirements of the Small Business Act.
In its current form, the best-in-class acquisition process
picks winners and losers without assuring full and fair
competition, thereby locking out thousands of small businesses
from the very contract opportunities that were guaranteed us
through the Small Business Act. The abrupt transformation of
the Federal acquisition process to best-in-class vehicles will
have a crippling effect on small business' competitive
opportunities. For example, roughly 25,000 small businesses
provide IT services to the Federal Government, but only
approximately 200 have the IT vehicles currently deemed best in
class.
Locking out 99 percent of small businesses from prime
contractor competitive opportunities will have a devastating
effect on the small business industrial base. How can the
Federal Government possibly claim to be providing the maximum
practicable opportunity for small business concerns? This new
process has been rushed so quickly into the acquisition system,
without clarity, regulations, or training, that contracting
officers have not received the information or training they
need. Many contracting officers think they must exclusively use
vehicles designated as best in class.
Some agency-level contract vehicles have not been named
best in class while others have received this designation.
Winners and losers are being selected without competition,
adherence to the FAR and Small Business Act, or consideration
of the nuanced needs of individual agencies, offices, and
regions.
If a small business is not already on one of the anointed
best-in-class vehicles, they are left out, literally, of the
competitive pool. Consequently, while large dollar amounts may
end up flowing to a very few small businesses who are on these
selected best-in-class vehicles, hundreds of good, viable small
companies will be totally shut out for competing.
For example, OASIS, one of the GSA best-in-class vehicles,
has pools with only 40 businesses per pool. Alliant 2, which
was just awarded, has only 80 small businesses. Some best-in-
class vehicles are 10-year contracts. So these companies are
left out from competing for 10 years. If you are not on a
vehicle today, you must wait 5 years for the small business on-
ramp to secure the right to compete. And some of these best-in-
class vehicles don't have an on-ramp.
There are existing acquisition vehicles and methods that
could have been used to achieve government acquisition savings
while assuring maximum practicable competitive opportunities
for small businesses. However, the rush into category
management without assuring that Small Business Act
requirements are met, without assuring strong and open
competitive field of firms remain engaged with real incentives
to lower prices, and without assuring that the needs and
nuances of agencies are met through the acquisition process.
Examples of good competitive methods include the GSA
multiple schedules, but the use of these schedules has
decreased by agencies over the last few years. An IDIQ created
for an entire department with more frequent on-ramps could also
satisfy category management requirements.
Small businesses need your help now to assure we secure
maximum opportunities as Federal suppliers. We ask you to
compel increased training from the top of acquisition
leadership down to the front-line contracting officers, to
assure they understand that category management and best-in-
class vehicles do not supersede our existing laws and
regulations. We need an easily accessible database of available
vehicles so that small businesses and contracting officers know
the full array of vehicles available to them rather than just
best in class.
Thank you for your support of the American small business
industrial base.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. Mackey, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF ML MACKEY
Ms. MACKEY. Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and
other members of the Committee, thank you for giving me the
opportunity today to testify before you. And I also want to
thank you for your consistent efforts in supporting America's
small business community.
My name is ML Mackey. I am the CEO and cofounder of Beacon
Interactive Systems, a small business with offices in Waltham,
Massachusetts, and Norfolk, Virginia. Beacon delivers
innovative, efficiency improving, and cost savings technology
for the Department of Defense. Today, I am representing the
national small business--the national small business--the Small
Business Division of the National Defense Industrial
Association. Have you ever been so vain you don't wear your
reading glasses, but you really should? Is there any way to cut
that----
The Small Business Division of the National Defense
Industrial Association, with a membership of nearly 1,600
corporate and over 80,000 individual members.
While category management greatly impacts the full spectrum
of the U.S. industrial supply chain, my testimony this
afternoon will focus on the constraints that it places on small
businesses trying to deliver innovative solutions to support
the U.S. warfighter at home and abroad.
The intent of making government procurement efficient,
streamlined, and cost-effective is a goal with which I and my
small business colleagues are aligned. Getting best-in-breed
products and services as rapidly as possible to the men and
women who protect us is of paramount importance.
Unfortunately, the contract approach prescribed by category
management will have an opposite and deleterious effect on this
goal. It drastically reduces competition within the existing
supply chain and creates a tremendous barrier for new
contractors to participate and deliver the valuable innovations
necessary.
As battle space needs evolve even more rapidly, so, too,
must acquisition processes evolve on both cost and capability
vectors. Category management, by only addressing cost through
contracting requirements, ignores the overwhelming need and
value of innovation. Without thoughtful implementation, the
acquisition of innovation is unplanned, disruptive, fluid, and,
in the past, has been costly. A cost-only approach to
contracting does not incentivize industry to explore innovation
or longer term solutions, because contract requirements
sacrifice taking new approaches in order to cut costs.
As the owner of a small business that provides cutting-edge
Internet of Things (IoT) technology to solve many of the DOD's
mission critical operational needs, the myopic approach of
limiting access to contract vehicles simply is an attempt to
limit cost while making it even more difficult for the
innovation economy to participate.
Category management, through the practice of strategic
sourcing, would consolidate the number of contracts the Federal
Government awards to small businesses. As an approach to cost
savings, it is well-intentioned, but it, unfortunately, drives
high-technology small businesses out of the Federal
marketplace, resulting in reduced competition within the
procurement process and the loss of small businesses who choose
creating innovation over building a business based on cutting
corners and costs.
An additional impact of category management is that small
businesses must align themselves with current contractors on a
cost basis, as opposed to value or capability, to even be able
to engage with the government. Small businesses must be
recognized as more than just a reliable supply chain for larger
companies to utilize in their own cost savings approaches. The
small business community represents the valuable marketplace of
ideas and innovation.
Category management, like Lowest Price Technically
Acceptable (LPTA) methods, when applied to broad acquisition,
does not consider that innovation is an aberration to standard
government contracting requirements, yet provides incredible
value.
One of the stated laudable intents of category management
is to accomplish a streamlined best-of-breed acquisition
practice. The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and the
Small Business Technology Transfer Programs are examples of
where the small business community delivers directly on this
intent. Technology acquired from the SBIR program is an example
of accessing best-of-breed solutions in a streamlined manner.
During the development phases of the SBIR investment--SBIR
investment, I shouldn't speak slang--SBIR investment, Phases I
and II, the needs of the warfighter are explicitly addressed
with new and innovative approaches. Furthermore, acquisition of
the resulting SBIR Phase III goods and services is streamlined,
as the competitive threshold has already been met in the highly
competitive Phase I and Phase II processes. Instead of helping,
category management will impinge on the ability of the U.S.
Government to acquire these results by limiting access to
contract vehicles.
Across the board, my small business colleagues are
overwhelmingly opposed to the category management approach.
Anything that winnows down the ability to compete on a fair and
level playing field across the industrial base makes it
especially difficult for small businesses.
We have a couple recommendations that we think might
actually address some of the intent of the category management
approach. We have three, in fact. One is, support the
contracting community with increased funding in order to
provide the resources necessary to enable innovation and
widespread small business participation within the contracting
process.
Two, reevaluate LPTA with an eye towards focusing on how to
best procure what will meet the evolving needs of the
warfighter. Focus on what is the best value, not what is the
least expensive acquisition.
Third, develop and deliver best-of-breed innovative goods
and services in a streamlined acquisition process by
implementing a pilot program at the DOD for SBIR Phase III
transitions, as described in Section 1710 of the 2018 NDAA.
Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and members of
the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before
you this morning, and thank you for your continued efforts in
supporting the small business community. I look forward to
answering any questions you may have.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
And I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes. And, Ms.
Bailey, I will start with you. Could you describe the impact
that these category management 20 percent and 35 percent goals
might have on emerging small businesses?
Ms. BAILEY. Yes, thank you. I think that with the idea that
you are going to be transitioning to these more sophisticated
contracts, where they have more increased requirements and
performance, past performance requirements, emerging small
businesses won't tend to have that type of experience, and you
are going to leave out those innovative solutions into those
contract vehicles and their opportunity to compete.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chvotkin, I will go to you next. It seems that the
spend under management and mandatory best-in-class approach may
require more nuance than is currently being applied. For
example, as you mentioned, it makes little sense to procure
complex weapon systems the same way one would buy office
supplies. What can Congress and this Committee specifically do
to help bring about a more tailored approach to best-in-class
use?
Mr. CHVOTKIN. Mr. Chairman, thank you. There is a number of
techniques and approaches you can have. Some of them are
through the oversight such as you are doing.
You have also initiated a number of pilot programs. We
talked earlier about some of the burdens in past performance,
and this Committee was a lead in enacting a provision for a
pilot program on small business past performance reporting and
capabilities through the SBA. They just issued some preliminary
information on that.
So I think addressing these symptoms is not enough. I think
the core here is whether the mandatory use makes sense as a
Federal Government, even across the limited number of
companies, and will the contracts provide continuing
opportunities for new and emerging firms to join in. I think
those on-ramps are very, very important, and many of the
emerging contracts do not have that capability today.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. Strum, I will go to you next. You mentioned that there
are alternative contracting vehicles and methods that can be
used to achieve cost savings while protecting opportunities for
small businesses. Can you provide some examples and describe
how they are more advantageous than the current policy?
Ms. STRUM. So, for example, GSA has schedules. So you have
got IT 70, which is an IT schedule. When you are on the
schedule, you are supposed to have provided your best price to
GSA. Also, GSA has 874, which is a professional services
schedule. What is the conflict between OASIS, which is a
professional services best-in-class vehicle, and 874, which is
a professional services schedule? Why buy through OASIS versus
buy through the GSA schedule?
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. STRUM. Sure.
Chairman CHABOT. Ms. Mackey, given your experience with
past Federal initiatives such as strategic sourcing, how does
this current category management strategy compare with past
initiatives?
Ms. MACKEY. Unfortunately, it is very familiar. So I have
been running and working in the legislative affairs policy area
for NDIA Small Business Division for the last 9 or 10 years,
and it has come through once or twice. And I can't convey to
you enough the people that worked through the FSSI challenges
before who either sent me emails or came and talked to me with
the slumped shoulders of here we go again kind of thing. It has
really got a dramatic effect on small business.
And one of the things that we need to keep in mind when we
think about small business is, you know, that joke about deep
pockets are short pockets. It is important to think that small
businesses have short pockets. It is really hard for us to
weather protracted delays. It is really hard to build up again
and be able to move it forward. And just with a little bit of
compassion for the owners of small businesses, often we manage
those dips and valleys on our own personal expense. And if we
are Federal contractors, they are not things that are allowable
expenses then when we get back on track.
So there is just this large attenuation at the end of the
whip that is really, really hard for the small business part of
the industrial base to recover from.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
I will yield back my time.
And the Ranking Member, the gentlelady from New York, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Mackey, the contribution of small businesses to R&D and
innovation as a whole has long been recognized as critical to
our economy and national security. Yet, it has been noted that
contracting in the sphere of the DOD is on the decline, along
with a general underutilization of the SBIR/STTR programs. Can
you explain what this trend means for the industrial base, and
what implementing category management means for innovative
companies like your own?
Ms. MACKEY. So the strain on the industrial base, the
defense industrial base, the Federal marketplace, is that my
colleagues in Boston, my friends in San Francisco that work in
well-known innovation areas, they don't participate, because it
is too hard, it is too difficult.
It is not too difficult sometimes to get started, you know,
with some of the on-ramps for small business and R&D, some of
the initial, maybe, SBIR Phase I awards that you get. It is
really hard to move beyond that to market launch, either within
the Federal space, or many of them will take investment from
SBIR and move back into the private sector.
So I personally would like to see SBIR and small business
R&D used for what it was intended for, to funnel innovation to
our Federal customers as well as leverage into the economy. So
that is the impact on the industrial base of category
management is difficult in that it keeps people from wanting to
play. That is the first question I think you asked me.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Yes. And how can we reverse this trend? What
can we do here? What type of recommendations could you offer?
Ms. MACKEY. So, from our personal experience, we have been
able to take SBIR investments and translate them through to
Navy defense business systems. So it is a market launch in the
Department of Defense. We are working with private sector and
taking it there.
I can tell you from our experience, the most difficult
thing, the thing that you could do to mitigate for others is
make contracting easier. It is the exact opposite of category
management. So I can share from our personal experience, if you
are interested, I could give you just a quick couple of
examples.
We go and talk to contracting officers when program
officers want our technology, when fleet wants our technology.
We work a lot with the U.S. Navy. When directives come out that
say, If only we had this capability, and the SBIR pipeline
says, Great, we have developed this for you, and they can't get
us under contract. And when I go and say, It should be easy, it
is follow-on work for SBIR, they have no idea how to act on
that.
So I think one of the things--I have two concrete
suggestions, if I could. One is, let's make Centers of
Excellence around SBIR follow-on contracting, so that we don't
put the contracting officers at risk to do something new and
different when they are the people that are supposed to be
careful of not new and different so that bad things don't
happen.
The second is, I think it might be really interesting to
understand that SBIR technology, goods and services can be
offered as government-furnished equipment, GFE, on the larger
proposals, so they don't necessarily--you can put the
acquisition program out, but you say this piece will be GFE,
and understand that is an SBIR follow-on.
I am hoping those two suggestions might be helpful.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. Thank you.
Ms. Strum, despite the numerous safeguards in place, we
continue to see bundling and consolidation of contracts. In
your opinion, is the consolidation or bundling of contracts
under category management being used to ease administrative
burdens in the procurement process?
Ms. STRUM. I think that that is okay, though. I think
having these large IDIQ, or indefinite delivery/indefinite
quantity contracts and then having task orders under them is
okay. I think having them agency-wide or department-wide is
okay, and I think you can achieve the efficiencies and the cost
savings through them that the government is looking for. And as
a taxpayer, I am all about, you know, cost savings, right?
But I think when you have them as these best-in-class with
10-year contracts with no on-ramps, and you are really keeping
the small businesses out of it, I think that is when you start
having the issues.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Ms. Bailey, enforcement actions are rare,
and there is a need for defining realistic enforcement
triggers. I would like to hear if you have any recommendation
to be a sufficient trigger. What would you recommend?
Ms. BAILEY. As a sufficient trigger for the enforcement of
this, I think that, you know, you are putting a lot of those
processes in place right now with the reporting of subcontract
type of activities. I think we need more enforcement on the
large businesses to encourage the small business participation.
But also, I think that from the agency perspectives on
these contracts, we really need to start looking below the
layers of just the small business goaling, and to look to make
sure that we are hitting all of the socioeconomic, you know,
goals, you know.
And also, from the aspect of us using these multiple
certifications to obtain these goals, I think we are skewing
that even further, because you are seeing that, you know, fewer
companies are able to participate. So you may see that all of
the goals are met, but if they are met by one company achieving
all three certifications or four certifications, it is doing a
disservice as well. So I think we need to start layering back
and looking at that detail as well.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Any short brief comment on that same
question?
Mr. CHVOTKIN. On the enforcement question?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Yes.
Mr. CHVOTKIN. Yes, ma'am. I think it is important that we
look at holding the agencies accountable. The challenge here is
that the agencies are losing the flexibility on their own when
the best-in-class contracts and objectives, top-down objectives
are set.
So I think the key is, as you suggest, and I don't have a
ready answer for what the enforcement actions are to be, but I
believe that the agencies do not have enough responsibility for
meeting the small business objectives that they have.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. CHVOTKIN. I would work on that with you.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Luetkemeyer, who is Vice Chairman of this Committee, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all
of you for being here today.
I am kind of curious. Is there an ability by small
businesses to partner with a larger entity to be sort of a
subcontractor on the main contract? Ms. Strum?
Ms. STRUM. If I may. There is always an ability to do that.
What that does is it decreases our revenue. It decreases the
ability to go after prime contracts and be a prime contractor.
And on the best-in-class contracts, the only way to get on them
is to have prime contract past performance.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Okay. Is there an ability of a number of
small businesses to sort of work together, to partner together
to be able to get a bigger contract?
Mr. CHVOTKIN. There is. Congress has given the authority to
the agencies for companies that are, quote/unquote, ``similarly
situated.'' If four women-owned small businesses were to come
together, the statutory authority gives them the ability to bid
as one, bringing the capabilities together.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Do they do that?
Mr. CHVOTKIN. I am sorry?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Do they do it? Do they take advantage of
that provision?
Mr. CHVOTKIN. Well, the Small Business Administration has
issued the regulations for that. The Federal Acquisition
Regulation, which is what the contracting community reads, has
not yet been issued. So we are waiting 3 years, 3-1/2 years, I
think, since the law has been passed to see the Federal
Acquisition Regulation issued. So some agencies are testing
that on their own, most are not.
And there is also, this Committee was very actively
involved in creating the Mentor-Protege Program, the all agency
Mentor-Protege Program. That is another way that large
businesses and small businesses can come together and
essentially share in that prime contract responsibility.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Each of you is not too happy with the
process. I understand and I agree with you. Is there a way for
contract management to coexist with small business access to
government contracts? Is there a way to get that done? Ms.
Bailey?
Ms. BAILEY. Yes. I think that if we look at increasing the
number of set-aside vehicles within these vehicles, so that you
have the small business set-aside programs being represented
adequately through separate vehicles within each one of these
best-in-class contract vehicles; and also, to reduce the
restrictions for initial entry into these, so that you can get
the emerging contractors in there and have more on-ramping and
more frequent on-ramping, to enable the newer companies to get
in there in a timely manner.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Have you seen, with implementation of
this, that there has been a disruption of the supply pipeline
for different businesses to the government, because of the
inability of a contractor to do what you are trying to do, or
it is all going to one or the small guys can't get there? Have
you seen a disruption of the----
Ms. STRUM. So there is definitely a disruption. So you will
see a lot of the work that you are trying to go after, you will
be talking to different agencies and they will say, Yeah, we
are going to put this RFP on the street. And then it goes on,
you know, one of the best-in-class vehicles that you are not
on.
So the disruption happens where you are not on a vehicle,
and you are looking then for a partner that is on that vehicle
so then you can sub to them, and sometimes that doesn't work
out. And so you lose out on business that you know about, that
you are talking to the client about, that you are trying to
capture, and then it goes on these vehicles that you are not
able to bid on.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Have you seen where the government is
trying to get these contracts issued and request for different
supplies and product? Have you seen them not be able to get as
much stuff as they want or to have a competitive bid? Yes, Ms.
Mackey.
Ms. MACKEY. So we deliver the operational energy management
system for shipboard Navy use. And they are ready for it. We
deliver the safety system for the Navy. And the contracting
delays and the process that we have to get through holds our--I
can give you our example--holds our technology up from getting
to them. And the fleet has expressed frustration about not
being able to get to it quickly.
I can also share some of my colleagues' experience at NDIA,
where they are not able to deliver on their products. We can
get you more information if you would like on that, if that
would be helpful.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Fantastic.
Mr. CHVOTKIN. If I could just add one item.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Yes, sir.
Mr. CHVOTKIN. The biggest challenge we have right now is in
the transition, the designation of best-in-class contracts has
come after the awards and the determination for mandatory use
has been after the contracts have already been awarded. So we
are in that interesting transition period of the evolution of
category management.
I think if the OMB, and they are well aware of the need, if
they could designate those contracts in advance of the
solicitation, then agencies--then companies would know where to
bid or that this contract is a best in class. Today, those
companies had no knowledge that the contract was going to be
designated or the agencies would be using it in that manner.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you very much. My time is expired.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Evans, who is the
Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax and
Capital Access, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want this question probably to go to every person. I will
start out with Ms. Strum. And this is what I have heard. If you
wanted to secure the industrial base, what changes should be
made when using category management? I have kind of heard that.
Can you speak to that?
Ms. STRUM. Do you mean what do I recommend as changes?
Mr. EVANS. Yes, yes.
Ms. STRUM. I think, for example, I have been working with
NOAA, for example, on an IDIQ that they have been trying to put
out for small business to replace an IDIQ that they currently
have out. And rumor has it that GSA is pushing them to use
OASIS for it. They feel compelled to use OASIS. It seems to
them to be mandatory, and they may not end up putting out their
own IDIQ.
The changes that I believe need to be put in place is
education to the contracting officers so that they understand
that these best-in-class vehicles are not mandatory, that they
can put out their own vehicles. Now, for category management
purposes, that vehicle should be able to be used for all of
NOAA, for maybe even all of commerce; and it is an IT vehicle,
and why not let all of commerce use it, and that satisfies the
category management requirement. Does that answer your
question?
Mr. EVANS. Yes. Others want to respond?
Ms. MACKEY. So one way to think of changing category
management is to maybe look at Section 1710 of the NDAA last
year that said, let's pilot a contract vehicle, perhaps in one
of these Centers of Excellence, that is already best of breed
in a way that has a fluid on-ramp to it, that just by
completing your Phase II, you can become part of that
contracting opportunity.
So I think combining some of the best of things that have
gone before, CPORTI (ph) has the ability to on-ramp frequently
and has wide openings to it, putting that with a best of breed
contract. I also think that category management is just
difficult. I think we are missing the point of we really need
to be supporting the contracting offices with enough resources
to be able to effectively meet the requirements levied on them
for a diverse inclusion over the industrial base. Forgive me
for editorializing.
Mr. EVANS. Yes.
Ms. BAILEY. I think, to follow on with them then as well
is, if you look at the categories that we have in category
management, maybe one of the things is to break those things
down to the subcategories, and look at issuing vehicles at
those subcategory levels, which would enable more small
businesses to be able to participate, rather than looking at
the whole entire category as a whole.
Mr. EVANS. Yes. Thoughts?
Mr. CHVOTKIN. Thank you, Mr. Evans. You know, the
industrial base in quotes, and that includes both the services
and the products, is changing so rapidly. One of the issues in
category management is it freezes the contract and the scope of
work. And so we ought to, instead of focusing in on achieving
arbitrary goals, one of the burdens is that it freezes out--it
locks the agencies into long-term solutions.
So I just think there ought to be greater flexibility and
certainly staying away from mandatory use, because the
agencies' needs are going to rapidly change, and we are pushing
them into unique and maybe inappropriate vehicles to achieve
the solutions they are trying to accomplish.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman yields back. Thank you very
much.
The gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Comer, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. COMER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My first question is for Ms. Strum. What options does a
small business have if it does not hold a spot on a best-in-
class contract? Are subcontracting opportunities or teaming
opportunities available for such companies?
Ms. STRUM. Yes. I mean, you can find large businesses and
small businesses that are on the contract that you can team
with. You also can talk to the agencies and make friends with
the customers and try to get the work on other vehicles, direct
contracts, use the GSA schedules if you have a GSA schedule--if
you are a GSA schedule holder. Sorry, that is the proper term.
There are other avenues to contracting.
Mr. COMER. How difficult is it for someone to get their
foot in the door to have a subcontracting or a teaming
opportunity?
Ms. STRUM. It is a matter of networking. Difficulty is in
the eye of the beholder.
Mr. COMER. Right.
Ms. Bailey, let me ask you a question. Given the Federal
Government has never met its 3 percent HUBZone goal, and I am a
big proponent of HUBZone, do you think category management will
make it even more difficult for agencies to achieve this goal?
Ms. BAILEY. Yes, absolutely. One of the major
recommendations I have is that if you are going to continue
along this line is to have specific set-asides for HUBZone
firms and to make sure that there are adequate competition and
number of firms in those HUBZone set-asides.
With the HUBZone, compliance is also an issue. And if you
don't have a HUBZone prime contract, then you don't have the
benefit of attempt to maintain in order to maintain compliance
and allow you to get back up to compliance when you do have an
award. So----
Mr. COMER. While we have heard of the many dangers category
management potentially imposes on small businesses, can you
think of any benefits this strategy might have for small
businesses? I am switching gears here.
Ms. BAILEY. Well, I think that from the education, if the
education gets out and all of the information of pricing of the
goods and materials, and individuals have access to that
information, it may help small businesses strategize on where
to go and which vehicles and the cost patterns that they have
got to get into.
The problem with entering into the Federal marketplace is
if you don't have past performance--and in most cases, as a
prime, we are seeing more and more requirements as a prime
requirement for past performance--it is very difficult to enter
into the market.
Mr. COMER. So one quick question--I have a little over 2
minutes remaining--for all the witnesses. Briefly answer, if
you can. What can this Committee do? What can we do to improve
the situation?
Ms. BAILEY. I think that the one thing is to really
seriously look at making sure that we have adequate on-ramping,
frequent on-ramping, that all the socioeconomic categories are
represented, and that you have vehicles that are specific for
those.
Mr. CHVOTKIN. I would recommend that OMB look very
carefully at its future awards. Restack whether the current
list of best-in-class contracts has sufficient opportunity for
small business participation, and then make sure that future
awards both have broad enough scope of work to keep technology
refreshed, as well as to bring on future companies through that
on-ramp process. Not everyone does that today.
Ms. STRUM. So my recommendation would be to have
contracting officers trained in what vehicles are available to
them besides the best-in-class vehicles, and possibly even have
a database created so that they know what other contracts are
out there that they can use to put RFPs on, so whether it is
within their own agency or outside their agency, if it is using
a GSA schedule, et cetera.
But then I would also question how best in class is
awarded, and look at whether or not it is really following the
FAR, and if it is, you know, the on-ramping issues and some of
the other issues just in how they are competed.
Ms. MACKEY. So I have three quick suggestions, two
technical, one strategic. The first is Centers of Excellence
for contracting, so that people know that are trained, that are
together and can reinforce their learning around different
types of contracting.
The second is contract vehicles, making sure they are
available. Speaking as an innovator who, therefore, has not
planned for necessarily, the ability to have the frequent on-
ramps, as mentioned, are really important on those contract
vehicles.
And the third piece that you asked in terms of what can
Congress do, I think making sure that program officers and
contracting officers raise the visibility of the successful
small business contracts that have happened, how they have
happened, and that you are happy that they happened. Help us
mitigate the risk by raising visibility to the successful
engagements.
Mr. COMER. Well, thank you all very much. Appreciate your
testimony.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back.
The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Lawson, who is the Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee on Health and Technology, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LAWSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome to the Committee. Several years ago, the Federal
Government set aside a percentage of contracts that small
business should receive, somewhere in the neighborhood,
according to the text here, around 23 percent, as compared to
the larger firms. Are we able to reach that 23-percent goal,
based on all of the testimony that I have heard here this
morning? Can you all elaborate on that? Are we capable, under
the circumstances we have, to reach those goals or have we
already reached them?
Ms. BAILEY. No, we definitely already reached them. And
under category management, and you look at total of dollars, we
have exceeded it. The problem is, is when you start peeling
back and looking at how many contractors are receiving that to
achieve those goals is the issue.
So, for instance, you know, DHS has a First Source
contract, and they have hit all of their goals. You know, they
have done really, really well. But when you look at the number
of companies that they had involved in that, for instance, with
HUBZone, it is six companies. They had $842 million spread
across six companies.
So that is what the real issue is is when you start looking
at the socioeconomic classifications underneath the small
business numbers.
Mr. LAWSON. Does anyone else care to respond? Because that
is very interesting. I mean, that is hard to believe, really.
Ms. MACKEY. So I would respond with adding onto the
socioeconomic classes that you look at, because it is important
to understand whether you meet goals or not, are you meeting
them in the diversified approach that set-asides intend for, so
that there are launching points for us to do further into the
marketplace.
I would say you should look also at what types of work they
are doing. Are we pulling across the industrial base? Are we
giving them on-ramps, if you will, into the market from which
they can build? And that is our goal, right, is to have a
healthy industrial base across small and large geographically,
socioeconomically. So I think looking at the spread of who is
doing what and where is important.
Mr. LAWSON. Anyone else care to respond?
Mr. CHVOTKIN. I would suggest that this Committee really
ought to take a look at the larger purpose of the small
business programs. Today, the agencies look at those objectives
or those goals as once they achieve it, they stop the awards.
And if they achieve it in one area, they are happy as long as--
it is a numerics game only. And category management is getting
in that same position.
I think we need to look at how we grow small businesses and
how we take advantage of the programs as a growth orientation
and not as a limitation. And I think that is a larger
conversation for another day, but I think I am concerned that
the category management is going to fall into the same trap of
numerical goals only, without regard to the who or the what.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay. Ms. Strum.
Ms. STRUM. If I may, just one quick comment. In 2017, we
missed our women-owned small business goal by $1.28 billion.
Mr. LAWSON. That is incredible. And one other thing you
said earlier when you were talking about networking, does that
contribute a great deal to a lack of participation when you
have such a small group that are getting all of the resources?
Ms. STRUM. Definitely. Right. So, I mean, a big part of our
jobs every day is to go out and talk with companies and meet
with companies and do business with other companies. And so,
some of the gentlemen asked about, you know, can you work with
other companies and, you know, sub to other companies as small
businesses. Can you, you know, do subcontracting. And, of
course, we can do subcontracting.
But in order to bid on contracts, you need to have prime
past performances. So a lot of what we do, again, is to make
the connections and do the networking. But we also, you know,
in order to make money for our companies, you know, we want to
have that prime contracting goals.
Mr. LAWSON. Right. And back in Florida, being in a
government town like I am, oftentimes I hear from African
American firms who say that they can't break in, you know,
because of the way things are set up.
And I know I don't have enough time to probably go into
that today, but just listening to what you all are facing as
women, the Chamber of Commerce and so forth, I can understand
what obstacles they are faced with. And there shouldn't be any
reason to have these obstacles placed for those firms who are
trying to break in, are capable of doing good governmental
work.
But the way it is set up, Mr. Chairman, and eventually we
might look at it again, that is what is happening to a lot of
them, why a lot of them are complaining. It is simply the way
the process is set up.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back.
And the gentleman from Kansas, Dr. Marshall, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. MARSHALL. Good afternoon, everybody. My first question
is for Ms. Strum. I am not sure we will get past my first
question.
Ms. Strum, I have been an OB/GYN for 25 years. I have been
a man in a women's world. I found myself advocating to make
sure that mammograms and pap smears were covered by insurance
companies, making sure that women had access to family
planning. And now as a Congressman, it seems like I continue to
focus on a lot of the women issues.
Just to kind of briefly describe, what are two or three
other, the major barriers, the challenges that female
businesses have? And if you were in Congress, what would you do
about it? If you were Queen, what would you do about it? Give
me, you know, a specific solution. So I am just kind of teeing
this up and go ahead and knock it out of the park.
Ms. STRUM. Wow. If I was Queen. Fun.
Mr. MARSHALL. We got to dream big and think outside the box
sometimes.
Ms. STRUM. So I think the challenges are probably similar
to what a lot of other small businesses find, whether you are
an SDVOSB, a small disabled veteran-owned business, or if you
are a HUBZone business. I think we all face a lot of similar
challenges. We look specifically for set-asides for women-owned
small businesses.
That being said, I don't think that the women-owned--the
set-asides for women businesses--I am not saying this
correctly--are not coming around as often as maybe they used to
be. And some of the ones that are coming around, so my personal
experience--my company is a software development company. We do
data analytics, and we are not seeing those coming around as
often.
I am constantly checking different websites of the
different contracts that we are on, and we are not seeing--I
will tell you, we see like janitorial services. We do a lot of
work with the FAA, and we will see things like building a
tower, or replacing carpets, and that is just not the stuff
that we do. We do software development. I want to see stuff
for, you know, they need people that do Java or, you know,
things like that.
So we are just not seeing the requests for work for the
things that we do, and so that has been our biggest struggle as
of late.
We are trying to break into new places in the market, into
other agencies. And that in itself is the same struggle that
anybody would have trying to break into new places in the
market. You know, you have to meet new people, make new
networks, that type of thing.
I am not sure if I answered your question fully.
Mr. MARSHALL. Is there anything else you wanted to add to
just like plain and simple solutions to the problem before us
today, this Federal procurement system, anything else that you
think is very women-specific that you didn't get to share yet,
or you want to really emphasize?
Ms. STRUM. I mean, of course, I would like to see more
women-owned set-asides, women-owned business set-asides. But I
think when you do these large procurements, these large IDIQ
procurements, it is always great to see the small business set-
asides. And when you have the small business set-asides to have
specific ones for women-owned small business, for the HUBZones,
for the SDVOSB, et cetera. I think that would really help push
our numbers and make it to, you know, that 23 percent that we
have been, you know, looking to achieve.
But I think that also helps our numbers in terms of making
sure it is not six companies getting, you know--I forget what
number Ms. Bailey used before in terms of the dollar amounts.
But I am not surprised to hear that, because it is not the
first time I have heard that.
Mr. MARSHALL. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back.
The gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Adams, who is the
Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Investigations, Oversight
and Regulations, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for your testimony. I want to follow up
on that six companies. I am curious about were there African
American companies involved there?
Ms. BAILEY. Those were all HUBZones. I didn't get down to
whether or not that they were. But even further on that DHS
First Source is you have several of those companies. Although
you may have several, they are accounting for several of the
certifications. So they could very well have had several
companies that were hitting the 8A, hitting the women-owned,
hitting SDVOSB and HUBZone.
So actually, the total number of companies that you look at
for the diverse thing is a lot smaller than looking at the
total number of contracts issued.
Ms. ADAMS. Yeah, we got to do better.
So, Ms. Strum, one of the policies that helps to ensure
that small businesses receive their fair share was establishing
the governmentwide 23 percent goal. And I think we have had
some discussion about it, but it also includes the small
disadvantaged women and veteran-owned businesses. So how are
these businesses, business contractors impacted by this
decrease in the contracts?
Ms. STRUM. I am not sure I understand the question.
Ms. ADAMS. Well, the contracts have been decreased. Is that
correct?
Ms. STRUM. That is correct.
Ms. ADAMS. What is the impact, in your opinion?
Ms. STRUM. So what I have seen happen is we have larger
dollar amounts and smaller contracts. Is that what you are----
Ms. ADAMS. Yes.
Ms. STRUM. Okay. So how has that impacted us? In terms of
dollars of revenue per company, it is harder to grow your
company, right, because you have got fewer contracts to go
after and bid on, and thereby win or lose, and, therefore, even
though the contracts have more money.
So you are seeing yourself making that 23--when I say
seeing yourself, the Federal Government might be making the 23
percent in total dollars, but there are fewer contracts for the
small businesses to go after and, therefore, fewer companies
are actually helping to achieve that 23 percent.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, ma'am.
Let's see. Ms. Mackey, small businesses are innovative and
nimble, which is why it is vitally important that the Federal
Government ensure that small businesses are able to compete
fully in the category management contracting approach. So how
can we work to ensure that the category management approach is
ensuring the successful participation of these companies like
your own?
Ms. MACKEY. So first, the problem with that is that
innovation is, by its nature, unplanned and disruptive. And
category management is a planned approach and a structured
approach to contracting that says, At this point we will need
this much. But with innovation, you have a different cycle.
So I think, to try to directly answer your question, the
idea of what we can do with category management, if there was a
way to broaden the best-of-breed definition to include maybe as
a first pass just the SBIR technologies, goods and services,
that we are allowed to do follow-on contracting, because the
competition barrier has already been crossed, perhaps adding
sort of a first pass on-ramp that is flexible in its timing
nature to the best-of-breed concept of category management.
I am making this up on the fly. I hope it makes sense. But
that concept of bringing the nimble and the fluid to what is
structured, you know.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. So insight from each of you or anyone that
wants to answer. Low Federal funding for Small Businesses
Administration has an impact on the amount of aid and technical
assistance they can provide small business owners.
So are you seeing an impact on the number of small
businesses that are able to compete for contracts due to these
effects and, if so, what type? So anybody can answer. We have
got like 53 seconds.
Ms. MACKEY. So I will tell you that at the SBA, I would
love to see more funding going to the Office of Innovation. I
can't give you the numbers on the impact, but I can give you
the impact. I am not seeing as much outreach to the innovation
economy from them, that I would just love to see more of that.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. Ms. Strum.
Ms. STRUM. I yield.
Ms. BAILEY. Especially from the HUBZone program office, I
think that more funding from the HUBZone program office to
really help companies understand and to educate the contracting
groups on the HUBZone program and the benefits of the HUBZone
program, and to encourage firms to be able to issue more
HUBZone set-asides. If there are more HUBZone set-asides, there
are more companies that are going to enter the market.
Ms. ADAMS. Very good. Thanks very much.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady's time
has expired.
The gentleman from New York, Mr. Espaillat, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. ESPAILLAT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for your testimony. My question is to Mr.
Alan Chvotkin. Did I pronounce that right?
Looking at some of the most recent data available from the
past two fiscal years, there has been a significant decrease in
small businesses' contracting actions. This means, on the
whole, that small businesses are either being priced out beyond
their capacity, right, on what they can meet, what they are
able to meet as small businesses, or that the market in which
they operate may no longer be viable for them.
Is this a trend that you believe is due to a demand for
goods and services beyond what small businesses can offer, or
have larger companies started to dilute and take away avenues
for small businesses in the industry space?
Mr. CHVOTKIN. That is a great question. The answer is more
complicated. Certainly, small businesses have the capabilities,
and what we see in the aggregation of contracts into larger and
larger dollar value means that it puts a greater burden on
those companies. There are also some significant rules changes
that have an impact on the companies, a shift in how much they
can subcontract, a limitation on subcontracting.
I don't think there are segments of the marketplace that
have been excluded, but what we see in the evolution of the
procurement process, whether it be strategic sourcing or
mandatory use, is that larger and larger segments of Federal
spending are being taken off the marketplace. And because it is
an objective to achieve a dollar value only, without regard to
how many companies participate, many of the agencies are using
that as a way to simply achieve their numerical goals and
declare victory.
Mr. ESPAILLAT. I see. My next question is first a
statement. We want to support new entrants and the 10-point
criteria in category management in a spirit meant to be a tool
for greater inclusion of industrial base entrants.
My first question is, with the use of contracting and
bundling to meet the minimum benchmark, is it worth revisiting
the standard? Any of you.
Ms. BAILEY. Yes. I really think that that is a huge
concern, because the larger these contracts are, the smaller
companies are not going to have the past performance
requirements in order to enter into the market, because we have
seen cases where a small business has to have two or three $100
million contracts in order to be able to be qualified to
participate in a bid. Not too many small businesses have those,
especially in the NAICS codes that a lot of the small
businesses have in professional services and those like.
So, I mean, as you bundle and make these larger and make
them more restrictive, it is going to only allow the larger
small businesses or those who have, you know, significant other
past performance to participate.
Mr. ESPAILLAT. So what would be the best help for small
businesses in this aspect to become more competitive? What
should they be doing? What should we be doing for them to make
them more competitive then?
Ms. BAILEY. I think that one of the things as far as with
the category management, like I said before, is look at
breaking down these vehicles into smaller components, where
they are more specific, where smaller businesses can have past
performance to participate in those areas. And by looking at
those subcategories, that might enable more of these set-aside
vehicles to be used at those levels and be able to participate
from all of the socioeconomic classifications.
Mr. ESPAILLAT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the
balance my time. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back.
I think that is all the questioners we have this morning
and now into this afternoon. And we want to thank our
witnesses, our very distinguished panel for all their testimony
today.
As we have heard the testimony, category management may
have vast implications for small businesses and the industrial
base that must be monitored closely. We need to continue
working together in a bipartisan manner, as this Committee
virtually always does, to ensure that the Federal Government
acts swiftly and diligently to make sure these outcomes do not
occur.
And I want to, again, thank the panel for really shedding a
lot of light that will help folks on both sides of the aisle on
this very important issue.
And I would ask unanimous consent that members have 5
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record. Without objection, so ordered.
And if there is no further business to come before this
Committee, we are adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 12:17 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]