- THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2019 BUDGET REQUESTS FOR INDIAN PROGRAMS
[Senate Hearing 115-402]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-402
THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2019 BUDGET REQUESTS FOR INDIAN PROGRAMS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON INDIAN AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
APRIL 11, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Indian Affairs
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
33-404 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON INDIAN AFFAIRS
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota, Chairman
TOM UDALL, New Mexico, Vice Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
JOHN McCAIN, Arizona
JON TESTER, Montana,
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
HEIDI HEITKAMP, North Dakota
STEVE DAINES, Montana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
T. Michael Andrews, Majority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Jennifer Romero, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on April 11, 2018...................................
1
Statement of Senator Cortez Masto................................
41
Statement of Senator Daines......................................
43
Statement of Senator Heitkamp....................................
35
Statement of Senator Hoeven......................................
1
Statement of Senator Murkowski...................................
3
Statement of Senator Smith.......................................
37
Statement of Senator Udall.......................................
2
Witnesses
McGhee, Hon. Robert, Vice President, United South and Eastern
Tribes.........................................................
22
Prepared statement...........................................
24
Payment, Hon. Aaron, Vice President, National Congress of
American Indians (NCAI)........................................
12
Prepared statement...........................................
14
Tahsuda, John, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary--Indian
Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior.......................
4
Prepared statement...........................................
5
Weahkee, Rear Admiral Michael, Acting Director, Indian Health
Service, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services..........
8
Prepared statement...........................................
9
Appendix
Herrera, Hon. Dwayne, Governor, Pueblo de Cochiti. letter........
62
James, Chris, President/CEO, National Center for American Indian
Enterprise Development, prepared statement.....................
54
National Indian Health Board (NIHB), prepared statement..........
57
Response to written questions submitted by Hon. John McCain to
John Tahsuda...................................................
65
Response to written questions submitted by Hon. Tom Udall to RADM
Michael Weahkee................................................
64
Rose, Ahniwake, Executive Director, National Indian Education
Association (NIEA), prepared statement.........................
49
Santo Domingo Tribal Council--Resolution No: 04-2018-15..........
64
Written questions submitted by Hon. Tom Udall to:
Hon. Robert McGhee...........................................
69
Hon. Aaron Payment...........................................
67
THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2019 BUDGET REQUESTS FOR INDIAN PROGRAMS
----------
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 11, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Indian Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:00 p.m. in room
628, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. John Hoeven,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN HOEVEN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NORTH DAKOTA
The Chairman. I call this oversight hearing on the
President's Fiscal Year 2019 budget to order.
Today the Committee will receive testimony on the
President's Fiscal Year 2019 budget request for Indian
programs. On February 12th of this year, Congress received the
President's Fiscal Year 2019 budget request. This oversight
hearing provides an opportunity to receive important feedback
on funding requests for Indian programs.
The President's budget outlines the Administration's plan
to build a safer and more prosperous Nation. As we consider the
President's proposal, we must keep in mind both our Nation's
fiscal state and the Federal Government's trust responsibility
to Native Americans.
Last month, the Committee held briefings with Federal
agencies and tribal organizations to discuss the President's
budget. From these briefings, two points were clear. First, as
a Nation, we have to do a better job of living within our
means, and we must use every taxpayer dollar responsibly and
effectively. Second, we must balance the fiscal state of our
Nation with the Federal Government's trust responsibility to
Indian tribes, which includes funding key programs and services
for Native communities.
There were several positive recommendations put forth in
the President's budget. The President's budget request included
modest increases for some critical Indian programs, such as an
increase in funds for health care and the repair and renovation
of Bureau of Indian Education schools. However, there were also
proposed cuts to other public safety, education and social
services programs.
As we think through the current state of tribal communities
across our Nation, we must be mindful of our national debt and
deficit as well as the needs of tribes. Additionally, we must
discuss how we can make more effective and efficient use of
Federal dollars in Indian Country. To that end today, we will
hear from two key Federal agencies and two tribal organizations
regrading the President's budget request.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here today with us.
I am looking forward to hearing your testimony.
Before we turn to our witnesses, I want to recognize the
Vice Chairman for his opening statement.
STATEMENT OF HON. TOM UDALL,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NEW MEXICO
Senator Udall. Thank you so much, Chairman Hoeven. I really
appreciate your calling this oversight hearing to discuss the
Administration's budget proposal for fiscal year 2019.
It is also a timely hearing in light of Congress' recently-
enacted Omnibus Appropriations Bill for fiscal year 2018. The
Omnibus is a step in the right direction toward the Federal
Government fulfilling its trust and treaty obligations to
Indian Country. Unfortunately, the same can't be said of the
Administration's fiscal year 2019 budget proposal.
The Administration's rhetoric about respecting tribal
sovereignty and investing in Indian Country simply does not
align with this budget proposal. As the head of the Office of
Management and Budget said recently, the Administration's
budget proposal is only a ``messaging document.'' If that is
the case, the Administration sent a very concerning message
about its priorities for Indian Country in fiscal year 2019.
It is totally inadequate, an insult to Indian Country with
sweeping, irrational cuts to tribal programs in an effort to
reduce the Federal Government. Particularly when programs
within DOI and HHS, programs that Indian Country specifically
sought increases for, were instead targeted for cuts. As you
can see from this chart right here behind me, this
Administration proposed gutting all of the programs that Indian
Country identified as a priority.
For example, the President's budget would eliminate the BIA
Housing Improvement Program. As everyone can see from this
photo, HIP dollars can have a huge impact in Indian Country. As
Admiral Weahkee can attest, the housing needs at Zuni, where
this photo was taken, are tremendous. The photo shows just how
far HIP dollars can go to provide folks a place to call home.
In this case, for an elderly Carla Alahuapo.
HIP and many other BIA programs are pillars of the Federal
Government's trust and treaty obligations. But yet again, they
would be either significantly reduced or eliminated entirely.
Infrastructure grant programs in Indian Country also take a
hit, like the Indian Community Development Block Grant that
Pueblos, including Santa Clara and Acoma use for elderly
housing needs. Not to mention BIE and IHS construction
backlogs, which at the Administration's proposed funding levels
would take centuries to address.
As you can see from these photos, infrastructure needs in
New Mexico's tribal communities are very real. These are but a
few examples of Indian Country's overall need. Although the
President has made law and order a cornerstone of his political
message, this budget would undermine public safety in Indian
Country. Court systems and an effective police force go to the
core of self-governance. Yet these programs don't escape this
Administration's cuts either. Program cuts mean less money for
housing block grants, less money for hospitals and schools,
less money for roads, less money for managing Indian Country's
natural resources, all critically important for economic
development in Indian Country.
I am proud that Senator Murkowski and I, along with other
appropriators, Senator Hoeven is included in there, put
together a responsible omnibus for Fiscal Year 2018 that
acknowledges and respects tribal priorities. We increased
funding for IHS by half a billion dollars and increased funding
for the BIA and BIE by another $204 million. These are
important steps toward funding levels that meet our solemn
obligations to Indian Country.
Thank you to our tribal witnesses for being here today. And
thank you to the Administration for appearing here. I am glad
the Administration will have the opportunity to hear directly
from tribal representatives at this hearing. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Are there other opening statements? Yes,
Senator Murkowski.
STATEMENT OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
Senator Murkowski. Just very, very briefly. I appreciate
the opportunity to highlight a couple of things where I think
we have acknowledgement that there are some things that we
entirely disagree with, with this proposed budget, but that
there are some areas that I think we see some increases that I
think are promising.
I do have some issue with some of the proposals that the
Administration has chosen to zero out. Many of our Alaskan
tribes depend on programs like the Small and Needy Tribes
funding, very, very important. Tribal Climate Resilience, you
talk to my communities out in places like Kivalina or
Shishmaref, those are very important. The Housing Improvement
Program, the HIP program, critically, critically important for
us. Johnson O'Malley, I think we also see some major deductions
in social services programs that we have spent a lot of time
coordinating with the agencies and the tribes to develop the
most helpful and most effective social services programs. So I
am going to be looking to those to make sure that we have
appropriate funding.
There are some areas that I do think I can certainly get
behind. One is a proposal for a 5 percent set-aside for tribes
from the Crime Victims Fund to provide services to crime
victims. I think that is very important. Many say we need more
than that. I agree with that, but I think that at least puts us
going in the right direction.
I do think we see the Administration placing its support
with the need to increase the IHS. Again, in no way is it
enough, and certainly the Vice Chairman here and my ranking
member on Interior Appropriations, we know it is not enough.
But again, the trend is in a much better direction. So we are
going to look again to make sure that we do right in these
accounts.
One last area that I do have some concerns with is shifting
the funding for the special, the diabetes program, the SDPI
from mandatory to discretionary, especially when we are hearing
from so many of our tribes the need to support mandatory
funding for IHS programs. So I am going to ask for additional
clarification from IHS on this proposal and why they are
advocating that change.
But I thank those from the agencies today, and again our
tribal representatives. We have to get moving, as we start
moving on the appropriations side of things. So this hearing
kicks it off, right off the bat. So I appreciate the testimony
and I appreciate the Chairman and the Ranking Member.
The Chairman. Are there other opening statements? If not,
then we will hear from our witnesses. Our witnesses today are
Mr. John Tahsuda, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Indian Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior; Rear Admiral
Michael Weahkee, Acting Director, Indian Health Service, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Rockville, Maryland;
the Honorable Aaron Payment, Vice President, National Congress
of American Indians, Washington, D.C.; and the Honorable Robert
McGhee, Vice President, United South and Eastern Tribes,
Nashville, Tennessee.
I want to remind the witnesses that your full written
testimony will be made part of the official record. So if you
could, please keep your statement to no more than five minutes,
so that members have time for questions. And then we will
proceed with Mr. Tahsuda.
STATEMENT OF JOHN TAHSUDA, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY
ASSISTANT SECRETARY--INDIAN AFFAIRS, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
Mr. Tahsuda. Good afternoon, Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman
Udall, members of the Committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the President's
2019 budget request for Indian Affairs. I am John Tahsuda, the
Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs at the
Department of the Interior.
The 2019 budget supports the Administration's commitment to
empower tribal communities. This includes focusing on improving
quality of life, creating educational and economic
opportunities, promoting efficient and effective governance,
preserving and fostering cultural heritage and being a steward
of natural resources.
Indian Affairs plays an important role in carrying out the
Federal trust, treaty and other responsibilities to 573
federally-recognized tribes. We serve more than 2 million
American Indian and Alaska Natives in tribal and Native
communities. Interior's programs maintain strong and productive
government-to-government relationships with Native communities,
helping to promote tribal nation-building and self-
determination.
The 2019 budget reflects investments in important programs
such as education, infrastructure and law enforcement. A major
component of the 2019 budget is a focus on infrastructure. The
Public Lands Infrastructure Fund legislative proposal will
provide up to $18 billion to address Interior's deferred
maintenance backlog in Bureau of Indian Education funded
schools as well as national parks and wildlife refuges.
Although many of the schools in the BIE system are operated
by tribes, the BIE is still responsible for the oversight and
maintenance of these school facilities. The estimated deferred
maintenance backlog for BIE schools is $634 million, which does
not include the cost of replacement for the schools in the
worst condition. This is why the Bureau and the Department
support this proposal and look forward to engaging further with
Congress on this important issue.
The budget also promotes tribal self-determination by
supporting tribal government activities. This includes
providing initial Federal support for the six Virginia tribes
federally recognized by an act of Congress in January of this
year, as well as fully supporting contract support costs. In
addition to support of the Administration's domestic energy
dominance and economic development goals, the 2019 budget
request funds the community and economic development activity
at $35.8 million and features investments in Indian energy
activities, including resource management on tribal lands.
Lastly, the 2019 budget focuses on protecting Indian
Country. An additional $2.5 million for public safety and
justice activities is specifically intended to address the
opioid crisis, a top priority for the Administration. Funding
will provide for the hiring of 17 additional drug enforcement
officers, who will be instrumental in addressing this rising
epidemic in Indian communities directly, and will allow us to
strengthen the Indian Country presence within Federal drug task
efforts, to keep drugs from entering reservation areas to begin
with.
In conclusion, the 2019 budget request maintains strong and
meaningful relationships with Native communities and
strengthens government-to-government relationships with
federally-recognized tribes. The request delivers community
services, restores tribal homelands, fulfills commitments
related to water and other resource rights, executes fiduciary
trust responsibilities, supports the stewardship of energy and
other natural resources, creates economic opportunity and
expands access to education.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. I
am happy to answer any questions the Committee may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tahsuda follows:]
Prepared Statement of John Tahsuda, Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary--Indian Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior
Good afternoon Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman Udall, and members of
the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to provide a statement on
behalf of the Department of the Interior on the President's Budget
Request for Fiscal Year 2019, presented to Congress on February 5,
2018. The 2019 Budget Request for Indian Affairs is $2.4 billion.
The Department of the Interior upholds the Federal Government's
unique trust responsibilities by fostering government-to-government
relationships between the Federal government and federally recognized
Tribes, American Indians, and Alaska Natives. The 2019 budget addresses
Federal responsibilities and tribal needs related to education, social
services, infrastructure, and stewardship of land, water, and other
natural resources. The budget prioritizes support for programs that
serve the broadest service population rather than initiatives that are
more narrowly focused. The President's budget maintains the
Administration's strong support for the principle of tribal self-
determination and efforts to strengthen tribal communities across
Indian Country. The budget calls for full funding for Contract Support
Costs and Tribal Grant Support Costs which Tribes incur from managing
Federal Indian programs.
As the Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs, I
have the responsibility to oversee the numerous programs within the
Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Bureau of Indian Education, along with
other programs within the immediate Office of the Assistant Secretary
for Indian Affairs. Indian Affairs plays an important role in carrying
out Federal trust, treaty, and other responsibilities to 573 federally
recognized Indian Tribes. Our programs serve more than two million
American Indians and Alaska Natives in tribal and native communities.
The BIA provides direct services and funding for compacts and contracts
for Tribes to deliver Federal programs for a wide range of activities
necessary for community development including natural resource
management, law enforcement, and social service programs, among many
others in Indian Country. The BIE manages a school system with 169
elementary and secondary schools and 14 dormitories providing
educational services to 47,000 individual students in 23 States and
supports 33 BIE-funded tribal colleges and universities. Indian
Affairs' programs are built on strong and productive government-to-
government relations with Tribes.
Infrastructure Investment
Public Lands Infrastructure Fund--Roughly 47,000 American Indian
students and their families rely on Interior to deliver a quality
education in a safe environment, but many of our schools are in poor
condition. Some schools have structural issues, lack basic features
like functional doors and windows, or are infested with mold.
A major component of the 2019 budget is the Public Lands
Infrastructure Fund legislative proposal, which will provide up to $18
billion to address Interior's deferred maintenance backlog in Bureau of
Indian Education-funded schools, as well as national parks and national
wildlife refuges. Although many of the schools in the BIE system are
operated by Tribes, BIE is still responsible for oversight and the
maintenance of the school facilities. The estimated deferred
maintenance backlog for BIE schools is $634 million, which does not
include the cost of replacement for the schools in the worst condition.
The Department is taking action to increase revenue from Federal
energy leasing and development over 2018 budget projections and will
keep 50 percent of additional revenue that is not allocated for other
purposes, for Department infrastructure needs. The proposal complements
the President's national infrastructure investment initiative and
recognizes the strategic importance of long-term investment in
America's treasures. This is why the Bureau and the Department strongly
support this proposal and look forward to engaging further with the
Congress on it.
Construction--The 2019 request proposes $133.3 million in new
funding for Bureau of Indian Affairs Construction activities. The
request also assumes the cancellation of $21.4 million in prior year
unobligated balances, for a net request of $111.9 million. The proposed
budget includes $28.3 million for dam safety and maintenance, $6.5
million for irrigation projects, $72.9 million for Education
Construction, $10.4 million for Public Safety and Justice projects, and
$12.0 million for facilities improvements related to regional and
agency offices serving tribal programs operations in Indian Country
including construction program management.
Indian Country Roads--The BIA maintains nearly 29,000 miles of
paved, gravel and earth surface roads; and more than 900 bridges. The
2019 budget request includes a $28.3 million infrastructure investment
in Road Maintenance.
Promote Tribal Self-Determination
The 2019 proposed budget provides $291.5 million for programs that
support Tribal Government activities. Within this, the request includes
$157.8 million for self-governance compact activities for self-
governance tribes and $72.6 million to support Consolidated Tribal
Government Programs for tribes operating under P.L. 93-638 contracts.
New Tribes Funding--The budget requests $1.1 million to support new
tribes. This includes $960,000 to provide initial Federal support for
six Virginia Tribes federally recognized by an Act of Congress in
January 2018.
Contract Support Costs--The 2019 requested funding for Contract
Support Costs is $231.0 million. The request fully supports estimated
needs assuming BIA program funding at the 2019 request. The 2019 budget
continues to request funding for CSC in a separate indefinite
appropriations account to ensure full funding for this priority.
Tribal Grant Support Costs--The 2019 request includes $74.0 million
to fully fund estimated Tribal Grant Support Costs for tribes which
choose to operate BIE-funded schools.
Protect Indian Country
Public Safety Programs--The 2019 budget includes a request of
$350.1 million for Public Safety and Justice Activities, of which
$326.6 million directly supports 190 law enforcement programs and 96
corrections programs run both by Tribes and by the BIA as direct
services. The request also includes $22.1 million for Tribal Courts and
$1.4 million for fire protection activities.
Within this request is an increase of $2.5 million to address the
opioid crisis in Indian country. Funding will provide for the hiring of
17 additional drug enforcement officers who will be instrumental in
addressing the rising epidemic in Indian communities directly and will
allow us to strengthen the Indian Country presence within Federal drug
task force efforts to keep drugs from entering reservation areas to
begin with.
Support Indian Communities
Support Economic Opportunities--In support of the Administration's
domestic energy dominance and economic development goals, the 2019
budget request funds the Community and Economic Development activity at
$35.8 million and features investments in Indian energy activities,
including resource management on tribal lands.
Indian Guaranteed Loan Program--The 2019 budget request for the
Indian Guaranteed Loan Program is $6.7 million which will guarantee or
insure $108.6 million in loan principal to support Indian economic
development.
Human Services Programs--Sustaining families is critical to
fostering thriving Indian communities. The Human Services activity
request includes $115.4 million for programs providing social services
which includes $65.8 million for Welfare Assistance, and $46.6 million
for Socials Service and Indian Child Welfare Act protections.
Manage Trust Resources and Lands
Natural Resource Programs--The 2019 budget request proposes $153.4
million for natural resource management programs which include
agriculture, forestry, water resources, and fish, wildlife and parks
activities.
The BIA helps to support the management of Indian forest lands by
300 Tribes across 18.7 million acres. The budget request includes $48.9
million for Forestry programs to support development, maintenance, and
enhancement of forest resources in accordance with sustained yield
principles included in forest management plans. The proposed budget
includes $28.0 million for BIA's Agricultural and Range program to
continue support for multiple use and sustained yield management on
over 46 million acres of Indian trust land dedicated to crop and
livestock agriculture. The request also includes $11.4 million for
Fish, Wildlife and Parks and $8.6 million for Water Resources
management activities.
Real Estate Services Programs--To meet our fiduciary Trust
responsibilities, the 2019 budget proposes $105.5 million for real
estate services programs. The requested funding supports the processing
of Indian trust-related documents such as land title and records and
geospatial data to support land and water resource use, energy
development, and protection and restoration of ecosystems and important
lands. The proposed budget includes $11.0 million for probate services
to determine ownership of Indian trust assets essential to economic
development and accurate payments to beneficiaries.
Foster Tribal Student Success
The BIE serves as a capacity builder and service provider to
support Tribes in delivering culturally appropriate education with high
academic standards to allow students across Indian Country to achieve
success.. The 2019 budget request includes a total of $741.9 million
for BIE programs. Funding includes $625.9 million for Elementary and
Secondary programs, $92.7 million for Post-Secondary programs, and
$23.3 million for Education Management. The budget prioritizes funding
for core BIE school operations while giving lower priority to
activities that do not directly support BIE-funded education programs
or facilities.
Land and Water Claims Settlements
The 2019 budget request prioritizes funding to meet Indian
Settlement commitments, and proposes $45.6 million. Interior is
committed to honoring enacted Indian land and water rights settlements.
Settlements often end decades of controversy and contention among
tribes and neighboring communities. Securing tribal and individual
Indian rights to historic land and ensuring permanent access to a clean
and reliable water supply is important to tribal nationhood, quality of
life, economic security, and sustained fundamental cultural values.
This request provides sufficient funding to complete those payments for
the Navajo Trust Fund and the Navajo-Gallup Water Supply Project, both
of which have enforceability dates in 2019 for BIA.
Conclusion
This 2019 budget request maintains strong and meaningful
relationships with Native communities, strengthens government-to-
government relationships with federally recognized tribes, promotes
efficient and effective governance, and supports nation-building and
self-determination. The request delivers community services, restores
tribal homelands, fulfills commitments related to water and other
resource rights, executes fiduciary trust responsibilities, supports
the stewardship of energy and other natural resources, creates economic
opportunity, and expands access to education.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. I am
happy to answer any questions the Committee may have.
The Chairman. Rear Admiral Michael Weahkee.
STATEMENT OF REAR ADMIRAL MICHAEL WEAHKEE, ACTING DIRECTOR,
INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES
Mr. Weahkee. Good afternoon, Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman
Udall and members of the Committee. My name is Michael Weahkee,
Acting Director of the Indian Health Service.
I want to thank you for your support and for the
opportunity to testify on the President's Fiscal Year 2019
budget. This budget advances our mission to raise the physical,
mental, social and spiritual health of American Indians and
Alaska Natives to the highest level. The IHS provides Federal
health services to approximately 2.2 million American Indians
and Alaska Natives from 573 federally-recognized tribes in 37
States.
The President's Fiscal Year 2019 budget proposes $5.4
billion in totally discretionary budget authority for the
Indian Health Service. This is an increase of $413 million
above the continuing resolution amount, which was the
comparison level at the time that the budget request was
developed.
This budget reflects the Administration's strong commitment
to Indian Country by protecting direct clinical health care
investments. It increases IHS's discretionary budget authority
by 8 percent. In order to prioritize direct clinical health
care services, the budget proposes to discontinue the Health
Education Program and the Community Health Representatives
Program. The budget request includes $58 million to address
accreditation emergencies within IHS and to improve quality of
care; $955 million for the Purchased and Referred Care Program;
$80 million for construction of two facilities on the health
care facility priority list; $159 million to staff six new or
replacement health care facilities, including three joint
venture projects; and an estimated $822 million for contract
support costs, which remains a separate indefinite
appropriation to guarantee full funding.
The IHS remains committed to addressing behavioral health
challenges, including high rates of alcohol and substance
abuse, mental health disorders and suicide in Native
communities. The proposed budget for these services is $340
million. Further, the budget provides $10 billion in new
resources across HHS to combat the opioid epidemic and serious
mental illness. As part of this effort, the budget includes
$150 million for IHS grants based on need for opioid abuse
prevention, treatment and recovery support in Indian Country.
The Specialty Diabetes Program for Indians is instrumental
in improving access to diabetes treatment and prevention
services in Indian communities. Diabetes-related health
outcomes have improved significantly. The long-time trend of
increasing rates of diabetes ended in 2011, and we have
observed a 54 percent decrease in new cases of kidney failure
due to diabetes among Native adults. The budget continues
funding for this program at $150 million.
We are working aggressively to address quality of care
issues across our system. In spite of ongoing challenges,
involving recruitment and retention of providers, aging
infrastructure, and rural health facilities, today we are able
to report progress. The Pine Ridge Hospital is back in
compliance with a condition of participation for emergency
services. The hospital is now in a reasonable assurance period,
pending a full survey to determine if it has maintained
compliance.
The Rosebud Indian Hospital satisfied the requirements of
the systems improvement agreement with CMS in September of 2017
and we are now awaiting re-survey of that facility as well. We
are also addressing concerns, Senator Udall, in your back yard,
the Navajo area, in the Gallup Indian Medical Center, the Joint
Commission and CMS surveys found the hospital emergency
department out of compliance with standards and conditions of
participation. We moved quickly to address the findings and
efforts to restore accreditation of all services surveyed by
the Joint Commission continue. The facility must now undergo a
full CMS survey to ensure Medicare program compliance.
We have achieved progress in the areas of oversight and
management of quality. Key accomplishments include
credentialing and privileging policy and process modernization,
development of a standardized patient experience survey,
establishment of primary care patient wait time standards. I am
proud of the efforts and the commitment of the staff for the
progress that has been made thus far. We are firmly committed
to improving quality, safety and access to health care for
American Indians and Alaska Natives.
We appreciate all of your support and I am happy to answer
any questions that you might have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Weahkee follows:]
Prepared Statement of Rear Admiral Michael Weahkee, Acting Director,
Indian Health Service, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Good afternoon Chairman Hoeven and members of the Committee. I am
Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee, Acting Director of the Indian
Health Service (IHS). Thank you for your support and for inviting me to
speak with you this afternoon about the President's Fiscal Year (FY)
2019 Budget Request for the IHS. This budget supports and advances our
mission to raise the physical, mental, social, and spiritual health of
American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
The IHS, an agency within the Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS), is responsible for providing federal health services to
approximately 2.2 million American Indians and Alaska Natives from 573
federally recognized tribes in 37 states. The IHS system consists of 12
Area offices, which oversee 168 Service Units that provide care at the
local level. Health services are provided through more than 850
facilities managed directly by the IHS, by tribes and tribal
organizations under authorities of the Indian Self-Determination and
Education Assistance Act (ISDEAA), 41 Urban Indian health
organizations, and through services purchased from private providers.
Our budget plays a critical role in providing for a healthier
future for American Indian and Alaska Native people. Likewise, it helps
us maintain the progress we have made over the years. The President's
FY 2019 Budget proposes $5.4 billion in total discretionary budget
authority for IHS, which is $413 million above the FY 2018 Annualized
Continuing Resolution. It also proposes Program Level funding of $6.6
billion, which is $263 million above the FY 2018 Annualized Continuing
Resolution.
Prioritizing Clinical Health Care Services
The IHS provides comprehensive health care, including but not
limited to primary medical services, dental care, behavioral health
services, community health services, and public health services such as
environmental health and sanitation facilities, through a network of
608 hospitals, clinics, and health stations on and near Indian
reservations. The budget reflects the Administration's strong
commitment to Indian Country. Specifically, the budget protects direct
clinical health care investments and increases IHS's discretionary
budget authority by eight percent. In order to prioritize direct
clinical health care services and the staffing of newly-constructed
health care facilities, the budget discontinues the Health Education
Program and Community Representatives Program.
The budget requests an increased level of funding to address
accreditation issues in the IHS system and improve quality of care. An
additional $29 million is requested over the FY 2018 Annualized
Continuing Resolution level for a total of $58 million in funding to
assist IHS-operated hospitals that are at risk or out of compliance
with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) Conditions of
Participation. These funds will be used to address CMS findings and may
be used to sustain operations of any affected service unit.
The budget increases Purchased/Referred Care program funding that
is essential for ensuring access to care by our patients by providing
$955 million, which is $32 million above the FY 2018 Annualized
Continuing Resolution. This program provides critical health care
services through contracts with hospitals and other health care
providers to purchase specialized or critical care when IHS and
tribally-managed facilities are unable to provide the services
directly. In addition, it supports high-cost medical care for
catastrophic injuries and specialized care.
Alcohol and Substance Abuse, Mental Health Disorders, and Suicide
The IHS remains committed to addressing behavioral health
challenges, including high rates of alcohol and substance abuse, mental
health disorders, and suicide in native communities. The proposed
budget for these services is $340 million, which is $30 million above
the FY 2018 Annualized Continuing Resolution. Further, the budget
provides $10 billion in new resources across HHS to combat the opioid
epidemic and address serious mental illness. As part of this effort,
the budget includes an initial allocation of $150 million for IHS to
provide multi-year grants based on need for opioid abuse prevention,
treatment, and recovery support in Indian Country.
Special Diabetes Program for Indians
The Special Diabetes Program for Indians (SDPI) provides grants for
evidence-based diabetes treatment and prevention services across Indian
Country. These funds have been instrumental in improving access to
diabetes treatment and prevention services for American Indians and
Alaska Natives. Since 1997:
97 percent of American Indians and Alaska Natives have
access to diabetes clinical teams, a 67 percent absolute
percentage increase.
95 percent of American Indians and Alaska Natives have
access to culturally tailored diabetes education programs, a 59
percent absolute percentage increase.
These efforts have had an impact. Diabetes-related health outcomes
have improved significantly in Indian communities since the inception
of the SDPI. Within our communities, the longtime trend of increasing
rates of diabetes ended in 2011. The diabetes program has proven
successful and has contributed to a decline in new cases of kidney
failure due to diabetes of 54 percent among Native adults from 1996 to
2013. In addition, there has been an eight percent reduction in the
average blood sugar level of American Indians and Alaska Natives with
diagnosed diabetes between 1997 and 2015. Improved blood sugar control
reduces complications from diabetes.
The SDPI grant program provides funding for diabetes treatment and
prevention to 301 IHS, tribal, and Urban Indian health programs. To
ensure sustained and additional improvements for the health of American
Indians and Alaska Natives, the FY 2019 Budget continues funding for
this essential program at $150 million and shifts funding from
mandatory to discretionary. Your continued support of these funds is
saving lives, improving quality of life, and reducing the cost of care
across Indian Country.
Health Insurance Reimbursements
The budget assumes $1.2 billion in estimated health insurance
reimbursements from third party collections. The collection of health
insurance reimbursements for the provision of care to patients covered
by Medicare, Medicaid, the Veterans Health Administration, and private
insurance allows IHS and tribally-managed programs to meet
accreditation and compliance standards. It also allows IHS to expand
the provision of health care services by funding staff positions,
purchasing new medical equipment, and maintaining and improving health
care facilities.
Access to Quality Health Care Services through Improved Infrastructure
The budget proposes $159 million for staffing of newly constructed
health care facilities. This funding will support staffing and
operating costs for three Joint Venture Construction Program (JVCP)
projects: Muskogee (Creek) Nation Health Center, the Cherokee Nation
Regional Health Center in Oklahoma, and the Yukon-Kuskokwim Primary
Care in Alaska. Through JVCP agreements, IHS has partnered with the
tribes to provide funds for staffing and facility operations while the
tribes have invested in the design, construction, and equipment costs
associated with the new facilities. These funds will allow the new
facilities to expand access to health care.
These funds also provide staffing for new or expanded IHS
constructed facilities, including Hau'pal (Red Tail Hawk) Health Center
in Arizona, the Fort Yuma Health Center Replacement, and the Northern
California Youth Regional Treatment Center in California.
The Health Care Facilities Construction budget includes funding to
continue construction of two facilities on the priority list: the Alamo
Health Center in New Mexico and the Dilkon Alternative Rural Health
Center in Arizona. A total of $80 million is requested, $38 million
below the FY 2018 Annualized Continuing Resolution.
Supporting Indian Self-Determination
The budget supports self-determination by continuing the separate
indefinite appropriation account for contract support costs (CSC)
through FY 2019. Authorized and required by the ISDEAA, CSC funding
supports certain operational costs of tribes and tribal organizations
administering health care service programs under self-determination
contracts and self-governance compacts. The budget includes an estimate
of $822 million to fully fund CSC, which is $22 million above the FY
2018 Annualized Continuing Resolution estimate. Maintaining the
flexible funding authority of an indefinite appropriation allows the
IHS to guarantee full funding of CSC, as required by the law, while
protecting services funding for direct services tribes.
Quality of Care
We are working aggressively to address quality of care issues
across our system. In spite of ongoing challenges involving recruitment
and retention of providers, aging infrastructure, and rural health
facilities, today we are able to report progress.
As a recent example, at the Pine Ridge Hospital, CMS notified us
that its survey on February 13-15 found the hospital in compliance with
the Condition of Participation for Emergency Services. Pine Ridge IHS
Hospital is now in a ``Reasonable Assurance'' period to demonstrate the
ability to maintain compliance. The Joint Commission will conduct a
full survey with CMS deeming status to determine if Pine Ridge IHS
Hospital has maintained compliance with all Medicare participation
requirements. Pine Ridge IHS Hospital will be readmitted to participate
in the Medicare program upon demonstrating full compliance by the
second survey. I am proud of the efforts and commitment of the staff at
Pine Ridge for the progress made thus far. We still have more work to
do in the Great Plains to honor our commitment to American Indians and
Native Alaskans, and I am reassured by the recent progress we have
made.
At Rosebud Hospital, after satisfying the requirements of the
Systems Improvement Agreement with CMS in September 2017, the hospital
is preparing for Joint Commission accreditation this spring. Our
application for survey was submitted to the Joint Commission in
January, and we look forward to their review.
We are also addressing concerns in the Navajo Area at Gallup Indian
Medical Center. Specifically, the concerns derive from a Joint
Commission unannounced survey in November 2017 that also triggered a
CMS survey in December 2017. The surveys found the hospital Emergency
Department out of compliance with the Joint Commission standards and
CMS Conditions of Participation. We moved quickly to address these
issues, and the hospital remedied the Joint Commission's findings.
Efforts to restore accreditation of all services surveyed by the Joint
Commission continue. The facility also shifted under CMS's survey
authority for Medicare Program compliance and will receive a full CMS
survey.
We developed the Quality Framework with tribal input, and brought
together people and expertise from across the Department of Health and
Human Services to focus efforts on improving the quality of care and
patient safety. The Quality Framework has been a blueprint for system
level improvements of processes and infrastructure to improve quality
and safety throughout the agency. We have achieved remarkable progress
in the areas of oversight and management of quality, modernizing
credentialing and privileging policy and processes (aided by new,
standardized software), accreditation master contracts for hospitals
and ambulatory health centers, development of a standardized patient
experience survey, and the establishment of primary care patient wait
time standards. Following a year of implementation of the Quality
Framework, IHS is moving toward sustainment of the gains and
improvements with the development of a five-year strategic plan to
enhance quality in all aspects of agency operations.
I especially want to thank the Congress for the funding that has
been provided for accreditation emergencies. These funds have been
critical to giving IHS the flexibility to address quality issues at
impacted facilities and to offset lost third-party revenue, which is
critical to the operating tempo of our facilities. The requested $58
million will be used to build on the improvements we have made to date.
IHS does not have another reserve of funding to meet any significant
emergency or emergent issues, and our existing reserves are simply not
designed to meet a challenge of this magnitude.
Despite all of the challenges, we are firmly committed to improving
quality, safety, and access to health care for American Indians and
Alaska Natives, in collaboration with our partners in HHS, across
Indian country, and Congress. We appreciate all your efforts in helping
us provide the best possible health care services to the people we
serve to ensure a healthier future for all American Indians and Alaska
Natives.
Thank you and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
The Chairman. Thank you, Admiral.
Mr. Payment?
STATEMENT OF HON. AARON PAYMENT, VICE PRESIDENT, NATIONAL
CONGRESS OF AMERICAN INDIANS (NCAI)
Mr. Payment. Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chair Udall and members
of the Committee, on behalf of the National Congress of
American Indians, thank you for holding this hearing on the
President's Fiscal Year 2019 budget for Indian Programs.
My name is Aaron Payment. I am the Chairperson for the
Sioux Ste. Marie Tribe of Chippewa Indians and the First Vice
President for the National Congress of American Indians. Again,
thank you for your efforts to protect the Federal treaty and
trust obligations in the budget in a non-partisan way. We are
grateful that the draft administrative budget is just a
starting point, and that Congress will have the final say.
We once again will be counting on you as we seek the
restoration of proposed cuts to many tribal programs, formula
funding rather than grants for Department of Justice funding,
set-asides for DOJ and the Crime Victims Fund, increases for
the Census 2020 and other funding detailed in our written
testimony. When it comes to the funding of tribal programs, we
seek only those things promised and contractually obligated to
us by the Constitution, treaties and agreements reached between
tribal nations and the United States when tribal nations
conceded to smaller land bases and the Federal Government
proposed to safeguard our right to govern ourselves and to
enable our nations to deliver essential services and the
resources to do so the honor and integrity of the Federal
Government depends on upholding these obligations.
Many of the proposed draconian cuts in the draft budget
threaten to limit or abrogate the treaty and trust obligation
and is a clear retreat from the Federal commitments made to
tribes. We support proposals that treat tribal governments
equitably, such as the proposed tribal set-asides in the
Department of Justice. Tribal parity should always be the
driving principle for every Federal department or initiative,
including addressing the opiate epidemic and the building and
repairing of our infrastructure.
We are also heartened to see increases requested for the
Indian Health Service. NCAI, however, was alarmed to see the
proposed eliminations of the Indian Community Development Block
Grant, Johnson O'Malley, Low Income Energy Assistance Program,
Community Development Financial Institutions, Tribal Energy
Loan Guarantee and more. We urge Congress to restore these
devastating cuts.
The Administration's budget includes many drastic cuts. It
includes 50 percent cuts to the BIA. This would take us back to
the 2013 sequestration levels and adjusted for inflation, I
have a graph here, this is lower than the 2003 levels and 21
percent lower than the Fiscal Year 2010 levels. NCAI urges
Congress to reject the reductions in the BIA's proposed budget.
Instead, we urge the investment in the programs ranked by
tribes as the most in need of increases as part of Fiscal Year
2019 tribal budget formulation for which tribes from each BIA
region outlined their top 10 budget items.
I like that graph that was shown earlier, and I am going to
talk about it a little bit. The results of this process show
that the BIA, Social Services and ICWA scholarships and adult
education, tribal court and aids to government, tribal
government made up the top five priorities. Unfortunately, most
of the programs identified by tribes as needing increases would
receive reductions or eliminations in the draft budget. The top
15 items identified by tribes are proposed to be eliminated.
These are scholarships, adult education, JOM, Housing
Improvement Program, Small and Needy Tribes. Social Services
and ICWA would be cut by 37 percent and 27 percent. Both are
disproportionately larger than the overall reductions in the
Department of Interior.
Further, BIA public safety programs include proposed
underfunding for tribal law enforcement at 20 percent, tribal
detention at 40 percent and tribal courts at 3 percent of
proposed needs. Further, NCAI recommends that DOJ eliminate the
competitive grant process that pits tribes against each other.
We recommend using appropriations as a base funding for tribes
to determine their own priorities. NCAI has long advocated for
a 10 percent set-aside in OJP funding that would streamline the
Federal funding process by which tribes receive resources.
We were grateful to see the 3 percent tribal set-aside out
of the Crime Victims Fund in the Fiscal Year 2018 Omnibus. We
are hoping and looking for at least a 5 percent increase in the
2019 budget.
Our funding pursuant to our Constitution and treaty and
trust responsibilities is not welfare. Reparations are based on
race, but was prepaid by the blood, sweat and tears of our
ancestors and the millions of acres of land, as memorialized in
treaties and contracts that pledge health, education and social
welfare into perpetuity. We look forward to working with this
Committee on the Fiscal Year 2019 budget as it moves through
Congress, to ensure Federal commitment made to tribes are
honored in the budget.
Megwich, thank you, and I welcome any questions you might
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Payment follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Aaron Payment, Vice President, National
Congress of American Indians (NCAI)
On behalf of the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI),
thank you for holding a hearing on the President's FY 2019 Budget
Request for Indian Programs. Overall, NCAI calls for restoration of
cuts to many tribal programs, formula funding rather than grants for
both Justice funding and opioids, a set-aside in the Crime Victims
Fund, increases for Census 2020, and others listed below in our
testimony.
Federal Commitments Funded in the Budget
Tribes seek only those things promised to us and every citizen by
the Constitution, and the solemn treaties and agreements reached
between our tribal nations and the United States. At the founding, the
United States dealt with our tribal governments as sovereign equals. In
exchange for Federal protection and the promise of certain benefits our
ancestors gave forever to the people of the United States title to the
very soil of our beloved country. To settle the process for admission
of new states, the thirteen original states agreed to transfer western
land claims to the United States under the principles in the Northwest
Ordinance, including:
The utmost good faith shall always be observed towards the
Indians; their land and property shall never be taken from them
without their consent; and, in their property, rights, and
liberty, they shall never be invaded or disturbed, unless in
just and lawful wars authorized by Congress; but laws founded
in justice and humanity, shall from time to time be made for
preventing wrongs being done to them, and for preserving peace
and friendship with them.
These provisions signify the intent of the Framers to provide for
the governance of Indian country, a compact between the original States
and all that followed. We have never asked anything except that these
protections be continued. Many of the proposed deep reductions in the
President's Budget threaten to limit this protection and these
benefits. The proposed budget cuts to tribal governmental services, if
enacted, would represent a clear retreat from the federal commitments
and treaty promises made to tribes.
The President's budget would cut the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA)
by about half a billion dollars, or 15 percent. BIA Social Services
would be reduced by more than a third, Indian Child Welfare by more
than a quarter, and critical human services programs, law enforcement
and courts programs, environmental protection, housing, and education
programs would face unconscionable reductions. Infrastructure programs,
such as the Indian Community Development Block Grant would be
eliminated, and the Indian Housing Block Grant and road maintenance
would be reduced.
We support proposals that treat tribal governments equitably, such
as the proposed set-asides in the Department of Justice for tribes.
Tribal parity should be a principle for every other department or
initiative as well, including addressing the opioid epidemic and
building and repairing infrastructure. We are also heartened to see
increases requested for the Indian Health Service (IHS).
Throughout our testimony, we call on Congress to uphold the federal
government's trust responsibility to tribal nations. When tribal
nations agreed to accept a smaller land base, the federal government
promised to safeguard our right to govern ourselves and to enable
tribal governments to deliver essential services and provide them
resources to do so effectively. That is the trust relationship embodied
in the U.S. Constitution. Congress and the Administration is
responsible for carrying out that trust in the federal budget.
Summary of Major Changes
As Congress has the final say on discretionary spending, NCAI notes
the following proposals in the President's budget as significant. Some
of the proposed eliminations include:
Eliminations
Indian Community Development Block Grant (in Housing and
Urban Development)
Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP)
Indian and Native American Program (INAP in Department of
Labor)
Community Development Financial Institutions, Native
American program (Treasury)
Tribal Energy Loan Guarantee Program
Eliminations within BIA include:
--Small and Needy Tribes
--Housing Improvement Program ($10 million)
--Tribal Climate Resilience
--Alaska Native Programs
--Johnson O'Malley Program ($15 million)
--Scholarships and Adult education ($35 million)
NCAI requests that Congress restore these eliminations. When
programs are zeroed out in the President's budget, even if they are
eventually restored, holdbacks of zeroed out programs cause a
disruption of high priority programs throughout Indian Country.
Major Reductions
Native American Housing Block Grant cut from $654 million to
$600 million, -8.2 percent
Bureau of Indian Affairs cut by $433 million, or -15.6
percent
Major Reductions in BIA include
--Social Services cut by $19 million, or -37 percent
--Indian Child Welfare Act cut by $5 million, or -27 percent
--Welfare Assistance cut by $8.4 million, or -11 percent
--Rights Protection Implementation cut by $14.7 million, or -
37 percent
--Job Placement and Training cut by $4.4 million, or -35
percent
NCAI requests that Congress reject these proposed reductions. It is
a particular concern that some proposed cuts target the programs
identified by tribes through budget formulation as top ranked programs
needing increases.
Proposed Increases
Indian Health Service Clinical Services, increase of $353
million to expand direct health care services.
IHS would receive $150 million for Opioid multi-year
competitive grants based on need; this is out of the $10
billion proposal for opioid funding.
In the Department of Justice, the budget proposes:
--$115 million for Indian tribes through a 5 percent set-
aside from the Crime Victims Fund for providing services to
crime victims. Indian tribes have never directly received
funding from the Crime Victims Fund;
--A 7 percent set-aside from across the Office of Justice
Programs totaling $93.8 million for tribal assistance.
Bureau of Indian Affairs
The 2019 President's budget for Indian Affairs is $2.4 billion in
current appropriations, a 15.6 percent decrease from the FY 2018 CR
level. Nearly every line item in the BIA budget would see reductions in
the FY 2019 budget request. One increase would be $2.5 million to fight
the opioid epidemic, to ``expand BIA capacity to address the increase
in drug-related activities through interdiction programs to reduce drug
use, distribution, and drug related crime.'' The BIA's budget provides
funding for tribal base operations, including social services,
education, road maintenance, water resources, forestry, law
enforcement, tribal courts, and many other core governmental services.
The proposed overall level for BIA/BIE would take funding in
nominal dollars back to the FY 2013 sequestration levels. However,
adjusted for inflation, the proposed funding is lower than any enacted
amount going back to FY 2003, and 21 percent lower than the level in FY
2010.
NCAI urges Congress to reject the steep reductions in the BIA's
proposed budget and instead invest in the programs ranked as most in
need of increases as a part of the FY 2019 tribal budget formulation
process. Figure 2 shows the roll up of the top 19 preferred programs
identified by tribes as part of the Tribal Interior Budget Council
(TIBC). \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Indian Affairs Fiscal Year 2019 Budget Formulation Guidelines,
October 2016, accessible at http://www.ncai.org/
2019_IA_Budget_Formulation_Guide_-3-.pdf
As part of the FY 2019 budget formulation process, tribes from each
BIA region completed a survey to outline which 10 budget lines they
would prefer to provide increased funding to and why. The results of
this process show that BIA Social Services, Indian Child Welfare Act
(ICWA), Scholarships and Adult Education, Tribal Courts, an Aid to
Tribal Government made up the top five.
Unfortunately, most of the programs identified by tribes as needing
increases in FY 2019 would receive reductions in the FY 2019
President's Budget Request.
Four programs in the top 15 identified by tribes were proposed to
be eliminated in the President's Budget: Scholarships and Adult
Education, Housing Improvement Program, Johnson O'Malley Program, and
Small and Needy Tribes.
Social Services and ICWA would be cut 37 percent and 27 percent
respectively, both cuts disproportionately larger than the overall
reduction for the Department of the Interior, which would see a
reduction of 16.8 percent.
For Public Safety and Justice Programs, Indian Country faces
funding shortfalls in a number of areas while at the same time facing
increased need due to a climbing drug trend. The BIA submitted a report
to Congress in 2016 estimating that to provide a minimum base level of
service to all federally-recognized tribes, $1 billion is needed for
tribal law enforcement, $1 billion is needed for tribal courts, and
$222.8 million is needed to adequately fund existing detention centers.
Based on recent appropriation levels, BIA is generally funding tribal
law enforcement at about 20 percent of estimated need, tribal detention
at about 40 percent of estimated need, and tribal courts at a dismal 3
percent of estimated need.
The BIA Office of Justice Services (OJS) reports that at the end of
2014 and into 2015, Indian Country faced a drastic increase in violent
crime, partially due to a change in Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR)
definitions, but also due to increasing drug trends. \2\ Anytime the
drug trend climbs, so does violent crime and property crime. In 2016
OJS had an increase in methamphetamine seizures of 106 percent over the
year before and an increase of opioid seizures of 56 percent. With
about 30 BIA criminal investigators nationwide to address that, the
opioid and meth trends require a much higher level of staffing to
adequately address the issue. NCAI recommends an increase in funding
for BIA law enforcement and detention of $353 million for FY 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Bureau of Indian Affairs, Office of Justice Services,
Presentation
November 8-9, 2017 to the Tribal Interior Budget Council http://
www.ncai.org/PS-J_Presentation_TIBC_Nov_2017.pptx
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Similarly, BIA Social Services help to address the underlying such
as drug addiction, poverty, and violence that tend to create and
perpetuate the circumstances that produce victims. Sub-activities
include services in the areas of family and domestic violence, child
abuse and neglect, and protective services. However, many tribes'
Social Services departments are understaffed and experience high
turnover rate. As an example, in FY 2017, Osage Nation case workers
averaged 25-30 cases a month each. This exceeds the standard of one
case worker for every 15 cases administered. A lack of increased yearly
funding tends to hinder these protective services.
With child welfare, tribal governments receive approximately one-
half of one percent of all federal child welfare funds while their
children represent approximately 2 percent of the United States
population under the age of 18 and 4 percent of the child welfare
population. \3\ ICWA funding is the foundation of most tribal child
welfare programs. In order for AI/AN children and families to get the
best possible services at home and in state systems and allow tribes to
assist state agencies and courts, adequate funding must be provided to
tribal governments to support their child welfare programs. At the time
that ICWA was passed in 1978, Congress estimated that between $26
million-$62 million would be required to fully fund tribal child
welfare programs on or near reservations.45 Even after recent increases
in FY 2015, current funding levels fall far short of this estimate--
especially after adjusting for inflation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Stoltzfus, E. (2014). Child welfare: An overview of federal
programs and their current funding. Washington, DC: Congressional
Research Service. Retrieved from http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/
cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2327&context=key_workplace
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The need for every other program listed in the Figure 2 has similar
levels of shortfall. NCAI urges Congress to invest in these areas as
well as providing an overall increase to the BIA's budget to support
the base budget for core tribal programs.
Indian Health Service
One agency that would receive increases in the President's budget
is the Indian Health Service. Indian Health Service (IHS). Overall, IHS
would receive $5.4 billion, $413 million over FY 2018 CR and an 8
percent increase over the current FY 2018 CR. However, the proposal
would also cut or eliminate several important programs at IHS. To put
the request in context, the IHS Tribal Budget Formulation Workgroup
recommended $6.4 billion in FY 2019.
A troubling proposal would be to move the Special Diabetes Program
for Indians (SDPI) from mandatory to discretionary. Congress would
provide funding to SDPI through the annual appropriations process. This
proposal moves in opposite policy direction of what tribes have been
calling for--to make the entire IHS budget mandatory instead of
discretionary. \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ NCAI Resolution MKE-17-011, Reclassification of IHS Budget to
Mandatory Spending Program, accessible at http://www.ncai.org/
resources/resolutions/reclassification-of-ihs-budget-to-mandatory-
spending-program
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The President's Budget includes $10 billion to combat the opioid
epidemic. IHS would receive $150 million ``to provide multi-year
competitive grants based on need for opioid abuse prevention,
treatment, and recovery support in Indian Country.'' \5\ Competitive
grants are not the best way to administer this funding, and we instead
request formula funding.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ U.S. Department of Health and Human Services FY 2019 Budget in
Brief.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While the opioid crisis is plaguing communities across the country,
studies indicate that American Indians and Alaska Natives (AI/ANs) are
impacted at a higher rate than other groups. According to the Centers
for Disease Control, the drug overdose death rates for AI/ANs in
nonmetropolitan areas increased by more than 500 percent between 1999
and 2015. In addition, pregnant AI/AN women are nearly 9 times more
likely than others to be diagnosed with opioid dependency or abuse. The
epidemic has even led several tribal communities to declare public
health emergencies.
Indian Country is resilient and determined to eliminate this deadly
crisis from our communities. Many tribal nations have invested their
own limited resources on prevention, treatment, recovery, and public
safety. However, Indian Country needs Congress to uphold its trust and
treaty responsibility. Congress missed a significant opportunity when
it failed to provide direct funding to tribal communities in the 21st
Century Cures Act. While we work diligently to remedy that situation,
Congress has the chance to do the right thing at the outset as it
finalizes funding for fiscal year 2018.
Accordingly, it is critical that Congress allocates a portion of
the $6 billion for combatting the opioid epidemic that was included in
the recent budget agreement to address the unique needs of Indian
Country. NCAI strongly encourages Congress to allocate funding directly
to tribal communities in order to address this crisis in a flexible and
culturally relevant manner.
Department of Justice
The President's budget proposal for FY 2019 includes funding for
several tribal programs at DOJ. Specifically, funding in the bill
includes:
$115 million for Indian tribes through a 5 percent set-aside
from the Crime Victims Fund for providing services to crime
victims. Indian tribes have never directly received funding
from the Crime Victims Fund;
A 7 percent set-aside from across the Office of Justice
Programs totaling $93.8 million for tribal assistance. This
compares to a 7 percent set-aside from certain OJP and OJJDP
programs for FY 17 and is a significant increase in funding
overall over FY 17 levels;
$10 million for Community Oriented Policing Services Tribal
Law Enforcement. In FY 16, this was funded at $30 million. For
FY 17, the Attorney General has the discretion to take up to 7
percent from COPS programs overall for tribal assistance. The
FY 19 budget proposal eliminates the COPS Office and merges the
program into the Office for Justice Programs (OJP).
An estimated $39.25 million for the Office on Violence
Against Women's (OVW) Grants to Tribal Governments Program
through statutory set-asides from other appropriated programs.
This is a slight increase over FY17 funding levels.
An estimated $6.739 million for OVW's Tribal Coalitions
Program through statutory set-asides from other OVW
appropriations. This is a slight decrease from FY17 funding
levels.
An estimated $3.5 million for OVW's Tribal Sexual Assault
Services Program through statutory set-asides from other OVW
appropriations. This is the same level of funding as FY 17.
$4 million for implementation of Special Domestic Violence
Criminal Jurisdiction. This is the same level of funding as FY
17.
$1 million for research on violence against Native women.
This is the same level of funding as FY 17.
$500,000 for the National Indian Country Clearinghouse on
Sexual Assault. This is the same level of funding as FY 17.
Tribal Grants across the Department of Justice
NCAI recommends that DOJ eliminate competitive grant funding
process and utilize Justice Department appropriations as base funding
where tribes and tribal courts themselves determine their own
priorities.
One of the most significant issues with DOJ funding is that it is
competitive funding awarded at the discretion of DOJ. In order to
obtain this funding, tribes--on behalf of their justice systems--must
compete against each other under DOJ's priorities and guidelines. In
the end, often the tribes that have the financial and human resources
to employ experienced grant writers end up receiving funding, while the
under-resourced tribes may be left without. Moreover, tribes cannot
count on funding continuing beyond the current grant period, and Indian
Country has numerous stories of successful programs disappearing at the
end of a two- or three-year grant cycle.
Tribal governments have been asking for reforms to the DOJ grant
making process for years in order to reduce administrative
inefficiencies, improve program effectiveness, and increase the ability
of tribal governments to leverage available DOI and DOJ funding to best
address the comprehensive public safety and justice needs in their
communities. Beginning in 2012, Congress has responded to this request
from tribal leaders by appropriating a fixed amount for ``tribal
assistance'' rather than appropriating funds for specifically
authorized tribal programs. This approach gives DOJ considerable
flexibility to work with tribal governments to determine how best to
administer the appropriated funds. In FY 17, Congress shifted from a
lump sum for tribal assistance to a percentage set-aside model for the
first time, creating a 7 percent tribal set-aside from some COPS and
OJP programs. Appropriators carved out several of the largest
appropriation lines from the tribal allocation, however, resulting in
an overall tribal funding decrease from FY16 levels. Both the House and
Senate CJS bills for FY18 that are currently pending include a 7
percent tribal allocation from across a wider range of OJP and COPS
programs. If enacted, this would help restore funding levels for DOJ
tribal justice programs to a more appropriate level.
DOJ is currently engaged in government-to-government consultation
with Indian tribes about its grant-making process, which we hope will
improve the effectiveness of DOJ funding in tribal communities.
OJP Tribal Set-Aside
A flexible tribal set-aside from across OJP programs would allow
for a more flexible funding structure at DOJ. In 2010, the Department
of Justice launched its Coordinated Tribal Assistance Solicitation
(CTAS). CTAS attempts to streamline the grant application process for
tribes, enabling them to submit a single application for DOJ programs,
as opposed to previous years in which they were required to submit
multiple grant applications. However, this streamlined application
model still results in multiple grant awards with separate reporting
requirements, award periods, and grant managers. CTAS will not achieve
its intended purpose of streamlining tribal grants until it is
accompanied by a streamlined funding mechanism.
NCAI has been advocating for a 10 percent OJP tribal set-aside that
would streamline the federal funding process by which tribes receive
resources to establish tribal courts; assist in developing detention
facilities; provide legal assistance; develop and maintain juvenile
delinquency prevention programs; and provide substance abuse prevention
programs. Further, the tribal set-aside gives tribes the flexibility to
develop a comprehensive strategy on how best to spend those resources.
It would also create new possibilities for coordinating BIA and DOJ
funding to reduce inefficiencies and unnecessary administrative costs.
Crime Victims Fund 5 percent set-aside
The Victims of Crime Act (VOCA) is the largest source of federal
funding for crime victims. Currently, the Crime Victims Fund (CVF)
contains more than $12 billion collected as fines and penalties in
federal criminal cases. In FY 2015, distributions from the Crime
Victims Fund were increased more than three times to over $2.3 billion.
In FY 2016 2017, distributions increased again to more than $3 billion.
Despite having the highest rates of crime victimization in the country,
none of these funds are directed to tribal governments. Instead, tribal
governments are forced to rely on pass-through funding from the states.
Over the past five years, states have passed-through less than 0.5
percent of available funds. NCAI recommends that 5 percent of CVF
distributions should be directed to tribal governments in order to
ensure that tribal crime victims are able to access victim services and
victim compensation.
Department of Labor, Employment and Training
The President's proposed FY 2019 budget zeroes out funding for the
Department of Labor's Division of Indian and Native American Programs
(DINAP). DINAP is a vital workforce development division specifically
dedicated to working with tribal nations and Native organizations--
specifically Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) Section
166 grantees--to support the provision of quality employment and
training services to unemployed and low-income Native people. As the
only federal employment and job training program that serves American
Indians and Alaska Natives who reside both on and off reservations, it
is imperative that funding be maintained at an adequate level for the
WIOA Section 166 program.
Department of the Treasury
Of great concern to Indian Country is the President's proposal to
eliminate funding for Community Development Financial Institutions
(CDFIs) through the CDFI Fund. In FY17, Congress appropriated $15.5
million for the Native American CDFI Assistance (NACA) Program, which,
according to the Treasury Department, translates to $15.395 million in
annualized CR funding for FY18. The President's FY19 Request would
eliminate funding for the NACA program and the three other
discretionary CDFI grant programs.
The Native Initiative of the CDFI Fund is an important program that
expands access to capital for individuals and small businesses in
Indian Country. The NACA program makes awards that assist community
development financial institutions (CDFIs) in increasing their lending
services and financial products, and in building their own internal
capacity to serve their target markets. Native CDFIs provide a wide
range of low interest loans to microenterprises, small businesses,
consumers, and for housing and homeownership. Native CDFIs also offer
financial education and entrepreneurial development training, homebuyer
education and foreclosure prevention counseling, credit counseling,
small business planning, debt relief counseling, counseling to improve
financial capability, match savings programs called Individual
Development Accounts, and free tax preparation services in Native
communities across the country. NCAI urges Congress to restore the
Native American CDFI Assistance program and appropriate $16 million for
the program in FY 2019.
Department of Energy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY2019
(Dollars in millions)
FY 2017
FY 2018
FY 2019
v.
Enacted
Est.
Request
FY2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Office of Indian Energy Policy
18
10
10
-8
and Programs (DA)
Tribal Indian Energy Loan
9
9
0
-9
Guarantee Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Office of Indian Energy Policy and Programs provides technical
assistance, education and capacity building, and financial assistance
to tribal governments. It also coordinates activities across the
Department, and works with tribes, tribal organizations, and other
agencies to promote tribal energy initiatives.
In FY19, the Department of Energy would receive $10 million to fund
the Office of Indian Energy Policy and Programs. This marks a
significant budgetary cut of $8 million dollars compared to FY2017
levels. An $8 million dollar reduction further limits the services and
amount of resources available to tribes who are planning energy and
infrastructure projects. Limitations on tribal energy development
continue to be problematic for many tribes due to a lack of access to
capital, capacity issues, and the complicated legal and regulatory
structure governing the use of Indian lands.
The Tribal Indian Energy Loan Guarantee Program, which was
authorized by the Energy Policy Act of 2005, received an appropriation
for the first time in FY17. Congress provided $8.5 million for the loan
guarantee and $500,000 for administrative expenses. The President's
Request would eliminate funding for this program.
Census Bureau and the 2020 Census
The U.S. population is enumerated every 10 years and census data
are used to allocate Congressional seats, electoral votes, and is the
basis for funding allocations for federally funded programs. Federal
funding for Indian schools, Indian education programs, Indian health
programs, Indian housing programs, water and sewage projects, roads and
economic development are based on data collected by the Census Bureau
every ten (10) years. The allocation of congressional seats across the
United States are directly tied to data collected by the U.S. Census.
Public Law No. 94-171 data is used for redistricting at the federal,
state, and local levels and an accurate count is necessary to ensure
that American Indian and Alaska Native voters have an equal voice in
the political process of non-tribal elections.
However, in the 2010 Census, the Census Bureau estimates that
American Indians and Alaska Natives living on reservations or in Native
villages were undercounted by approximately 4.9 percent, more than
double the undercount rate of the next closest population group.
Additionally, uncertainty about FY 2017 funding levels and lack of
appropriations resulted in the Census Bureau canceling planned field
tests on the Standing Rock Reservation in North and South Dakota and
the Colville Reservation and Off-Reservation Trust land in Washington
State, which eliminated critical testing of methods for the 2020 Census
for counting people in tribal areas lacking street addresses, testing
methods of making in-person counts in Native households, and
determining where and how to use oversampling to counteract the
undercount facing Native people living on reservations and in Native
villages. Inadequate funding has compelled the Census Bureau to
announce ``pauses'' and modifications for key 2020 Census activities,
which could greatly diminish the Bureau's ability to take an accurate,
cost-effective census and is expected to increase the disproportionate
undercount of American Indian and Alaska Natives, especially those
living in rural, low-income, geographically isolated, and/or
linguistically isolated households.
The Census Bureau must have a significant funding ramp-up and
receive the funding on time for the next two years, to ensure a fair
and accurate census--one that counts all communities including Indian
County.
To keep 2020 Census preparations on track and preserve other vital
Census Bureau data, Congress should allocate $4.735 billion for the
U.S. Census Bureau in FY2019, which is $933.5 million above the
president's request, but only $475.5 million above the Commerce
Department's own cost estimate for 2020 Census activities. Here's the
breakdown of our FY2019 funding recommendation (compared to the
president's request):
+$912.5 million for 2020 Census preparations and early
implementation, for a total of $3.928 billion
+$21 million to restore vital ongoing economic and
demographic surveys to their FY2017 funding level of $270
million in the Current Population and Surveys account
Conclusion
For a nation that bases its greatness to a significant degree on
its rule of law, treaties and intergovernmental agreements carry
paramount importance. We look forward to working with this Committee as
the FY 2019 budget moves through Congress to ensure federal commitments
made to tribes are honored in the FY 2019 budget.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Payment.
Mr. McGhee?
STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT McGHEE, VICE PRESIDENT, UNITED SOUTH
AND EASTERN TRIBES
Mr. McGhee. Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman Udall and
members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today and for your willingness to conduct an oversight
hearing on the President's budget request for Fiscal Year 2019.
My name is Robert McGhee, Vice President of the Porch Band
of Creek Indians. I am here today in my capacity as the Vice
President of the United South and Eastern Tribes Sovereignty
Protection Fund. As is acknowledged by the 100th Congress, the
United States owes an historical debt to tribal nations. This
debt includes many injustices that Native people have suffered
as a result of Federal policy, including Federal actions that
sought to terminate tribal nations and assimilate Native
people.
It also involves a ceding of our land holding and natural
resource, oftentimes by force, to the United States, resulting
in perpetual trust obligation to tribal nations. These
resources are the very foundation of this Nation and have
allowed the United States to become the wealthiest and the
strongest world power in history. Federal appropriations to
Indian Country are simply a repayment on this debt.
This is not merely a question about addressing poverty or
needs. Our relationship is more than this. This is ultimately a
question about honor, about fulfilling commitments and
promises. A great nation keeps its word. America must fulfill
its promise to us in not just words, but action.
While this Administration claims to prioritize Indian
Country, this budget request reveals otherwise. It proposes
deep cuts to the Bureau of Indian Affairs, eliminates and makes
changes to the Indian Health Service programs without
consultation, and a host of other eliminations and cuts, both
directly and indirectly impacting Indian Country.
Like Senator Udall mentioned, we are being told that this
request is just a messaging document, and that if Indian
Country does not agree with its proposals, we should look to
Congress to ensure the trust responsibility is delivered upon.
While we understand that only Congress has the power to
appropriate funds, the Administration is sending a powerful
negative message to Indian Country. In reducing, eliminating
and calling into question the constitutionality of Federal
Indian programs, this Administration is ignoring and
undermining its trust responsibility to tribal nations. This is
unacceptable.
Because of our history and our unique relationship with the
United States, the trust obligation of the Federal Government
to Native peoples, as reflected in the Federal budget, is
fundamentally different from ordinary discretionary spending
and should be considered mandatory in nature. Recently, some in
Congress have called for mandatory funding for IHS. We strongly
support this proposal, which is more consistent with the
Federal trust obligation, and urge that this be expanded to
include all Federal Indian programs.
Continued underfunding results in tribal nations having to
subsidize greater and greater levels of the trust obligation, a
violation of our sacred agreement that has persisted,
regardless of Administration. We urge this Committee and
Congressional appropriators, as they have previously, to reject
the deep cuts found in this President's request and work to
fund the trust obligation.
Now I would like to turn to some of the specific comments
we have on the President's budget request. Regarding the
proposals for infrastructure package, it is critical that
tribal nations have direct access to funding available via any
infrastructure package. While we acknowledge that the
President's infrastructure plan does state that some money will
be set aside for tribal nations, additional details remain
unclear. The President's plan also proposes to streamline
infrastructure permitting.
We are concerned that without strong tribal consultation
and cultural review requirements, these proposals could serve
to undermine tribal sovereignty and the protection of cultural
resources and public health.
The request also allocates funding from the BIA budget for
the reorganization of the Department of Interior. The Secretary
has yet to significantly consult with or provide much detail to
tribal nations on the reorganization of the Department. All
that we are aware of is meetings held with Federal employees
and other units of government, as well as draft regional plans.
The request for Indian Affairs is a 15.6 percent decrease
from the Fiscal Year 2018 CR and a 20 percent decrease from the
Omnibus. Nearly every line item in the BIA budget would see
reductions. However, the Interior's budget justification
describes the request in the following way: ``The 2019 budget
supports the Administration's commitment to help promote tribal
nation-building and self-determination, empower tribal
communities, foster tribal self-sufficiency, create educational
and economic opportunities, ensure safe Indian communities,
preserve and foster cultural heritage, and steward natural
resources.'' From our perspective, it is difficult to see how
any of this can be true, considering the deep reductions and
eliminations found in the request.
The Fiscal Year 2019 budget request for IHS is 8 percent
above the 2018 CR, a slight decrease from the Omnibus. We
strongly support the increases to the chronically under-funded
agency. Despite these increases, we and others in Indian
Country are strongly opposed to the elimination of the
Community Health Representatives Program, as well as other
eliminations and decreases found in the request. Finally, the
request also proposes to move Special Diabetes Programs from
mandatory to discretionary spending.
In closing, while we take a firm position that all members
of Congress have an obligation to tribal nations, the members
of this Committee have a greater role in understanding and
working toward fulfilment of this obligation. As leaders who
have consistently demonstrated a true understanding of this
commitment, we implore this Committee to lead the change within
Congress that is necessary to improve how the United States
views, honors and fulfills its promises to Indian Country. The
Federal budget is a reflection of this commitment. We
recognizes that there are many causes and issues that this body
considers. However, we ask that you always remember to seek and
deliver upon this Nation's first promise to its First People,
the trust obligation. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McGhee follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Robert McGhee, Vice President, United South
and Eastern Tribes
Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman Udall, and members of the Senate
Committee on Indian Affairs (SCIA): thank you for the opportunity to
testify today and for your willingness to conduct an oversight hearing
on the President's shameful Budget Request for Fiscal Year (FY) 2019.
My name is Robert McGhee, Vice Chairman of the Poarch Band of Creek
Indians. I am here today in my capacity as Vice President of the
Executive Officers Committee of the Board of Directors for United South
and Eastern Tribes Sovereignty Protection Fund (USET SPF).
USET SPF represents 27 federally-recognized Tribal Nations from
Texas to Florida to Maine. \1\ USET SPF member Tribal Nations are
within the Eastern Region and Southern Plains Region of the Bureau of
Indian Affairs (BIA) and the Nashville Area of the Indian Health
Service (IHS), covering a large expanse of land compared to other
regions. Due to this large geographic area, USET SPF Tribal Nations
have great diversity in cultural traditions, land holdings, and
resources. This allows our region to mirror the great diversity found
in Indian Country nationwide.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ USET SPF member Tribal Nations include: Alabama-Coushatta Tribe
of Texas (TX), Aroostook Band of Micmac Indians (ME), Catawba Indian
Nation (SC), Cayuga Nation (NY), Chitimacha Tribe of Louisiana (LA),
Coushatta Tribe of Louisiana (LA), Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians
(NC), Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians (ME), Jena Band of Choctaw
Indians (LA), Mashantucket Pequot Indian Tribe (CT), Mashpee Wampanoag
Tribe (MA), Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida (FL), Mississippi
Band of Choctaw Indians (MS), Mohegan Tribe of Indians of Connecticut
(CT), Narragansett Indian Tribe (RI), Oneida Indian Nation (NY),
Pamunkey Indian Tribe (VA), Passamaquoddy Tribe at Indian Township
(ME), Passamaquoddy Tribe at Pleasant Point (ME), Penobscot Indian
Nation (ME), Poarch Band of Creek Indians (AL), Saint Regis Mohawk
Tribe (NY), Seminole Tribe of Florida (FL), Seneca Nation of Indians
(NY), Shinnecock Indian Nation (NY), Tunica-Biloxi Tribe of Louisiana
(LA), and the Wampanoag Tribe of Gay Head (Aquinnah) (MA).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legal and Constitutional Basis for the Fiduciary Trust Responsibility
From the earliest days of the United States, the Founders
recognized the importance of America's relationship with Tribal Nations
and Native peoples. They wove important references to those
relationships into the Constitution (e.g., Art. I, Section 8, Cl. 3
(Indian Commerce Clause); Article II, Section 2, Cl. 2 (Treaty Clause).
Tribal Nations influenced the Founders in the development of the
Constitution as recognized by the 100th Congress, when the Senate and
the House passed a concurrent resolution acknowledging the ``historical
debt'' the United States owes to Tribal Nations.
''[O]n the occasion of the 200th Anniversary of the signing of
the United States Constitution, acknowledges the historical
debt which this Republic of the United States of America owes
to the Iroquois Confederacy and other Indian Nations for their
demonstration of enlightened, democratic principles of
government and their example of a free association of
independent Indian nations;. . . .'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ S. Con. Res. 76, 100th Congress.
One has only to walk the halls of the Capitol to see many works of
art and sculpture that depict the central role that Tribal Nations have
played in the development of America's national identity. Not depicted
on the walls of the Capitol are many of the injustices that Native
peoples have suffered as a result of federal policy, including federal
actions that sought to terminate Tribal Nations, assimilate Native
people, and to erode Tribal territories, learning, and cultures. Where
these injustices are depicted, our tragedies are romanticized \3\ and
told through a revisionist lens. The true story involves the cession of
vast land holdings and natural resources, oftentimes by force, to the
United States out of which grew an obligation to provide benefits and
services in perpetuity to Tribal Nations. These resources are the very
foundation of this nation, and have allowed the United States to become
the wealthiest and strongest world power in history. Federal
appropriations to Tribal Nations and Native people are simply a
repayment on this perpetual debt.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See https://www.aoc.gov/capitol-hill/native-americans-art
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Indian provisions in the Constitution were given immediate life
in treaties that the United States entered into with Tribal Nations
beginning with the Treaty with the Delaware in 1778 and continuing
through another 373 treaties. Additionally, in the first decades of the
United States, numerous laws were enacted addressing the details of the
Federal-Tribal relationship (e.g., Trade and Intercourse Acts of 1790,
1793, 1796, 1799, 1802, and 1834), even as the Federal courts defined
the Federal government's trust obligation to Indian nations (e.g.,
Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1831)). This period reflected an
acknowledgement of and respect for our independent and sovereign
existence, with the United States taking action within our lands only
after securing our consent, including through treaty-making.
As it became more powerful and maintaining strong relations with us
became less necessary, the United States quickly moved from an approach
based on consent to an approach based upon the notion of domestic
dependency and plenary authority. Notwithstanding the Constitutional
foundation, the federal government engaged in many actions that
betrayed the treaties and trust obligation to Tribal Nations, such as
the seizure of Tribal lands and the forced assimilation efforts of the
Indian boarding school system. Fortunately, Tribal efforts to exert our
sovereign rights in collaboration with our federal partners have led to
more enlightened policies since the boarding school era, reflected in a
host of laws that support Tribal sovereignty and are critical to the
vitality and well-being of Tribal communities. Regrettably, these laws
are rarely funded to the level necessary to achieve their intended
purposes.
The chronic underfunding of federal Indian programs continues to
have disastrous impacts upon Tribal governments and Native peoples. As
the United States continues to break its promises to us, Indian Country
and Tribal citizens experience some of the greatest disparities among
all populations in this country--including those in health, economic
status, education, and housing. The 2003 ``Quiet Crisis'' report issued
by the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights (USCCR) revealed deep
disparities in funding the federal trust responsibility, and was meant
to galvanize action on the part of Congress and the Executive Branch.
15 years later, very little has changed. Though there was an effort to
reissue the report in 2016, USCCR faced its own funding and
infrastructure issues, and this was never accomplished. Nonetheless,
USET SPF expects an updated report would likely have mirrored its
earlier version. This is not a question about addressing poverty and
needs across Indian Country. Our relationship is much more than this.
This is ultimately a question about honor, about fulfilling commitments
and promises. A nation's exceptionalism is grounded in these
principles.
The Unique Role of the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs
While USET SPF takes a firm position that all members of Congress
have an obligation to Tribal Nations, the members of this Committee
have a greater role in understanding and working toward fulfillment of
this obligation. As members of the only full Congressional Committee
charged with, ``study[ing] the unique problems of American Indian,
Native Hawaiian, and Alaska Native peoples and. . .propos[ing]
legislation to alleviate these difficulties,'' it is incumbent upon
every Senator on this dais to advocate for and demand the inclusion of
Indian Country's priorities in all relevant legislation before the
Senate. While we appreciate the amplification of these priorities
through the work of the Committee via hearings, letters, and relevant
legislation, it is equally, if not more, important, that the Members of
this Committee use this role to elevate our voices in Congress' other
Committees, as well as on the Senate floor. Indian Country expects and
demands that you carry our messages into conversations with colleagues
who may be less familiar with the trust obligation.
As leaders who have consistently demonstrated a true understanding
of this commitment and obligation, we implore you to lead the change
within Congress that is necessary to improve how the United States
views, honors, and fulfills its promises to Indian Country. The federal
budget is a reflection of this commitment. We recognize that there are
many causes and issues that this body considers. However, we ask that
you always remember this nation's first promise to its First People--
the promise that resulted in an exchange responsible for the vast
wealth, power, and influence of this country.
The President's FY 2019 Request for Indian Programs Violates the Trust
Responsibility
In his 2017 Native American Heritage Month proclamation, the
President stated,
''My Administration is committed to tribal sovereignty and
self-determination. A great Nation keeps its word, and this
Administration will continue to uphold and defend its
responsibilities to American Indians and Alaska Natives.
Together, we will strengthen the relationship between the
United States Government and Native Americans.''
A great nation does keep its word. The first step toward
fulfillment of America's promises is not just words, but action. While
this Administration professes to prioritize Indian Country, this Budget
Request reveals otherwise. At all levels of the Administration, from
the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to BIA to IHS, Tribal Nations
and others objecting to this draconian budget request are being told
that the request is just a ``messaging document.''
While we understand that only Congress has the power to appropriate
funds, the Administration is sending a powerfully negative message to
Indian Country. In reducing, eliminating, and calling into question the
constitutionality of federal Indian programs, this Administration is
ignoring and undermining its trust responsibility to Tribal Nations.
Moreover, the message that this sends to all American citizens is one
of disregard and dishonor, further exacerbating the challenges we face
in educating the nation on our history, sovereignty, and the continued
obligation to Tribal Nations. Finally, the agencies most directly
charged with delivering on the fiduciary trust responsibility--BIA and
IHS--are demonstrating no accountability for budget request numbers and
instead, are directing Tribal Nations to advocate for funding with
Congress. This is a failure on the part of the Administration to take
seriously its role as trustee.
Funding Requests and Mechanism do not Reflect Trust Obligations
Because of our history and unique relationship with the United
States, the trust obligation of the federal government to Native
peoples, as reflected in the federal budget, is fundamentally different
from ordinary discretionary spending and should be considered mandatory
in nature. Inadequate funding to Indian Country needs to be viewed as
unfilled treaty and trust obligations and should not be vulnerable to
year to year ``discretionary'' decisions by appropriators. Recently,
some in Congress have called for mandatory funding for IHS. USET SPF
strongly supports this proposal, which is more consistent with the
federal trust obligation, and urges that this be expanded to include
all federal Indian programs.
We further note the long-lasting effects of continued underfunding
for federal Indian programs. The FY 2019 Budget Request fails to
reflect a prioritization of trust obligations and the related promises
that are at the core of our special and unique relationship. These
unfulfilled treaty and trust obligations will ultimately lead to
hearings by this very Committee, as the consequences of this Request
results in the problems and difficulties that SCIA is charged with
addressing.
Constitutionality of Federal Indian Programs
Several times now, this Administration has called into question the
constitutionality of programs or targeted accommodations for American
Indians and Alaska Natives (AI/AN). As this Committee well knows, all
federal Indian programs are based on a political, government-to-
government relationship between the U.S. and Tribal Nations.
Appropriations that support programs and services such as this are
provided in perpetuity in exchange for the millions of acres of land
and natural resources ceded, often times by force, to the U.S. In
addition, the Executive Branch, regardless of party, has a decades-long
history of policy-making that includes exemptions or accommodations
from federal actions for Tribal Nations and Native people.
Infrastructure Plan
For generations, the federal government--despite abiding trust and
treaty obligations--has substantially under-invested in Indian
Country's infrastructure, evident in the breadth and severity of its
unmet infrastructure needs as compared to the rest of the nation. While
the United States faces crumbling infrastructure nationally, there are
many in Indian Country who lack even basic infrastructure, such as
running water and passable roads. According to a report released in
2017 by National Congress of American Indians, there exists at least
$50 billion in unmet infrastructure obligations across Indian Country.
Decades of chronic underfunding of the federal government's trust
obligations has resulted both in a dangerous lack of infrastructure, as
well as infrastructure that is severely degraded.
If this Congress and Administration intend to modernize and repair
infrastructure throughout the country, the deep infrastructure needs of
Indian Country must be addressed. It is critical that Tribal Nations
have direct access to any funding available via an infrastructure
package. We must not be restricted to partnering or competing with
another entity in order to be in receipt of infrastructure dollars.
Additionally, in support of Tribal self-determination, these dollars
should be eligible for inclusion in Self-governance contracts and
compacts.
While we acknowledge that the President's infrastructure plan does
state that some funding will be set aside for Tribal Nations within its
proposed Rural Infrastructure Program, it remains unclear exactly how
much funding is being proposed and whether Tribal Nations would have
access to other parts of the President's plan. With a renewed focus on
domestic issues and putting America first, this focus must also include
a commitment to rebuilding the sovereign Tribal Nations that exist
within the domestic borders of the United States. Much like the U.S.
investment in the rebuilding European nations following World War II
via the Marshall Plan, this Congress and Administration should commit
to the same level of responsibility to assisting in the rebuilding of
Tribal Nations, as our current circumstances are, in large part,
directly attributable to the shameful acts and policies of the United
States.
The President's plan also proposes to streamline infrastructure
permitting processes. While there remain many unknowns associated with
these streamlining measures, USET SPF is concerned that these proposals
could serve to undermine Tribal sovereignty, and the protection of
cultural resources and public health. We note that the Federal
Communications Commission is already planning to move forward, over the
strong objections of Tribal Nations, with a Report and Order this week
that restricts Tribal cultural reviews and illegally redefines the
meaning of `federal undertaking' under the National Environmental
Policy Act and the National Historic Preservation Act.
Tribal governments must be consulted in any infrastructure project
planning or permitting on ancestral lands. Any infrastructure build-out
in Indian Country and beyond must not occur at the expense of Tribal
consultation, sovereignty, sacred sites, or public health. Consultation
must include Tribal consent for projects that significantly impact or
threaten Tribal interests. This point should be strengthened in the
law, and not just in regulations. In the short term, we must move
beyond the requirement for Tribal consultation via Executive Order to a
strengthened model achieved via statute. In the long term, we must
return to the achievement of Tribal Nation consent for federal action
as a recognition of sovereign equality.
Interior Reorganization
USET SPF is deeply concerned that the reorganization of the
Department of the Interior is moving forward in the absence of Tribal
consultation. Although Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke recently stated,
``we're going to go into consultation, as we should, and it's really up
to the tribes whether they're going to participate or not, and I
respect sovereignty,'' a consultation has yet to be initiated on the
specifics of the reorganization plan. The Secretary has yet to
significantly consult with or provide much detail to Tribal Nations on
the reorganization of the Department, although we are aware of meetings
held with federal employees and other units of government. Yet, we note
that new DOI regions have been proposed and there is $900,000 set aside
in the BIA Budget Request for its share of initial pre-planning
responsibilities (with the knowledge that this figure will increase
significantly in the out years). USET SPF urges this Committee and this
Congress to withhold any funding for Interior reorganization pending
confirmation that the Reorganization will not impact funding to Tribal
Nations or inherent federal functions, as well as meaningful
consultation with Tribal Nations resulting in consent for or an
exemption from the reorganization.
Role of Office of Management and Budget in Inadequate Budget Requests
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) asserts that over $21
billion in federal dollars funds Indian Country annually. From the
perspective of Tribal advocates, including those who serve on budget
formulation committees for federal agencies, this number seems to be an
over-estimate, with far less actually reaching Tribal Nations and
Tribal citizens. We suspect that OMB arrives at this figure by tallying
the amount for which Tribal Nations and entities are eligible,
regardless of whether these dollars actually reach Indian Country. The
Tribal Interior Budget Council has asked OMB for a full accounting of
federal funding distributed to Indian Country. To date, OMB has not
responded to this request and continues to take the position that as an
extension of the Executive Branch, it does not have the same
consultative responsibilities as other federal agencies. USET SPF
requests that in the spirit of transparency, this Committee consider
supporting report language that would ensure OMB provides Indian
Country with an accurate inventory of its own federal funding on an
annual basis. In addition, USET SPF contends that Indian Country would
be better-served by an Indian-specific desk at OMB rather than analysts
with portfolios that include other interests.
FY 2019 Request for the Bureau of Indian Affairs
The FY 2019 President's Budget Request for Indian Affairs is $2.4
billion in current appropriations, a 15.6 percent decrease from the FY
2018 CR level. Nearly every line item in the BIA budget would see
reductions in the FY 2019 budget request. However, Interior's Budget
Justification describes the Request in the following way,
''The 2019 budget supports the Administration's commitment to
help promote tribal nation-building and self-determination,
empower tribal communities, foster tribal self-sufficiency,
create educational and economic opportunities, ensure safe
Indian communities, preserve and foster cultural heritage, and
steward natural resources. Indian Affairs programs deliver
community services, restore tribal homelands, fulfill
commitments related to water and other resource rights, execute
fiduciary trust responsibilities, support the stewardship of
energy and other natural resources, create economic
opportunity, and expand access to education.''
It is difficult to see how any of this could be true, considering
the deep reductions and eliminations found in the Request. Moreover, on
a February 12th conference call, Tribal leaders and advocates were told
that the BIA budget request supports the ``core mission'' of the
Agency, but with nearly every line item receiving a decrease, it is
impossible to determine what the Administration deems its ``core
mission.'' According to the BIA's website, its mission is, ``to enhance
the quality of life, to promote economic opportunity, and to carry out
the responsibility to protect and improve the trust assets of American
Indians, Indian tribes and Alaska Natives.'' By any measure, this
Budget Request fails to uphold these words.
As National Congress of American Indians notes, overall, Human
Services programs would fall by 27 percent, Natural Resource programs
by 23 percent, Public Safety and Justice by 9 percent, and the Bureau
of Indian Education by 16 percent. Similarly, the top priorities
identified by the Tribal Nations of the Eastern Region for FY 2019
would all see drastic reductions or eliminations:
Social Services--cut by 37%
Scholarships and Adult Education--eliminated
Indian Child Welfare Act--cut by 27%
Tribal Courts--cut by 28%
Aid to Tribal Government--cut by 10%
One of the few increases would be $2.5 million in the Law
Enforcement Special Initiatives budget to fight the opioid epidemic by,
``expand[ing] BIA capacity to address the increase in drug-related
activities through interdiction programs to reduce drug use,
distribution, and drug related crime.'' While USET SPF welcomes any
funding provided directly to Indian Country to combat the opioid
epidemic in our communities, including for law enforcement, $2.5
million in what may be one-time funding falls short. To increase the
number of BIA drug enforcement officers, USET SPF has requested no less
than $11 million annually.
FY 2019 Request for the Indian Health Service
The FY 2019 Budget Request would include $5.4 billion for IHS, $413
million or 8 percent above the FY 2018 Continuing Resolution. While we
acknowledge and support increases to this chronically underfunded
agency, we also note that for FY 2019, the Tribal Budget Formulation
Workgroup (TBFWG) which meets annually and is comprised of Tribal
leader representatives from each of the 12 IHS Areas, recommended $6.4
billion.
While we continue to await the IHS' full FY 2019 Congressional
Justification, we support increases to several critical IHS line items:
an increase for clinical services, including an increase of $268
million for Hospitals and Clinics for a total funding amount of $2.1;
increase of $32 million for purchased/referred care (PRC) for total
funding of $955 million; and increase of $340 million for Mental
Health, and Alcohol and Substance Abuse Programs, which is $30 million
above current spending levels. These line items were the top four
funding priorities of Tribal Nations in the Nashville Area of IHS.
However, as with overall funding for IHS, it is important to recognize
that these increases fall far short of IHS' obligation to the health of
Tribal Nations, as well as the TBFWG's recommendations. We continue to
support and urge the adoption of a plan to phase-in full funding for
IHS. USET SPF maintains that until Congress fully funds the IHS, the
Indian Health System will never be able to fully overcome its
challenges and fulfill its trust obligations.
Despite these increases, the President's Budget also proposes cuts
and eliminations to other parts of the IHS budget. USET SPF and others
in Indian Country are strongly opposed to the elimination of the
Community Health Representatives program and health facilities
construction, as well as other eliminations found in the Request.
The Budget Request proposes a total $10 billion in new funding to
combat the opioid epidemic. Under the proposal, IHS would receive $150
million ``to provide multi-year competitive grants based on need for
opioid abuse prevention, treatment, and recovery support in Indian
Country.'' Considering the disproportionate levels of opioid abuse and
mortality in Tribal communities, a small amount of funding delivered
through competitive grants, while welcome, does not even begin to
scratch the surface. Further, the source of this funding remains
unclear. USET SPF calls upon this Committee and this Congress to
prioritize substantial direct funding to Tribal Nations as it seeks to
address the opioid crisis. Among the direct funding proposals we
support are: S. 2270, the Mitigating METH Act, S. 2545, the Native
Health Access Improvement Act, and S. 2437, the Opioid Response
Enhancement Act.
The Request also proposes to move the Special Diabetes Program for
Indians (SDPI) from mandatory to discretionary spending. When asked for
an explanation on an ``All-Tribes'' call, IHS indicated that all health
extenders are proposed to be moved from mandatory to discretionary.
This proposal has not received any Tribal consultation, in violation of
IHS' & HHS' Tribal consultation policies. From USET SPF's perspective,
this proposal represents the exact opposite of what we are trying to
achieve--which is mandatory funding for all federal Indian programs.
FY 2019 Request for Other Agencies, Operating Divisions, and Line Items
While some may view ``federal Indian programs,'' as limited to
those administered by BIA and IHS, USET SPF maintains that all federal
agencies have a trust responsibility to Tribal Nations. In addition and
as a practical matter, it is important to recognize that Tribal Nations
access funding from nearly every federal agency. Reductions and
eliminations at other agencies and operating divisions, then, would
have significant impacts in Indian Country and further compound cuts at
BIA and IHS. This Administration and Congress must recognize that the
President's Budget Request as whole reflects its commitment to Indian
Country and the trust obligation. While by no means an exhaustive list
of priorities, we would like to highlight funding levels for some
additional agencies, operating divisions, and line items.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
Outside of IHS, Tribal Nations receive a significant amount of
funding from the CDC for public health promotion and surveillance,
disease prevention, vaccinations, and other purposes. As such, the
overall 12 percent cut to CDC is troubling. We are especially opposed
to the proposed elimination of Good Health and Wellness in Indian
Country (GHWIC), a $78 million initiative that started in 2014 and
continues through 2019, supporting the health surveillance and
promotion work of Tribal Nations, Tribal organizations, and Tribal
epidemiology centers (TECs). USET's TEC and 5 subawardees are supported
in part through this initiative. GHWIC interventions focus on reducing
tobacco use and exposure, improving nutrition and physical activity,
increasing support for breastfeeding, increasing health literacy, and
strengthening team-based health care and community-clinical links.
While FY 2019 proposes to be the final year of a 5-year funding cycle,
we expect that participating Tribal Nations will continue to sustain
health promotion efforts at its conclusion.
Medicaid Block Grants and Changes to the Affordable Care Act
The FY 2019 budget request proposes to make major changes to
programs authorized under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act (ACA). Under the Request, Medicaid spending would be replaced with
a block grant to states leading to the elimination of the ACA's
Medicaid expansion and drastic cuts in Medicaid over the next decade.
As this Committee is well aware, Indian Country is universally opposed
to this type of proposal, as it would create barriers to AI/AN Medicaid
access, violating the trust responsibility to provide health care and
resulting in deep cuts in 3rd party revenue to the already chronically
underfunded Indian Health System. In addition, the Request proposes to
eliminate subsidies for the ACA's health insurance marketplace, which
would pose further barriers to health care access and vital 3rd party
dollars.
Administration on Children and Families
The Administration has zeroed out funding for the Rural Community
Facilities line item in the ACF account. The Administration argues that
this program is duplicative and that grantees under this program
continue to receive funding in spite of underperformance. However, this
grant is one of the only sources of funding available to Indian Country
to provide Tribal-specific water and wastewater operator training,
including that provided by USET. When Tribal community members are
trained as operators, the result is operational continuity, cultural
competency, and self-determination. Without this funding, Tribes will
have to turn to state-certified operators who are unlikely to be
members of the community, unlikely to stay in the job for very long,
and do not have knowledge of the unique jurisdictional and legal
framework that applies to Tribal water systems. We urge appropriators
to once again provide funds for this invaluable program.
Department of Justice
USET SPF was pleased to see and strongly supports a 5 percent
Tribal set-aside from the Crime Victims Fund in the Request for the
Department of Justice. In addition, while we are glad to see support
for the Tribal Access to Crime Information Program (TAP) in the
Request, we note that up to $3 million in funding would be sourced from
existing Tribal dollars. Indian Country must not be forced to choose
among critically important Tribal justice programs. TAP funding must be
appropriated separately.
Department of Homeland Security
Despite a responsibility for emergency management and response in
Indian Country, Tribal Nations and Tribal emergency management
organizations have limited access to direct funding from the Department
of Homeland Security (DHS), as the current funding mechanisms require
Tribal Nations and their emergency management organizations to seek
funds through state governments. USET SPF calls upon appropriators to
work with Tribal Nations to to identify and eliminate both procedural
and current eligibility impediments to additional direct DHS funding
for Tribal governments.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
USET SPF also opposes reductions in funding to Tribal Nations found
in the FY 2019 Budget Request for EPA. Although the Administration
continues request increases and a Tribal set aside in the Clean Water
State Revolving Fund program, the Request proposes a nearly $575
million cut to State and Tribal Assistance Grants. While some of this
funding was restored in an addendum, it remains troubling that a number
of line items specific to Tribal Nations were targeted.
Department of Commerce
The Budget requests $9.8 billion for the Department of Commerce, a
$546 million or 6 percent increase from the 2017 enacted level.
However, the Budget would eliminate the Economic Development
Administration, which is a primary source of funding for economic
development activities in Indian Country, including USET's own Economic
Development Department. The Budget also proposes to reduce funding for
the Minority Business Development Agency from $34 million in FY17
($33.769 FY18 CR) to $10 million in FY19, which includes funding and
direct services to Tribal Nations and Native people.
Department of Treasury
USET SPF opposes in the strongest possible terms the elimination of
funding for Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs)
through the CDFI Fund, including the elimination of the Native American
CDFI Assistance (NACA) Program. While this Administration purports to
prioritize the creation jobs and economic opportunities in Indian
Country, elimination of the NACA program would prove otherwise. As USET
works to establish the first Native CDFI serving our entire region, we
urge this Congress to ensure our funding is maintained.
Conclusion
While USET SPF recognizes this Committee's strong, long-standing
commitment to Indian Country, we cannot accept funding for federal
Indian programs that continues to fall far short of fiduciary trust
obligations. This Committee must use its influence to ensure that
Congressional appropriators uphold the fiduciary trust obligation to
Tribal Nations in FY 2019 and beyond. In pursuit of a relationship more
reflective of this obligation, USET SPF urges this Committee, Congress,
and all branches of the federal government to ensure that full funding
for the trust obligation is realized in our lifetimes. USET SPF looks
forward to partnering with the Committee to bring this to fruition.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. McGhee. We will have five-
minute rounds of questioning.
First, for Mr. Tahsuda. There is funding in the budget for
repair of BIE schools, which is good. The 2019 budget request
has $18 billion in the public lands infrastructure funds to
address public lands issues and needed repairs at BIE schools.
Talk to me about how you are going to consult with tribes in
determining which projects are selected, and prioritizing the
needs and so forth for the schools.
Mr. Tahsuda. Thank you, Chairman. We are going through the
process now, as we did with preparing for the budget, of
looking at the priority list for deferred maintenance. From
that, determining what would be priorities as far as adding to
the 2016 list. We already have--actually, let me back up. We
already have one priority list, 2016, which we hope to finish
out first as far as construction of new schools.
Following up on that would be a determination from the
deferred maintenance backlog as to which schools would be more
appropriate to just be replaced. We would consult with the
tribes, obviously, in doing that. But we have a significant
level of information about the condition of the schools and
hopefully, the Congress passes this and we would then be able
to address all these schools over a short period of years,
instead of having to continually add to new priority lists.
The Chairman. In the 114th Congress, I introduced, and we
passed, the Native American Children's Safety Act. In the 2019
budget, there is a proposed cut of $19.4 million for Social
Services programs. My question is, how are you going to be able
to not only enforce that law, but also what impact would that
reduction have on making sure that we are keeping Indian
children safe in their communities, and certainly in foster
homes?
Mr. Tahsuda. Thank you, Chairman. When Congress passed the
Native American Child Safety Act, it didn't specify any
additional funding for that. So for us, it is an unfunded
mandate, which we are working to meet. A lot of the work will
also be on the tribal side of that, and we are in the process
of finalizing guidelines that they will use as far as meeting
the new statute.
And we work with them through the current programs they
have to provide, from their side, to provide the training that
they need. We provide training through our staff as it is now.
This has been part of the process f working through the
consultations, developing the guidelines. We have planned out,
after the guidelines become final, I believe it is June 3rd,
under the statute, we have several months planned of training
with the tribes, so that they will be able to implement these
new guidelines in short order.
But we have to work within the funding that we have for
that.
The Chairman. Mr. Weahkee, the Fiscal Year 2019 budget does
propose $340 million for mental health, alcohol and substance
abuse programs. How would you use this? There is an increase
there. How would you propose to use that? Also, last month our
Committee held a hearing on opioid abuse. How do you propose to
do more to address the opioid crisis?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Chairman Hoeven. I believe our
first step needs to be to sit down and consult with the tribes
on where the priority areas are in both mental health and in
opioids. So our plan would be to initiate consultation to
discuss where the tribal priorities are. We still have
significant issues with suicide, with alcohol, substance abuse,
methamphetamine use, heroin use and the targeted opioid funding
is meant to address prevention, treatment and recovery support
services. That is step one, let's sit down with the tribes and
determine what their priorities are.
The Chairman. Mr. Payment, talk to me for a minute about
the importance of the Small and Needy Tribes program, if you
would.
Mr. Payment. First, I really appreciate Senator Murkowski's
reference to Alaska Natives. Too often they get left behind. I
have made it my personal mission to advocate for them. All
tribes have been in a similar situation with having lack of
resources. So our small and needy tribes, the funding is
proposed to be cut, actually zeroed out in this draft budget.
The President's priority is to zero out the Small and Needy
Tribes proposal.
Tribes that need it the most are the ones that are small
and needy in rural communities. So I don't support that, NCAI
doesn't support that. We stand in unison with our small and
needy tribes in rural communities.
The Chairman. Also, you mentioned several others like
Johnson O'Malley, adult education, some others. Talk to me
about the importance and the effectiveness of those programs.
Mr. Payment. Johnson O'Malley goes back to right after the
enactment of the Indian Reorganization Act as a way of trying
to undo what the Federal Government did with forced
assimilation and boarding schools, and bringing back culture
and opportunities for tribes to program that, so they can bring
back self-esteem and so that people can, our people can exceed
at all levels. Johnson O'Malley is a big part of that, and
adult education is a big part of that, so we can become self-
determined.
In 1974, we passed the Self-Determination Act. It was a
dedication and a pledge to move forward, to undo the past and
to provide for tribes to be able to provide for themselves. So
those are critically important programs.
I would note, there is a real disconnect between the
increases that we see that we are grateful for in the IHS
budget and some of the real serious, and I use the word
draconian, cuts in the BIA side. I know both are not headed up
by tribal leaders yet, and we are looking forward to filling
those positions as soon as possible.
But there are some real serious and alarming cuts coming
out of the BIA. We believe it is because of a lack of
leadership in the Asia position.
The Chairman. Both IHS and BIA are two areas where we push
for more funding, obviously health care and education being so
important.
Mr. Payment. It seems to be registering right now in this
Administration in the IHS portion, but not so much on the BIA
side.
The Chairman. Yes, okay.
Vice Chairman Udall?
Senator Udall. Thank you very much, Chairman Hoeven. As I
said in my opening, the Administration's budget simply does not
reflect Indian Country's priorities. What results is a
``messaging document'' that tells Indian Country their concerns
have fallen on deaf ears. Vice President Payment, NCAI's
testimony really highlights how this Administration hasn't just
ignored Indian Country priorities, but actually cut or
eliminated every single priority funding area. It appears the
Administration's consultation with HHS and the Tribal-Interior
Budget Council was just a check the box exercise.
Vice President Payment, do you agree?
Mr. Payment. I would say that for Interior, yes, I think
that the obligation to proceed with the Tribal-Interior budget
committee process, for which I served as an alternate for the
Midwest Region, was a check the box. When you look at the
sheet, and I really appreciate this graph, because a picture
says a thousand words. You see the priorities that tribes
identify in your graph here. And then you see the cuts, 100
percent cuts to scholarships and adult education, housing
improvement, Johnson O'Malley, small and needy tribes.
Then you see 30 percent cuts. We are losing ground, going
back to the Self-Determination Act. So somehow, with these
consultations of reorganizing the BIA, maybe more attention
should have been paid to listening to tribal leaders and our
needs and trying to propose funding that meets our needs.
Earlier, we heard Mr. Tahsuda saying they are trying to do
with what they have. Well, that is not the job of the trustee.
The trustee is to advocate to meet the needs of the tribes. If
it is not coming out of the trustee, where can it come from?
Thankfully, Congress has a role in this.
Senator Udall. Thank you. The chart you are referring to I
think are the ones also we have up here on the left hand side
of the dais.
The Administration's budget cuts are deep and wide and
almost no area is spared, including infrastructure. It
eliminates Indian Country development block grants, reduces
Indian housing block grants and cuts road maintenance and
funding for important water projects. The Administration
proposes to make up for these cuts through other proposals,
like the Infrastructure fund.
Mr. Tahsuda, it is my understanding that this fund is
supposed to address the $600 million BIE maintenance backlog.
Is that right?
Mr. Tahsuda. Yes, sir. Senator, the fund will address that.
But the proposal is relatively broad, though. I think we would
be happy to work with Congress to expand it. Again, there are a
number of schools that it would be more fiscally responsible to
replace than continue to keep maintenance going on. That would
be something we would appreciate working with Congress on, to
have the authority to do that as well.
Mr. Udall. When we talk about addressing the backlog, the
Administration's proposed fund doesn't address the $4.1 billion
BIE construction backlog, is that correct?
Mr. Tahsuda. I am not sure where that number comes from. We
have the deferred maintenance backlog and we have the remaining
schools on the 2016 priority list.
Senator Udall. That number that I used, Mr. Tahsuda, that
number was given to us by the BIE director at the briefing
where they briefed us. So that is your Interior Department
number. You have proposed here a $600 million BIE maintenance
backlog. But in fact, the actual construction backlog is $4.1
billion, is that correct? That is the number we were given. I
just need a yes or no answer on that.
Mr. Tahsuda. If you wrap that all together with all the
replacement schools, including the ones that are currently on
the list, that is probably close to the number.
Senator Udall. For Vice President Payment, do you support
cutting infrastructure line items and replacing them with this
fund?
Mr. Payment. I support funding the need as identified
through budget priorities, through past testimony, on the
record. It almost feels like a bait and switch. So I don't
support the promise of something else down the road in exchange
for not funding it now. I believe that we have identified the
priorities in past Administrations and in this Administration,
and funding it now, not on the promise that we might fund it
some day."
Senator Udall. Vice President McGhee, what priority areas
would you want this infrastructure fund to include?
Mr. McGhee. The USET tribes have looked at various ways, we
are pleased that there is BIE education money in there and
health facilities money. But we shouldn't have to choose. We
have priorities all across there. So the tribal infrastructure
that we are looking at is physical infrastructure, jobs, public
safety, justice infrastructure, communications and such. There
are many more concerns than just those two that were funded
within this fund. I think it is one of those things that we
shouldn't have to decide between the two. Infrastructure
funding is necessary, but it is not about two programs. It is
about across Indian Country and the Federal obligation to help
us build those infrastructures.
Senator Udall. Thank you very much. I yield back to Senator
Murkowski.
Senator Murkowski. [Presiding.] Thank you. Since I have the
gavel and I am generous and magnanimous, I am turning to
Senator Heitkamp.
STATEMENT OF HON. HEIDI HEITKAMP,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NORTH DAKOTA
Senator Heitkamp. I want to thank my colleagues, Senator
Murkowski, but I also want to greatly thank my colleagues,
Senator Smith and Senator Cortez Masto. I have another
appointment and I of course always have burning questions. I
promise they will be questions, not diatribes.
I want to start with one of my greatest concerns, as you
know, which is public safety. I have had a chance to visit with
a lot of you, addressing the challenges. I understand your
staffing and your challenging needs.
But I don't understand this budget. So in 2016 BIA
submitted a report to Congress estimating that to provide a
minimum, a minimum, base level of public safety and judicial
services to all federally-recognized tribes, it would cost
approximately $2.3 billion. And so currently, BIA has only met
a fraction of that.
If BIA knows that we need additional increased funding, and
that we haven't met that need, to meet baseline, and that is
the words of BIA, are we sending a message to our tribes that
their public safety isn't as important as the public safety of
any other citizen in this Country? We will start with you, Mr.
Tahsuda.
Mr. Tahsuda. Thank you, Senator. Law enforcement is
obviously a very important priority for this Administration. It
is obviously important for those who live on reservation
communities. The number that you cited I think includes a broad
range of situations that exist around Indian Country. As you
know, the jurisdictional map that is Indian Country varies
greatly. And so we have some large land-based reservations----
Senator Heitkamp. Can I just interrupt? I don't have a lot
of time. How can you possibly say you are getting enough to
protect Native women, Native children and Native people when
you are actually looking at almost a decrease in public safety?
Mr. Tahsuda. Well, we are focusing on the----
Senator Heitkamp. No, these numbers are yours.
Mr. Tahsuda. Yes.
Senator Heitkamp. Two point three billion, that is your
number, that is BIA's number. So if that is your number for
baseline support, then why isn't that in the budget? Why isn't
that number the request for the budget? Because the biggest
challenge that I have in my State is public safety. I just
talked to the police chief of Belcourt. He is begging, begging
for help. I have people all over North Dakota in Indian Country
begging for help.
I need you guys to be the advocates. I need you guys to
say, we are going to do the minimal amount that we need to
provide public safety, and that includes places where people
can be incarcerated.
So I don't want to hear about how it can't get done. I want
to hear how you are advocating. I think Mr. Payment made a
great point, which is, you are the trustee. You should be the
advocate. I get that you may not want to fund housing, or you
may not want to fund education, but fundamentally, keeping
people safe has to be the highest priority. Security has to be
the highest priority. Without that, we don't have the
opportunity for anything else.
And we need an advocate. Can you promise me, and I know
this is tough, we need to take it back to the Secretary, we
need to take it back to Mulvaney. I have talked to the Attorney
General, Jeff Sessions, about this. This cannot get ignored.
The Department of Justice needs to step up, BIA needs to step
up if we are going to protect women and children in Indian
Country.
And if we are not willing to step up, then let's just admit
that they are second class citizens. They aren't entitled to
the same protection that people in this Country are entitled
to.
Can you say you are going to take our concerns back?
Mr. Tahsuda. I will take your concerns back. They are part
of the discussion that we have. And again, we are trying to
focus on, and I can't speak to what happened before I came to
the Department, but----
Senator Heitkamp. Do you agree, do you personally agree
with the $2.3 billion?
Mr. Tahsuda. I would have to go back, I am not sure where
that number came from. I know there were prior efforts to put
funding into area where we don't have clear law enforcement
jurisdiction. I am not sure if that is part of what was in that
number. But we also have core responsibilities, including core
jurisdictional responsibilities.
Senator Heitkamp. If you don't agree with that number, can
you get me the number that you think? Can you give me a needs
assessment, talking to, in consultation with all the other
tribes on what it is going to take to get basic law enforcement
services in Indian Country in this Country?
Mr. Tahsuda. Well, I think our budget reflects two goals,
one of which is to strengthen law enforcement in the areas
where we have clear jurisdiction, and we are, as you know, on
several of your reservations, we don't have the sufficient
force there to do that. That is something we are working
strongly on, as you suggested in our phone call the other day.
We are turning over the rock the fifth time in certain matters.
Part of this is training and getting more officers through our
system.
So it is not a simple answer of just saying, throw more
money at it. It is trying to analyze how we are doing the job
most efficiently and are we putting those resources to the best
use. That is what we are trying to do.
Senator Heitkamp. If you can just indulge me, one more
question. Would you agree that right today, in North Dakota,
which is what I know the most about, we have inadequate,
grossly inadequate law enforcement services in Indian Country?
Mr. Tahsuda. I think we have some difficulties, I will
admit. It is a challenging environment. Again, we struggle to
get people through the system and to identify where they can
go, where they will be most effective. So it is also, in Indian
Country, a march. We have a force that is probably less than
most other law enforcement agencies deal with, and we have the
greater territories to cover. More scarce populations. So that
is a factor that --
Senator Heitkamp. And some of the highest rates of violent
crime in this Country.
Mr. Tahsuda. Yes.
Senator Heitkamp. The highest rates of drug use.
Mr. Tahsuda. Yes.
Senator Heitkamp. The highest rates of criminality and the
lowest rates of protection by law enforcement. That is what I
see in my State. So we have to fix this, and we need an
advocate in your job. Thank you.
Mr. Tahsuda. Toward that end, Senator, we have in the
budget funding for an additional 17 drug enforcement officers.
I hope that we get support for that.
Senator Heitkamp. [Remark off microphone.]
Mr. Tahsuda. Yes. Yes, they work in concert with other drug
enforcement task forces.
Senator Heitkamp. I could use 17 just in North Dakota.
Senator Murkowski. Well, and not to pile on here, but it is
one thing to have drug enforcement agents. But if you have
nobody that is able to follow through with the prosecution,
what happens in my State, because we don't have sufficient law
enforcement, because we do not have the protection and public
safety that Senator Heitkamp has been talking about, the bad
guys come in and get away with bloody murder because they can,
because we don't have the resources to follow through with the
protection.
I am going to turn to Senator Smith, because I know that
she also has to go to another hearing.
STATEMENT OF HON. TINA SMITH,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MINNESOTA
Senator Smith. Thank you very much, Chair Murkowski. I
would just note that I am hearing on both sides of the aisle
here a sense of real concern about the budget levels and this
overall budget. I am not going to go down that path again as
everyone else has.
Though I really have to say, I note with great interest the
message that Vice President Payment and Vice President McGhee
bring, which is that this is not just a question of priorities
and scarce resources. This is a question of the solemn trust
and obligation and agreement between the United States and our
tribal nations. I think that is the message that I have here,
not a message document that is a budget. So I want to say I
really appreciate that, very much appreciate that.
But I want to ask about something actually that Senator
Murkowski brought up at the beginning. I would like to go back
to the Special Diabetes Program funding. This is something of
great interest to me because I am interested in taking this
model, which I understand has been so successful, and applying
it to the terrible challenges that we have with opioid and
treatment and recovery in Indian Country. I am working with
members of this Committee to develop legislation that would
create a special behavioral health program, so that tribes can
access the resources that they need, and using that diabetes
program as a model for that strategy, so that we can have good,
strong, locally-driven, culturally-specific and results and
evidence-based programs.
So my question to you is, can you tell us, I am kind of
looking at you, Vice President Payment, but anybody can
respond. We are concerned, of course, about this shift from
mandatory to discretionary funding. Could either of you just
give me a sense of what impact that would have? What would be
different if we made that shift?
Mr. Payment. First of all, earlier, so we get glows and
grows, and I talked very favorably about some of the proposed
increases in IHS. So it is not an attack on IHS. Four years ago
I testified in this Committee on the need to make Special
Diabetes permanently reauthorized, mandatory and advanced
appropriations for our health services. So we prepaid health,
the health portion of health, education and social welfare is
embodied in the treaties. And we prepaid that with our land.
So the Special Diabetes is one of the best-ranked,
evaluated programs in terms of its return on investment, mainly
because it empowers people to take care of their own health and
acknowledge the types of statistics and data they should be
looking at. So it is one of the very best programs that we have
seen.
I don't support means testing for Indian programs and
services, but I would say that Special Diabetes would meet
anybody's means test.
In looking at the budget, Interior and IHS, it is
inconsistent. There is almost a schizophrenic approach to
proposing this budget. So going backward in time, making it
from mandatory to discretionary, is not consistent with tribal
leaders. I said previously on HHS Secretary Tribal Advisory, it
is something we have been advising this Administration and the
past Administration that it has needed to be mandatory and
advance appropriated.
So I would like to hear how that changed and like to hear
if tribal leaders have expressed at the tribal HHS Secretary
Advisory Council if something has changed, or what
fundamentally changed at IHS that they have a different
position on it now. It is not what tribes want.
Senator Smith. Would either of you like to respond to that
and help me understand why there would be a shift from
mandatory to discretionary?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator Smith, I think that is in
our ball park.
In the Special Diabetes Program for Indians, it is the only
mandatory line that we have within the Indian Health Service
budget. It is part of a greater Administration decision to move
a number of different programs from the mandatory to
discretionary side of the budget. So it is an Administration
policy decision.
Senator Smith. Fundamentally, that would probably relate in
less resources for the Special Diabetes Program, yes?
Mr. Weahkee. The Administration supports the amount, which
is $150 million. I think that in terms of how this would impact
programming, there are concerns with funding level, if it goes
into discretionary, impacts from continuing resolutions,
planning, ability to plan for grants. These were some of the
things that tribal leaders have expressed to me as concerns.
But the movement would enable the Administration to make
choices about their priorities and putting the dollars into
their area of highest priority.
Senator Smith. I see I am out of time. I want to thank you
for your responses, but I am not convinced that this is a good
idea, to make a move from mandatory to discretionary. It
strikes me that it will end up in less support for something we
know works very well.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Smith.
Mr. Weahkee, you mentioned that one of the reasons behind
this move from mandatory to discretionary was that you have
effectively seen that the program has been working, that you
are seeing a leveling of the diabetes. I have asked to get some
better statistics within the Alaska Native community. Because
it is my understanding that we are still faced with very, very
serious issues as it relates to diabetes, both Type I and Type
II.
So this is the first I have heard that we are actually
getting to a better place. So if you have any information that
you can share with us, I would certainly appreciate that.
I wanted to ask a question of you, Mr. Tahsuda. This
relates to housing. Several of us mentioned the reduction in
the BIA Housing Improvement Program, the HIP program. I don't
think that we are unique in Alaska when it comes to the
situation of housing. We just completed a statewide housing
assessment and the percentage of overcrowded homes is twice the
national average. There are more than 79,000 households that
spend more than 30 percent of their income on housing,
approximately 14,600 homes that are energy-inefficient, meaning
they are burdened with high energy costs.
We then get the health impact study back that shows us what
is happening with a deteriorating level of health within
crowded households. When you have 15 people in a two-bedroom
home, the spread of disease. When you have the example that I
was using is, somebody is doing small engine repair in the
middle of the house because it is winter time and you need to
be inside, you have chemicals, you have issues that are in your
air that is just wrong and unhealthy.
The need is just so critical. The need, everywhere that I
go, in every community, is almost staggering in some places.
So we keep hearing the benefits of this program. And yet we
zero it out within this particular budget. What is the logic
here?
Mr. Tahsuda. Thank you, Senator. One of the efforts that we
have made in the Department in this Administration is to focus
on our core responsibilities, core operations first and
identify how we can best meet those.
I think it is no secret that the Bureau of Indian Affairs
has struggled over the years in adequately meeting even its
core responsibilities. That is something we are committed to.
Things like housing programs, there is a whole department
that is dedicated to that. For us to put resources into
something that is a very small part of our programs, but not be
focused on our core operations is something that we have
identified that we need to do better. We are looking at doing
that, both through the budget and how we administer the
program.
Senator Murkowski. And I would challenge you on this. I
take it back to a trip that I took with a Secretary of
Education, this was Rod Paige back in the Bush days. He was up
in the State to look specifically to education. He came out in
a very rural, very remote place called Gambell, Alaska, out on
St. Lawrence Island in the middle of the Bering Sea. He looked
around and realized that, if I don't have housing for teachers,
I can't keep a teacher in a school, which means the kids can't
get educated. If I don't have adequate housing, I have disease,
I have issues that relate to health that increases my costs
here. If I don't have adequate housing--we moved forward on a
housing initiative a dozen years ago. But it was multi-agency,
it was multi-department. Because everything was so inextricably
tied back to adequate housing.
SO I hear what you are saying about core functions. I don't
disagree. But I also think that you need to look outside of the
silos, all of you, when we are thinking about how we provide
for the health, safety and well-being. And Admiral, you say you
want, this budget provides for the physical, the mental, the
spiritual health to the highest level. Well, think about it as
it encompasses so many different aspects.
Very quickly, because my time is just about out, and this
is to you, Rear Admiral, YKHC is building a facility in Bethel.
You know this is going to require a large staffing package.
Your budget includes the staffing package for Fiscal Year 2019
at about $60 million.
The reason I am asking this question is because the Fiscal
Year 2018 initial budget request was way off in its estimate of
total need. You originally requested $20 million, but the need
was roughly $60 million. As Chair of that Interior
Appropriations Committee, we are paying pretty close attention
to that. So I am asking for the assurance that the amount you
are requesting for Fiscal Year 2019, including the funds that
YKHC is looking for, fully meets the staffing needs for the
facilities that you anticipate to open in Fiscal Year 2019?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator, and yes, ma'am, these
numbers are updated, assuming there are no slips in opening
dates, beneficial occupancy dates. Those numbers are projected
to meet all the needs for staffing currently.
Senator Murkowski. We sure hope you are right on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. [Presiding.] Thank you, Senator Murkowski,
and thank you for presiding. I appreciate it.
Senator Cortez Masto.
STATEMENT OF HON. CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NEVADA
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. Let me follow up on some
of the concerns with affordable housing. In Nevada, this is a
crisis. It is happening in Nevada in not only our urban but
rural areas and our tribal communities as well. Obviously, it
is an issue across the Country.
One of my primary concerns, however, is also with the HUD
VASH vouchers. Mr. Tahsuda, and I will ask Mr. Payment as well.
The President's budget proposes a nearly 50 percent cut to the
HUD VASH vouchers for Native Americans, to $3 million. Yet in
2015 alone, Nevada received HUD VASH vouchers worth more than
$2 million. Can you please tell me the potential impact these
cuts would have on our veterans and your concerns or thoughts
on how you are going to address it?
Mr. Payment, I don't know if you would like to go first.
Mr. Payment. Sure. Again, I earlier talked about this
inconsistency, or almost schizophrenic approach to proposing a
Federal budget. We hear a lot from the Administration about the
needs and concerns of our veterans. We serve the Nation at the
highest rate of any racial-ethnic population, as part of our
warrior tradition. As such, we have advocated for HUD VASH so
that we can address those needs in our tribal communities. Our
veterans are equal veterans as everybody else. This program is
critically needed. We fought for it, we won it in the
reauthorization of NAHASDA if that ever happens.
So I do think it is a retreat from the commitment to our
veterans, for sure.
Senator Cortez Masto. Mr. Tahsuda?
Mr. Tahsuda. That is not a program that is part of our
portfolio.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. So let me ask you this,
then. There are also concerns about Native American housing,
the block grants by $54 million. The concerns that I have there
that I am hearing from this Administration. Again, affordable
housing across this Country, this is something that we have
seen, whether it is workforce housing or needs in our tribal
communities. I don't understand how we are putting forth a
budget that is going to cut any type of needs in our community.
Let me move on, because I know something, Mr. Tahsuda, that
is in your wheelhouse. I constantly hear, but I have not seen
any discussion, but I heard a little bit about this from Mr.
McGhee, which is, the DOI reorganization effort.
One thing I do know about it is BIA budget includes
$900,000 to support the DOI reorganization effort. But what I
just heard from, I believe it was either Mr. McGhee or Mr.
Payment, the tribal communities have not been brought into the
discussion on what this looks like. I know I have not, and many
people in my community have concerns about the reorganization
and its impact.
Can you enlighten me? What is the reorganization? What is
the $900,000 used to support it? What are we looking at?
Mr. Tahsuda. Thank you, Senator. The reorganization is
department-wide. It would be the largest reorganization of the
department at least since Teddy Roosevelt was President. Our
part in that obviously has to do with the relationship with the
tribes and sort of how we geographically administer our
responsibilities to them.
So the Secretary is committed from day one that the tribes
would be consulted with, and they would not only get to look at
the maps that everybody has but we will discuss with them how -
Senator Cortez Masto. Have you consulted with them yet?
Mr. Tahsuda. We have not.
Senator Cortez Masto. Do you intend to?
Mr. Tahsuda. We do. In fact we are finalizing plans to go
out in a few months and start this process. This is not
something that happens overnight. We wanted to proceed sort of
carefully.
We also have been talking internally with our regional
directors, who work very closely with the tribal leaders in
their regions to try to identify some things that would be good
to discuss at a consultation. So that will be prepared and be
going out in a few weeks through the tribal leaders with some
suggested dates and locations to do that consultation.
The $900,000 is in some ways a placeholder. One of the
concepts in the reorganization is unified regions where you
could have some common leadership in a region across the
bureaus that are in that region. To do that requires little bit
of planning.
Senator Cortez Masto. Are these management areas that I
hear about, common management areas?
Mr. Tahsuda. Yes, that is one way to describe them. But it
would be really to get better decision-making when you have
different bureaus that weigh in on a particular matter that is
before the Department. We often have that, where you have BLM
land next to a tribal reservation or something, we have to do.
So the idea is that that would be a more efficient way to
reach the decision-making on behalf of everybody.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. I know my time is about
up. Let me just add one additional thing. I was just out at a
Moapa Indian reservation in Southern Nevada. Same thing,
concerns that I hear that I understand my colleagues talked
about were the cuts to our law enforcement and basic law
enforcement needs in our tribal communities. I cannot think of
better use of this money than going into more money for victims
of crime, more money for law enforcement, more money for the
needs of our tribal communities who quite often are left behind
when it comes to their law enforcement needs.
So I am hoping that as we look at this and we are looking
at putting money back into this that the opportunity to
continue to support our tribal communities, our women and our
children and victims and law enforcement, is something that the
agencies are going to focus on as well. So thank you. I know my
time is up.
The Chairman. Vice Chairman, do you have any further
questions for the witness?
Senator Udall. Yes, since we are on the second round, and
we have Senator Daines here. We have to take care of him on the
first round, right?
The Chairman. Yes, Senator Daines, pardon me. I am sorry.
Take six minutes.
[Laughter.]
STATEMENT OF HON. STEVE DAINES,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MONTANA
Senator Daines. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Udall. I was certainly very pleased last month when Secretary
Zinke visited the Blackfeet Reservation to authorize the first
transfer of funds for the Blackfeet Water Rights Settlement. It
was a long time coming. I worked with Secretary Zinke back when
he was Congressman Zinke, when he was in the House, I was in
the Senate. We got that across the finish line.
As you know, though, in order for the settlement to be
effective, all funds must be appropriated by the 2025 deadline.
Unfortunately, we won't get there on the current rate of
funding proposed in the President's budget. To get back on
track, over $50 million must be appropriated for the settlement
each year.
Mr. Tahsuda, will the Department of Interior work with me
to secure as much funding as possible to implement the
settlement so it can become enforceable by the 2025 deadline?
Mr. Tahsuda. Thank you, Senator. Yes, implementation of the
Blackfeet Water Settlement is a high priority for the
Secretary. As you know, and to be supportive of your efforts in
any way that we can to make sure that access to those
settlements funds are appropriated in a timely fashion.
We generally do that across the board, because you know we
have statutory deadlines like that that come up with various
water settlements as they come up. We work to try to meet
those.
Senator Daines. Can I also get your commitment to propose
more funding for the settlement in both the Bureau of
Reclamation and Bureau of Indian Affairs accounts in future
budget requests, to ensure the settlement is implemented in a
timely manner?
Mr. Tahsuda. Well, Bureau of Rec is a little out of my
league, but I will certainly bring that back to the Secretary.
I know we have a commitment from our Bureau, at least, in
working on that. I am sure Bureau of Rec will be interested in
working on that as well.
Senator Daines. I appreciate it. It is going to take a team
effort, combined effort of the Administration, as well as the
Montana Congressional delegation, to finally see this
settlement put into action. Thanks for your help on that.
I would like to turn now to the physical maintenance needs
in a certain school in the Northern Cheyenne Tribal
Reservation, and that is in Busby, Montana. Specifically, it
has rusty pipes, a dysfunctional kitchen where they can't cook
the kids' food, the asbestos in the building. And because of it
all, the low morale among the students and teachers.
And it really begs the question, how can we expect Native
students to succeed if we can't create the most basic
environment that promotes learning?
My question is, Mr. Tahsuda, will the Department support a
legislative proposal consistent with the proposed Public Lands
Infrastructure Fund in the President's budget request to
support the repair and replacement of BIE schools that are in
poor condition?
Mr. Tahsuda. Thank you, Senator. Yes, I think we are happy
to work with Congress to determine the best way to implement
that. As I mentioned earlier, we have the $634 million backlog
on deferred maintenance. So in the best fiscally responsible
manner, it would probably be appropriate to look at some of
those schools and replace them rather than keep up with
deferred maintenance, which ends up being more expensive than
having a new school facility.
So certainly, we are happy to work with you and the
Chairman and Vice Chairman and the Congress to give us the
authority we need to address the schools in the best way
possible. The Secretary cares very much about this. As you
know, he has been to several tribal schools now. It is a high
priority.
Senator Daines. Yes. What are the needs the Department sees
as most pressing as you look across the BIA system? I know you
have mentioned 2016 and other lists in response to Chairman
Hoeven. But I am looking for more detail.
Mr. Tahsuda. For the BIE system?
Senator Daines. Right.
Mr. Tahsuda. Clearly, infrastructure is the most pressing.
But we also have a need to address teacher recruitment,
infrastructure for teachers. As you know, many of the schools
are in very rural locations. Getting good, qualified teachers
to go to those locations often requires having housing
available for them as well. So being able to provide the
facilities for the kids, facilities for the teachers.
And we have some internal ideas about how we can do a
better job of recruiting teachers as well. I don't think
historically the BIE has been able, through its own internal
policies, has been able to do the best job of recruiting the
teachers that we need.
Senator Daines. Lastly, I am going to take the Chairman up
on this extra minute, the BIA proposed budget also includes
$2.5 million to address the opioid crisis in Indian Country. In
Montana, and among Montana's Indian tribes, meth is actually
more of our issue. They are both a problem; meth is the bigger
problem. The Fort Belknap Indian Community, for example, is in
a state of emergency over the meth epidemic. In fact, the Crow
Tribe saw a meth-fueled triple homicide just last summer.
Mr. Tahsuda, will this funding also be used to combat the
meth crisis?
Mr. Tahsuda. Thank you, Senator, are you talking about the
$2.5 million?
Senator Daines. Yes. So along with the opioid questions,
will you also address the meth issue?
Mr. Tahsuda. Yes, Senator. I would say, yes, we will be.
Senator, as you know, the drugs don't separate themselves out
when they come in. They often come in together. And in fact, I
don't know if you saw earlier today, but the Secretary, along
with the White House, made an announcement last week, we ran a
major interdiction effort in New Mexico. In addition to other
drugs, 48 pounds of meth was part of the confiscation.
So certainly, while you call it an opioid effort, our
attention is to address the drug epidemic in general on the
reservations, particularly with our law enforcement resources.
Senator Daines. Thank you very much. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Vice Chairman Udall?
Senator Udall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Tribes are disproportionately impacted by rapidly-changing
climates. I see that in New Mexico with my tribes. The tribes,
I really feel, in many cases, on some of my visits, the tribes
are at ground zero for things like drought, wildfires, fishery
disasters. These things are happening all across the United
States.
So given that tribes play a vital role in adapting to
climate change, and given that 95 million acres of land managed
either by tribes or for the benefit of tribes by the United
States, and mind you, that is 11 million more acres than the
entire National Park Service manages, Mr. Tahsuda, given the
important role tribes can play in addressing climate change,
why did Interior eliminate the Tribal Climate Resilience
Program?
Mr. Tahsuda. Thank you, Vice Chair. Again, the primary
thrust of the budget, the underlying theme is focusing on our
core operations, core priorities.
Senator Udall. This is a core priority for tribes.
Mr. Tahsuda. What is a core priority, I think, Senator, is
addressing the impacts. We have, we follow the science and the
law when it comes to these matters. We have a responsibility to
address the situation on the ground. We provide resources to
the tribes to do that. We provide them through, for grazing
lands, we have, again, we try to help the tribes address those.
In most instances, they are best addressed, they are in the
best position to identify those impacts. Our job really is to
assist them in addressing those. That is what we see as one of
our core, not just a core priority but a trust responsibility.
Senator Udall. I can just tell you from the things that I
see on the ground in New Mexico, the resources are not there in
any of the programs. This is severely, severely, underfunded.
So eliminating a program like this Tribal Climate Resilience
Program really hits to the heart of what tribes are trying to
do to survive and continue their way of life.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recently
reported that the rate of Hepatitis C infection tripled between
2010 and 2015, mostly due to the use of needles by a growing
number of drug users. These secondary health complications of
substance abuse, things like increased rates of bloodborne
infectious disease and of neonatal abstinence syndrome can
prove just as costly to treat and just as deadly for many
Native communities.
Mr. Weahkee, does IHS have any data on changing numbers of
IHS patients presenting with opioid use-related bloodborne
infectious diseases like Hepatitis C and HIV-AIDS, or house
statistics on rates of neonatal abstinence syndrome?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator Udall, for the question.
With regard to Hepatitis C infection rates, we know nationally
that approximately one in 30 baby boomers is infected. Our
initial data tells us that we have approximately 34,000
patients in Indian Country infected with Hepatitis C. We know
it is very costly to treat.
We are just now beginning to look at the tie between opioid
use and rates of Hepatitis C and HIV-AIDS. So we are gathering
the body of evidence to be able to come back and provide you
with more finite information.
Senator Udall. Please do that and give us a very full
answer in the record. We would really appreciate that.
Vice Chairman McGhee, do you believe that IHS and other
agencies at HHS are requesting enough funding resources to deal
with these related health complications in tribal communities
we were just talking about?
Mr. McGhee. Even though we have had some increases, of
course those increases are not enough. We talked about the
increases, but yet we have also eliminated certain programs. We
eliminated the Community Health program, that is a program that
is vital to our Tribe, we use that program a lot. And if we are
looking at the opioid crisis, if we are looking at these drug
epidemics, like the meth problem that Senator Daines was
talking about, there are various programs that all could work
together. The other one is the Health Education Program that
was eliminated, too.
All these programs could work together for us to determine
what the issues are and how can we impact those issues. We need
to look at the possibility of saying, okay, these programs are
needed. We appreciate the increase that were made, but these
programs that were eliminated are needed because they were
doing an effective job by going into the community and
addressing the problems and seeing what they are.
So I think, as Senator Murkowski related, all these things
are connected. When you look at all of things, you have to look
at the holistic approach to the issues that are impacting
tribal nations, especially when it comes to health care. And it
is holistic. We cannot look at one without looking at the other
one.
I think this goes back to, she was talking about housing
needs, she was talking about infrastructure needs. All of these
have an impact, so when there is a cut or elimination of a
program, you are impacting the tribes.
Senator Udall. Vice President Payment, do you have any
thoughts on this same issue?
Mr. Payment. We were talking about the reductions and the
incidence of Hepatitis C. I was just thinking, I am from a
large family; I have three brothers that have Hepatitis C and
two are deceased. So I think the urgency might be lost in the
statistics a little bit.
Again, the budget proposal is good. So in some ways, there
is a term in public policy called satisfice. And satisficing,
because it is better than what we have had. But if you look at
the budget formulation and self-governance committees and
direct service tribes' groups and the advocacy of what is
actually needed to fulfill the trust responsibility. We are
only scratching the surface.
So certainly, any kind of cuts to programs and services
that have demonstrated their utility is not warranted and not
supported by tribal Indian Country.
Senator Udall. Thank you. I want to express my thanks to
the entire panel today. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I would also like to express my thanks to all
of you for being here today.
With that, if there are no more questions, then we will
conclude the hearing. The hearing record will be open for two
weeks and members can submit additional questions in writing.
We would ask that you respond to them as promptly as you can.
With that, again, thank you, and we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:22 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
Prepared Statement of Ahniwake Rose, Executive Director, National
Indian Education Association (NIEA)
Dear Chairman Hoeven:
On behalf of the National Indian Education Association (NIEA), I
respectfully submit the following comments in response to the
President's Fiscal Year (FY) 2019 Budget Request for programs that
impact Native students.
NIEA is the most inclusive national organization advocating for
improved educational opportunities for American Indian, Alaska Native,
and Native Hawaiian students. Our mission centers on ensuring that
Native students have access to a high-quality academic and cultural
education, a goal that is only possible if Congress upholds the federal
trust responsibility to tribes.
The Federal Trust Relationship
Congress has a federal trust responsibility for the education of
Native students. Established through treaties, federal law, and U.S.
Supreme Court decisions, the federal government's trust responsibility
to tribes includes the obligation to provide parity in access and equal
resources to all American Indian and Alaska Native students, regardless
of where they attend school. The President's Budget Request for FY 2019
represents a rupture in the federal trust responsibility, an obligation
shared between the Congress and the Administration for federally-
recognized tribes.
The President's FY 2019 Budget for Native Education Programs
NIEA has significant concerns regarding the proposed budgets for
the Department of Interior and the Bureau of Indian Education (BIE) as
well as the Department of Education (DoED). Overall, the President's
Budget for FY 2019 proposed a 19 percent cut to the BIE and a five (5)
percent cut to the DoED. These cuts disproportionately impact Native
students, reducing tribal funding for resources and programs that
support college, career, and community readiness.
The Administration's budget reflects steep cuts of over $172
million in funding for BIE education programs and $165 million for BIE
school construction and facilities improvement. Severe cuts and
elimination of key programs, including the Johnson-O'Malley program,
ISEP formula funds, post-secondary scholarships, early childhood
education, and juvenile justice detention centers, represent a failure
to uphold the BIE's fiduciary responsibility through the federal trust
relationship.
Despite estimates of over $1.3 billion in need for construction at
Bureau funded schools, the President's Budget completely eliminates
funding for school and education facilities construction. Instead, the
budget proposes $72.8 million to repair existing schools, which
currently have a maintenance backlog of over $640 million. Such steep
cuts to funding for safe and healthy classrooms for Native students
amount to extreme neglect of Native students and families.
Similarly, the President's Budget for FY 2019 fails the 92 percent
of Native students in public schools by cutting over $602 million from
programs that impact Native students. The proposed budget slashes and
eliminates critical education programs in Native communities, including
Title VI Indian Education Grants, Native Hawaiian and Alaska Native
education programs, Tribal Colleges and Universities, Impact Aid, and
Title I.
The BIE and DoED must uphold their constitutional obligations to
tribal nations by fully funding programs that serve the unique academic
and cultural needs of Native students. Tribes and Native communities
must have access to the resources necessary for Native students to
engage and thrive in the classroom and beyond. The following funding
levels for key federal education programs would promote Native student
success in the classroom and beyond:
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
interior--environment appropriations bill
Education Construction--Provide $430 million for Bureau of Indian
Education (BIE) school construction and repair. An increase of $191.7
million above FY 2018 enacted.
This funding category includes school construction,
facilities improvement and repair, and replacement school
construction.
The Department of the Interior's Office of Inspector General
published in September of 2016, an evaluation titled
``Condition of Indian School Facilities,'' estimated the cost
of fixing the dilapidated BIE schools, concluding that more
than $430 million would be needed to fix the problems already
identified.
Broadband Internet Access--Provide $40 million to extend broadband
Internet access. An increase of $21.15 million above FY 2018 enacted.
Less than ten percent of Indian Country has access to
broadband Internet technology and 60 percent of BIE schools do
not have adequate digital broadband access, or computer access,
to be aligned with college and career readiness standards.
Expand e-rate for BIE schools, Native majority schools and
Tribal Colleges and Universities.
Johnson O'Malley--Provide $42 million for full funding. An increase
of $27.1 million above FY 2018 enacted.
The Johnson O'Malley program has provided grants to
supplement basic student needs by assisting with the unique
academic and cultural needs of Native students since 1934.
The federal government allocated $125 per student in JOM
funding in 1995. Current funds (FY 2017) provide less than
$63.80 per student, which are often the only source through
which Native students--including those in public schools--can
engage in basic education activities.
Juvenile Detention Education--Provide $620,000 for juvenile
detention education in BIA-funded facilities. An increase of $120,000
above FY 2018 enacted.
This essential funding is used to provide educational
services to detained and incarcerated youth at 24 BIA-funded
juvenile detention facilities.
One of the best methods to rehabilitate individuals is
through education and eliminating this program creates
additional costs by increasing the rate of criminal recidivism.
Student Transportation--Provide $73 million for student
transportation in the BIE system. An increase of $16 million above FY
2018 enacted.
BIE schools incur disproportionately high costs in
transporting Native students to and from school due to the
often-rural location of BIE facilities.
These high costs often lead to funding shortfalls, which
then must either go unpaid or funded by diverting funds from
other education programs.
Tribal Grant Support Costs--Provide $90 million for tribal grant
support costs for tribally-operated schools. An increase of $9 million
above FY 2018 enacted levels.
Tribal Grant Support Costs fund the administrative costs of
existing tribally-operated schools.
Full funding is critical as these funds help tribes expand
self-governance and tribal control over education programs.
Schools must divert critical teaching and learning funding to
cover any shortfalls in operational costs.
Facilities Operations--Provide $109 million for BIE facilities
operations. An increase of $42.4 million above FY 2018 enacted.
BIE schools use this funding for costs such as electricity,
heating fuels, communications, GSA vehicle rentals, custodial
services, and other vital operating expenses.
For years, schools have only received roughly 50 percent of
funding needed for these expenses. This shortfall is
unacceptable as costs continue to rise for vital services.
Facilities Maintenance--Provide $76 million for BIE facilities
maintenance. An increase of $16.5 million above FY 2018 enacted.
BIE schools use this funding for the preventative and
routine upkeep, as well as for unscheduled maintenance of
school buildings, grounds, and utility systems.
Underfunding of maintenance continues to be an issue as
buildings are in poor conditions and cannot maintain proper
standards.
Indian School Equalization Program (ISEP)--Provide $431 million for
the Indian School Equalization Program. An increase of $24 million
above FY 2018 enacted.
These funds provide the core budget account for BIE
elementary and secondary schools by covering teacher salaries,
aides, principals, and other personnel.
ISEP funds are often reallocated to cover the program cuts
in other areas of education.
ISEP must have adequate funding to ensure all program needs
are fulfilled and must not be reduced to provide funds for new
initiatives that have not been vetted by tribes.
Bureau of Indian Education Immersion Demonstration Grants--Provide
$5 million for BIE immersion programs. An increase of $3 million above
FY 2018 enacted.
According to UNESCO, 74 Native languages stand to disappear
in the next decade, with only 20 Native languages being spoken
by 2050.
Providing Immersion Demonstration Grant funds protects the
cultural and linguistic heritage of Native students in
education systems by providing Native students immersion
learning in order to strengthen language, improve academic
outcomes, and become future leaders of their tribes.
Tribal Education Agencies/Departments--Provide $10 million to fund
Tribal Education Agencies/Departments. An increase of $7.5 million
above FY 2018 enacted.
This funding assists Tribal Education Agencies (TEAs), who
are uniquely situated at the local level to implement
innovative education programs that improve Native education.
TEAs would use this much-needed funding to develop academic
standards, assess student progress, and create math and science
programs that require high academic standards for students in
tribal, public, and BIE schools.
Institute of American Indian Arts (IAIA) and Center for Lifelong
Education--Provide $9.9 million to the Center & Museum under the
American Indian, Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian Culture and Art
Development Act. Level funding with FY 2018.
IAIA is the only fine arts institution that awards bachelor
and master degrees devoted to the study of contemporary Native
American and Alaska Native arts.
IAIA has graduated more than 3,800 students from federally-
recognized tribes and beyond. Of the $16.9 million requested,
provide $11.8 million.
Haskell Indian Nations University (HINU) and Southwestern Indian
Polytechnic (SIPI)--Provide $25.0 million to HINU and SIPI under the
Snyder Act. An increase of $6.7 million above FY 2018 enacted.
These institutions are federally chartered and funded
separately from the other tribal higher education institutions
and require additional funding considerations.
Of the $37.8 million requested, a one-time payment of $14.8
million is needed to forward fund these institutions, so that
they can receive their institutional operating funds on an
academic calendar (July 1), rather than the federal fiscal year
(October 1).
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
labor, health and human services and education appropriations bill
ESSA Title I, Part A: Local Education Agency Grants--Provide $20
billion for Title I, Part A. An increase of $4.2 billion above FY 2018
enacted.
Title I of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) provides
critical financial assistance to local educational agencies and
schools with high percentages of children from low- income
families that ensure all children meet challenging state
academic standards.
ESSA's appropriation for FY2018 is $15.5 billion. However,
in order to counter annual inflation and sequestration, a
drastic increase in funding is needed to meet the needs of
Native students and students from low-income families.
ESSA Title VI: Indian Education Formula Grants--Provide $198
million for Title VI, Part A. An increase of $92.7 million above FY
2018 enacted. Authorized funding for Title VI, Part A for FY2017 is
$105.3 million. Increases are needed as this critical grant funding is
designed to supplement the regular school program and assist Native
students so they have the opportunity to achieve the same educational
standards and attain parity with their non-Native peers.
Title VI funds support early-childhood and family programs,
academic enrichment programs, curriculum development,
professional development, and culturally-related activities.
As Native students lag far behind their non-Native peers in
educational achievement, increased funding is necessary to
address this substantial gap.
ESSA Title VI, Part A, Subpart 2: Special Programs and Projects to
Improve Educational Opportunities for Indian Children--Provide $67.9
million for Title VI, Part A, Subpart 2: Special Programs and Projects
to Improve Educational Opportunities for Indian Children.
ED's Native Youth Community Projects initiative provides
better comprehensive, community-driven strategies to improve
college and career-readiness of Native youth.
ESSA Title VI, Part A, Subpart 3: Language Immersion and National
Activities--Provide $10 million for Title VI, Part A, Subpart 3. An
increase of $3.1 million above FY 2017 enacted.
Under the ESSA, language immersion programs are funded in
public schools. It is well documented that Native students are
more likely to thrive in environments that align with their
language and culture.
ESSA Title VI, Part B: Native Hawaiian Education Program--Provide
$36.4 million Title VI, Part B.
The Native Hawaiian Education program empowers innovative
culturally appropriate programs to enhance the quality of
education for Native Hawaiians. When establishing the Native
Hawaiian Education Program, Congress acknowledged the trust
relationship between the Native Hawaiian people and the United
States.
These programs strengthen the Native Hawaiian culture and
improve educational attainment, both of which are correlated
with positive economic outcomes.
ESSA Title VI, Part C: Alaska Native Education Equity Assistance
Program--Provide $36.4 million for Title VI, Part C.
Alaska does not receive any BIE funding, making this source
of funding the only resource available for Alaska Native tribes
and organizations to provide supplemental programs that address
the achievement gap for Alaska Native students.
This funding is crucial to closing the gap between Alaska
Native students and their non- Native peers as eligible
activities include professional development for educators,
activities carried out through Even Start programs and Head
Start programs, family literacy services, and dropout
prevention programs.
ESSA Title VII: Impact Aid--Provide $2 billion for Title VII. An
increase of $589 million above FY 2018 enacted.
Impact Aid provides direct payments to public school
districts as reimbursement for the loss of traditional property
taxes due to a federal presence or activity, including the
existence of an Indian reservation.
With nearly 93 percent of Native students enrolling in
public schools, Impact Aid provides essential funding for
schools serving Native students.
School Construction--Provide $500 million for school construction.
Provide funding for school construction consistent with the Trump
Administration's focus on infrastructure by providing funding in
communities where significant concentrations of Native students attend
public schools.
With 93 percent of Native students in public schools and
more than 40 percent of Native students in rural communities
with limited capacity for bonding, investing in Indian Country
via schools will help prepare Native students for the 21st
century economy.
HEA Title III: Tribal Colleges and Universities--Provide $65
million ($30 million in discretionary funding and $30 million in
mandatory funding) for Title III-A grants under the Higher Education
Act for Tribal Colleges and Universities.
Titles III and V of the Higher Education Act, known as Aid
for Institutional Development programs, support institutions
with a large proportion of financially disadvantaged students
and low cost-per-student expenditures.
HEA Title III: Tribal Colleges and Universities: Adult/Basic
Education--Provide $8 million for American Indian Adult/Basic Education
at Tribal Colleges and Universities, from existing funds appropriated
for state block grant funding. No such set-aside from existing funds
included in FY 2018 enacted.
Despite an absence of dedicated funding, TCUs must find ways
to continue to provide basic adult education classes for those
American Indians that the present K-12 Indian education system
has failed.
There is a wide-ranging need for adult basic education and
literacy programs and TCUs need adequate funding to support the
ever increasing demand for adult education and remediation
program services.
HEA Title III, Part F: Native American-Serving, non-Tribal
Institutions--Provide $10 million for non-tribal, Native-serving
institutions of higher education. An increase of $1.7 million above FY
2018 enacted.
Funds provided under this line item serve as the primary
source of federal funding for Native-serving, non-tribal
institutions of higher education.
With nearly 100 institutions potentially qualifying as
Native-serving, non-tribal institutions, an increase in funding
will provide the opportunity for more Native-serving
institutions to better serve their students and increase
graduation rates among Native students.
Perkins: Tribally Controlled Post-Secondary Career and Technical
Institutions--Provide $10 million for postsecondary career and
technical institutions program funds under Carl Perkins Technical and
Career Education Act. An increase of $1.7 million above FY 2018
enacted.
Vocational education/training programs are very expensive to
conduct, but are vital to preparing a future workforce that
will operate safely and efficiently contributing greatly to the
global economy.
Currently, two TCUs participate in this funding program:
United Tribes Technical College in North Dakota, and Navajo
Technical University in New Mexico. The TCUs urge Congress to
appropriate $10 million for Sec. 117 of the Act.
Infrastructure Proposal for BIE School Construction
Though NIEA is pleased to see BIE schools included in the $18
billion ``Public Lands Infrastructure Fund'' proposal from President
Trump, we remain concerned that the means for obtaining funds could
infringe on public lands. If the proposal were to fully respect tribal
sovereignty and provide the full funding that BIE schools need--more
than $640 million in immediate funding and at least $1.3 billion in
funding for construction and maintenance--then NIEA will of course be
interested in learning more about the proposal. If, however, the
proposal is for funding that does not respect the inherent sovereignty
of tribes, we could not support it.
NIEA is concerned about steep cuts to education construction for
BIE schools without any details or tribal input regarding the current
infrastructure proposal. As expressed by Chairman Payment of the Sault
Ste. Marie Tribe of Chippewa Indians during the hearing, the
Administration has slashed critical construction and maintenance
funding for the BIE in exchange for the possibility of future funding
in the infrastructure proposal. The proposed infrastructure package
does not abrogate the federal trust responsibility to fund construction
for BIE schools in the federal budget. Though current funding levels
fail to fully address the $640 million need for construction, the need
for construction and repair in BIE schools is too great to wait for a
possible infrastructure package without ongoing funding to address
construction needs. Native students must have access safe and healthy
classrooms where they can learn and thrive.
Conclusion
With these concerns and through these recommendations on the
President's FY 2019 Budget Request for Indian programs, NIEA looks
forward to working with the Chairman to pass a budget that serves the
unique needs of the only students that the federal government has a
direct responsibility to educate--Native students.
______
Prepared Statement of Chris James, President/CEO, National Center for
American Indian Enterprise Development
The National Center for American Indian Enterprise Development
(``The National Center'' or ``NCAIED'') appreciates this opportunity to
present our views on the President's Budget Requests for Fiscal Year
(FY) 2019 for Indian Programs that most directly affect business,
economic and energy development in Indian Country.
With over 40 years of assisting American Indian Tribes and their
enterprises with business and economic development, the National Center
has evolved into the largest national Indian specific business
organization in the United States. Driven by our motto--''We Mean
Business of Indian Country''--we are actively engaged in helping Tribes
and native enterprises and entrepreneurs realize their business goals.
We fulfill our mission by assisting with business, financing and
contracting needs, including trainings, business development and other
guidance, marketing tools, access to capital, and procurement technical
assistance. In addition to our American Indian Procurement Technical
Assistance Center (AIPTAC), we will be expanding our procurement and
technical assistance to new areas and developing the Native Edge
Institute to offer one-on-one counseling to Native businesses and
entrepreneurs. We are revamping our Native Edge online portal and will
add a lending component through participation of Community Development
Financial Institutions (CDFIs). Our growing annual Reservation Economic
Summits (RES) will continue to offer conference sessions, training
workshops, Buy Native Procurement Matchmaking, Trade Show, and other
networking opportunities.
Overview of FY 2019 Budget Requests for Indian Programs
The National Center views many of the FY 2019 Budget Requests for
Indian Programs with skepticism and opposes the deep cuts or
elimination of several key programs that support business, economic,
housing and community development in Indian Country. Programs that
should be strengthened, not eliminated, include HUD's Indian Community
Development Block Grant Program, and Labor's Indian and Native American
(Jobs) Program. Given the federal trust obligations to sovereign tribal
governments, the federal budget must provide the essential support that
federal offices and programs need to fulfill those obligations, and
that means maintaining current or increasing funding levels. Our
recommendations include examples of the programs worthy of greater
resources because of their targeted support for tribes and Indian
communities specifically.
Federal Support as Leverage for Business and Economic Development in
Indian Country
The National Center's previous budget views on the FY 2017 and 2018
Budget Requests noted many of the programs that address our key
priorities. We are pleased that the FY 2018 Omnibus Appropriations
agreement increased funding for advance several of our priorities, but
the FY 2019 Budget Requests propose cuts, some drastic, to these
important programs. We urge the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs to
consider our recommendations below and incorporate them into its own
recommendations to the Senate Budget and Appropriations Committees:
Business and Procurement Technical Assistance
Procurement Technical Assistance Program: In the FY 2019
Department of Defense (DOD) appropriations for Title III,
Operations and Maintenance--Defense-Wide, Congress should
provide the FY 2018 enacted level of $38.5 million for the
Defense Logistics Agency's Procurement Technical Assistance
Cooperative Agreement Program to support the Procurement
Technical Assistance Centers (PTACs) that operate across the
country, and continue to set aside a specific amount for
American Indian PTACs (AIPTACs). This funding helps leverage
private matching funds of PTACs and AIPTACs to provide
procurement technical assistance to small business contractors
seeking contracts with federal, state, local and tribal
governments. To enable AIPTACs to assist contractors seeking
opportunities afforded by hikes in defense spending, and to
match the authorized funding level for AIPTACs, our FY 2019
recommendation: At least $38.5 million for all PTACs, including
$4.5 million for AIPTACs.
5 percent Indian Incentive Program: Congress should continue
to include in Defense Appropriations, Title VIII--General
Provisions, mandatory funding for this important program that
supports defense procurement objectives by affording eligible
DOD prime and higher-tier contractors an incentive payment of 5
percent of the value of contract work awarded to and performed
by subcontractors owned by American Indian, Alaska Native, or
Native Hawaiian individuals or communities. Prior years'
funding of $15 million annual resulted in $1.7 billion worth of
work subcontracted to native-owned companies, yet a substantial
backlog remains (well over $30 million in qualified incentive
payment requests). Working down this backlog will require a
sustained funding effort, and the $20 million just approved for
FY 2018 is a first step in that direction. To keep decreasing
the backlog, and align with higher DOD procurement spending,
our FY 2019 recommendation: $20 million for the 5 percent
Indian Incentive Program.
Minority Business Development Agency: The FY 2019 Budget
Request proposes $10 million for the MBDA at the Department of
Commerce, and reform of its service delivery model and re-
orient its focus on policy, advocacy research and public/
private partnership.
Operating as an Executive Order agency, MBDA has funded some
Native American-focused MBDA Centers and has provided the only
funding ever made available for the statutorily authorized
Office of Native American Business Development (ONABD). The FY
2018 enacted level for MBDA is $39 million for MBDA, with
conference report language directing that no less than 50
percent of its funding be awarded through competitive
agreements, external awards and grants. Just as level funding
for MBDA is important, we strongly believe, as noted below on
p. 4, that funding should be provided for the ONABD as
authorized in the Senate-passed ``Indian Community Economic
Enhancement Act'' (S. 1116). That bill places the ONABD within
the Office of the Secretary of Commerce where it belongs, not
under the purview of the MBDA. Our FY 2019 recommendation: $39
million for MBDA, with more support for Native-focused Business
Centers.
Administration for Native Americans: We are pleased that the
FY 2019 Budget Request proposes $52 million for ANA, including
its effective competitive grant program to implement Social and
Economic Development Strategies (SEDS), and that the Senate
just passed S. 1116 to reauthorize ANA and enhance the SEDs
program. Our FY 2019 recommendation: At least $52 million for
ANA.
Leveraging Federal Funds to Increase Access to Capital
Indian Loan Guarantee Program: Once again, needed funding
for this key DOI loan guarantee program faces a proposed cut
for FY 2019, down to $6.597 million with a cap of $108.55
million in aggregate loan value. Congress has been adding funds
to this essential program, just approving $9.27 million for FY
2018, with a higher aggregate loan cap of $123.6 million, to
help meet Indian Country's financing needs. This program
successfully incentivizes and leverages private sector lending
for tribal, tribal enterprise and other native business
projects for business expansion, economic or energy
development. With a great track record of successful projects,
the program produces a $16 return on each $1 of the federal
investment. Our FY 2019 recommendation: $15 million to support
as much as $250 million in private sector financing for Indian
Country projects, including small infrastructure projects.
Tribal Energy Loan Guarantee Program: After many years,
Congress finally appropriated $9 million for FY 2017 for this
important program to leverage private financing for energy
project development in Indian Country. Sadly, the $9 million
was rescinded, but Congress approved $1 million for FY 2018 and
the Department of Energy's Loan Programs Office is conducting
listening sessions to arrive at the best approach to
implementing the Tribal Energy Loan Guarantee Program, even
though the FY19 Budget Request proposes to eliminate it. Our FY
2019 recommendation: $9 million to implement this key program.
Native CDFIs: The FY 2019 Budget Request proposes to
eliminate funding for Community Development Financial
Institutions (CDFI) Fund grants, including grants for Native
CDFIs as part of the Native American CDFI Assistance
initiative, and provide only limited funding to support
management of the CDFI Bond Guarantee Program, New Market Tax
Credits, and certification and compliance for Native and other
CDFIs. As barriers to capital access are nowhere more steep
than in Indian Country, greater support (not less) for Native
CDFI grants is critically necessary to make available more
small and micro loans for individuals and small businesses, and
to facilitate financial literacy and more entrepreneurial
development training, in Indian communities. Congress just
approved $250 million for the CDFI Fund, and of the $161
million for financial and technical assistance grants, $16
million was provided for Native CDFIs as well as a waiver of
the non-federal match requirement. Our FY 2019 recommendation:
$20 million for Native CDFI grant funding.
New Market Tax Credits: The FY 2019 Budget Request proposes
insufficient support for the CDFI Fund generally, and for the
New Market Tax Credit (NMTC) program. What should be provided
is a set aside for, or emphasis on investments into,
underserved tribal communities as the National Center and other
national native organizations have urged. Our FY 2019
recommendation: Increased support for NMTCs and set aside of
NMTC allocations for project development in Indian Country.
Support for High Level Federal Offices Focused on Native American
Affairs
As noted in our previous years' budget recommendations, the
National Center is convinced that business, economic, community and
energy development advances in Indian Country when there is a high
level Office within a key federal department or agency to focus its
resources on Native American initiatives. Most of the key federal
departments have supported such a high level office, although the FY
2019 Budget Request reduces that support. Most unfortunate, the
Department of Commerce (DOC) still has no operational Office of Native
American Business Development (ONABD), as authorized in Public Law 106-
464, to help facilitate access to the Department's plentiful resources
to promote commerce, international trade and tourism for Indian
Country. As already noted, we strongly support speedy enactment of S.
1116 to elevate and fund this Office so that it can coordinate all of
Commerce's programmatic activities, as well as initiatives with other
key federal departments, to increase business and economic development,
trade and tourism in Indian Country!
Below are the National Center's views on funding for these
essential Offices:
Commerce--Office of Native American Business Development:
The ONABD should be placed in the office of the Secretary, with
a $2 million budget, as authorized in Senate-passed S. 1116.
Our FY 2019 recommendation: $61 million for DOC's Departmental
Management, within which $2 million should be set aside for the
ONABD.
DOI--Office of Indian Energy and Economic Development: The
FY 2019 Budget Request continues to underfund the economic
development activities of this important office. In addition to
funds for energy development-related initiatives, funding
should be increased for the Economic Development Division of
OIEED so that it can enhance its economic development
initiatives and implement programming for Native Business
Incubators, as proposed in Senate-passed S. 607. Our FY 2019
recommendation: $7 million more for OIEED.
SBA--Office of Native American Affairs: The FY 2019 Budget
Request includes $1.5 million for Native American Outreach,
down from $2 million enacted for FY 2018. This line item
supports SBA's Office of Native American Affairs, headed by an
Assistant Administrator to manage the outreach activities. Such
activities include multi-agency workshops, Native supplier
events, and facilitation of Native contractors' participation
in SBA's 8(a), HUBZone, women-owned business, veteran and
service disabled veteran-owned, and other small business
contracting programs. Our FY 2019 recommendation: $2 million
for Native American Outreach.
USDA--Office of Tribal Relations: The FY 2019 Budget Request
proposes $2 million for the Office of Partnerships and Public
Engagement, into which USDA has lumped four previously separate
programs, including the statutorily authorized Office of Tribal
Relations (OTR), previously funded at $500,000 or higher. The
OTR has led many successfully initiatives to coordinate USDA
programs to assist tribes and native agricultural enterprises,
and target USDA's assistance to enhance agricultural financing
and market access, and promote business, economic, community
and infrastructure development in Indian Country. We are
pleased that Congress continued at least level funding of
USDA's Rural Development programs that have so effectively
provided assistance to Indian communities, but we oppose the
cuts proposed in the FY 2019 Budget Requests. Our FY 2019
recommendation: $500,000 at least for the OTR specifically, and
preserve funding for the RD programs that best assist Indian
community development.
DOE--Office of Indian Energy Policy and Programs: The FY
2019 Budget Request of $10 million falls woefully short of what
the OIEPP needs and the level of $18 million provided for FY
2018. We commend this Committee for having endorsed a higher
funding level for this important office, and urge it to do so
again. Our FY 2019 recommendation: $20 million for the OIEPP.
Thank you for the opportunity to present these views and reiterate
our requests to increase support for the above programs that invest
federal dollars as leverage to multiply exponentially the amount of
tribal and private capital invested in Indian Country.
______
Prepared Statement of the National Indian Health Board (NIHB)
Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman Udall, and Members of the Committee,
the National Indian Health Board (NIHB) thanks you for holding the
hearing, ``The President's FY2019 Budget Request for Indian Programs.''
On behalf of NIHB and the 573 federally-recognized Tribes we serve the
National Indian Health Board (NIHB) submits this testimony for the
record. NIHB is a 501(c)3, not for profit, national Tribal organization
founded by the Tribes in 1972 to serve as the unified, national voice
for American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) health in the policy-
making arena. Our Board of Directors is comprised of distinguished and
highly respected Tribal leaders in AI/AN health. They are elected by
the Tribes in each region to be the voice of the Tribes at the national
level.
The Federal Trust Responsibility
The federal promise to provide Indian health services was made long
ago. Since the earliest days of the Republic, all branches of the
federal government have acknowledged the nation's obligations to the
Tribes and the unique trust relationship between the United States and
Tribes.
The Indian Health Service is the primary agency by which the
Federal Government meets the trust responsibility for direct health
services. IHS provides services in a variety of ways: directly, through
agency-operated programs and through Tribally-contracted and operated
health programs; and indirectly through services purchased from private
providers. IHS also provides limited funding for urban Indian health
programs that serve AI/ANs living outside of reservations. Tribes may
choose to receive services directly from IHS, run their own programs
through contracting or compacting agreements, or they may combine these
options based on their needs and preferences.
Today the Indian healthcare system includes 46 Indian hospitals
(\1/3\ of which are Tribally operated) and nearly 630 Indian health
centers, clinics, and health stations (80 percent of which are Tribally
operated). When specialized services are not available at these sites,
health services are purchased from public and private providers through
the IHS-funded purchased/referred care (PRC) program. Additionally, 34
urban programs offer services ranging from community health to
comprehensive primary care. To ensure accountability and provide
greater access for Tribal input, IHS is divided into 12 geographic
Service Areas, each serving the Tribes within the Area. It is important
to note that Congress has funded IHS at a level far below patient need
since the agency's creation in 1955. In FY 2017, national health
spending was $9,207 per capita while IHS spending was only $3,332 per
patient.
The Federal Government has yet to live up to the trust
responsibility to provide adequate health services to our nation's
indigenous peoples. Historical trauma, poverty, lack of access to
healthy foods, loss of culture and many other social, economic and
environmental determinants of health as well as lack of a developed
public health infrastructure in Indian Country all contribute to the
poor state of American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) health. This
underfunding of the IHS is clearly visible when examining the health
disparities for AI/ANs. Among AI/ANs, the rate of drug overdose deaths
is twice that of the general population, according to the IHS. Deaths
from prescription opioid overdoses increased four-fold from 1999 to
2013 among AI/ANs. According to the Office of Minority Health, from
2009-2013, AI/AN men were almost twice as likely to have liver and
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) cancer as non-Hispanic White men and
are 1.6 times as likely to have stomach cancer as non-Hispanic White
men, and are over twice as likely to die from the same disease. AI/AN
women are 2.5 times more likely to have, and almost twice as likely to
die from, liver and IBD cancer, as compared to non-Hispanic White
women. In 2015, AI/ANs were three times more likely to die from
hepatitis C than non-Hispanic whites, and twice as likely to die from
hepatitis B. In 2014, suicide was the second leading cause of death for
AI/ANs between the ages of 10 and 34 and adolescent AI/AN females have
death rates at almost four times the rate for White females in the same
age groups. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Office of Minority Health. Minority Population Profiles,
American Indian and Alaska Natives. https://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/omh/
browse.aspx?lvl=4&lvlid=39. Accessed on March 21, 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In FY 2017, the IHS per capita expenditures for patient health
services were just $3,332, compared to $9,207 per person for health
care spending nationally. Even other federally funded health systems do
better than IHS. The Veterans' Health Administration's direct health
care budget is 14 times that of the IHS yet served only 4 times the
population with direct care services.
Tribes are grateful for the recent increases to the IHS
Appropriation over the last several years, but note that the increases
have not allowed for significantly expanded services or improvements in
equipment, buildings or staffing. While the IHS annual appropriated
budget has increased by $2.2 billion (about 52 percent) since FY 2008
much of this increases simply covers needs associated with population
growth, inflation, full funding of Contract Support Costs and
maintaining current services. This leaves little extra money for making
actual improvements in health services or to build public health
infrastructure for American Indians and Alaska Natives. We are only 2
percent of the population. Congress, please take the courageous and
ethical step of adequately funding health care for this country's first
peoples.
The following testimony reflects the IHS Tribal Budget Formulation
Workgroup recommendations for FY 2019. \2\ The Tribal workgroup is
comprised of American Indian and Alaska Native Tribal leaders,
technicians and researchers, nationwide, who come together each year to
form Indian Country's priorities as they relate to IHS. Through this
process and product, this testimony reflects, therefore, the national
Tribal voice.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The full FY 2019 Tribal Budget Request is available at http://
nihb.org/legislative/budget_formulation.php
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Indian Health Service Budget
Tribes recommend $32 billion to fully fund IHS, to be phased in
over 12 years. This includes amounts for personal health services,
wrap-around community health services, facilities, and capital
investments. Within this $32 billion is: $17.37 billion for Medical
Services; $1.82 billion for Dental and Vision Services; $4.07 billion
for Community and Public Health Services; $8.77 billion for facility
upgrades and upfront costs (non-recurring investments). The Workgroup's
top 5 areas for program expansion at IHS for FY 2019 include:
1) Hospitals and Clinics
2) Purchased/Referred Care
3) Mental Health
4) Alcohol and Substance Abuse and
5) Dental Services
Hospitals and Clinics--In FY 2018, Tribes recommend $2.3 billion
for Hospitals and Clinics (H&C) which is $246 million over the FY 2018
enacted level. Adequate funding for the Hospitals & Clinics (H&C) line
item is the top priority for fiscal year 2020, as it provides the base
funding for the 650 hospitals, clinics, and health programs that
operate on Indian reservations, predominantly in rural and frontier
settings. This is the core funding that makes available direct medical
care services to AI/ANs. Increasing H&C funding is necessary as it
supports medical care services provided at IHS and Tribally-operated
facilities, including emergency care, inpatient and outpatient care,
medically necessary support services, such as laboratory, pharmacy,
digital imaging, information technology, medical records and other
ancillary services. In addition, H&C funds provide the greatest
flexibility to support the required range of services needed to target
chronic health conditions affecting AI/ANs such heart disease and
diabetes, treatment and rehabilitation due to injuries, maternal and
child health care and communicable diseases including influenza, HIV/
AIDS, and hepatitis.
Health IT--One area within the H&C line item is the area of Health
Information Technology (HIT). IHS does not receive dedicated and
sustainable funding for the agency to adequately support health IT
infrastructure, including full deployment of electronic health records
(EHRs). The current Resource and Patient Management System (RPMS), is a
comprehensive suite of applications that supports virtually all
clinical and business operations at IHS and most Tribal facilities. No
new funds have been appropriated to support operations and maintenance
for the RPMS suite. This has resulted in a mass exodus of Self
Governance Tribes who have opted to withdraw their IT shares to seek
other commercial HIT solutions which promise to more readily address
their needs. In fact, this has caused a domino effect in that the IHS
agency technology budget is decreasing more rapidly because of the
withdrawal of these shares. Without a viable solution, IHS Health IT
system will be left behind, and IHS patients will be put at risk. With
the VA's announcement to move toward a commercial-off the shelf EHR, it
is critical that IHS receive parallel appropriations to facilitate the
replacement of RPMS, since our system is based on VA's VistA program.
Purchased/Referred Care--In FY 2019, Tribes recommend $1.2 billion
for the Purchased/Referred Care (PRC) program. This is $282 million
above the FY 2018 enacted level. The PRC budget supports essential
health care services from non-IHS or non-Tribal providers. In FY 2015,
PRC denied over $423.6 million in services--that is 92,354 needed
health care services that AI/ANs were denied from receiving. This core
funding is still a top priority for the Tribes, as some service Areas
rely heavily on PRC dollars, and we hope to see it continued as a
priority in FY 2019. These deferrals are real lives. The shortage of
PRC funds directly contributes to the opioid crisis in Tribal
communities. The deferral of care due to funding and workforce
shortages has pushed more and more Tribal members towards prescription
opioids to treat health conditions that would otherwise successfully be
treated with non-opioid therapies. This endless cycle of deferral and
opioid dependency is a direct result of the underfunding of the IHS
system, and must be stopped.
Mental Health--In FY 2018, Tribes are recommending $207,791
million. This is $107.9 million above FY 2018 enacted. This significant
increase is needed to enhance the capacity of Tribal communities to
develop innovative and culturally relevant prevention programs that are
greatly needed in Tribal communities. Research has shown that AI/ANs do
not prefer to seek mental health services that rely solely upon Western
models of care; which suggests that AI/ANs are not receiving the
services they need. \3\ For example, NIHB spoke with a young woman from
the Pine Ridge Reservation who courageously shared her story about her
multiple suicide attempts. She went to an inpatient psychiatric
facility in Rapid City, but did not feel that she received healing. It
wasn't until she attended a Lakota cultural healing camp that her life
turned around. She said, ``It made me feel powerful. I got to learn
about my culture and it made me feel closer to who I am.'' But the camp
operates through donations and community support. Congress should
provide dedicated funding for these types of activities. The geographic
remoteness of most Tribal communities demands unique and innovative
treatment options to address comprehensive mental health, substance
abuse and psychiatric services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Beals, J., Novins, D.K., Whitesell, N.R., Spicer, P., &
Mitchell, C.M., & Manson, S.M. (2005). Prevalence of mental disorders
and utilization of mental health services in two American Indian
reservation populations: Mental Health disparities in a national
context. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 1723-1732. Walls, M. L.,
Johnson, K. D., Whitbeck, L. B., & Hoyt, D. R. (2006). Mental health
and substance abuse services preferences among American Indian people
of the northern Midwest. Community Mental Health Journal, 42, 521-535.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alcohol and Substance Abuse--In FY 2019, Tribes recommend $207.8
million for the Alcohol and Substance Abuse budget. This is $100
million above the FY 2018 enacted level. Of the challenges facing AI/AN
communities and people, no challenge is more far reaching than the
epidemic of alcohol and other substance abuse. For instance, the state
of Minnesota reported that pregnant AI/AN women were 8.7 times more
likely to be diagnosed with maternal opioid dependency, and that AI/AN
infants were 7.4 times more likely to be born with neonatal abstinence
syndrome (NAS)--meaning that the repercussions and trauma of this
crisis are intergenerational. Other secondary impacts include the undue
burdens imposed on many AI/AN families struggling with opioid and
substance use disorders, the children forced into foster care, and the
kinship care networks that are strained beyond their ability. As NIHB
recently testified before this committee, the current opioid and
substance abuse epidemic represents one of the most pressing public
health crises affecting Tribal communities. While this epidemic is
affecting many communities throughout America, it has
disproportionately impacted Tribes and has further strained the limited
public health and healthcare resources available to Tribes. Successful
treatment approaches include traditional healing techniques that link
the services provided to cultural practices and spiritual support.
However, we now know that inadequate funding for alcohol and substance
abuse services has a ripple effect on other services, such as
overloading the agency's outpatient clinics, urgent care departments,
and emergency departments with unnecessary visits (typically funded by
Hospitals and Health Clinic funds and third party collections).
Dental Health--For FY 2019, Tribes recommend $251.9 million for
Dental Health. This is $56.6 million above the FY 2018 enacted level.
In the general U.S. population, there is one dentist for every 1,500
people, but in Indian Country, there is only one dentist for every
2,800 people. Nationally, American Indian children have the highest
rate of tooth decay than any population group in the country. On the
Pine Ridge Reservation, the W.K. Kellogg Foundation found that 40
percent of children and 60 percent of adults suffer from moderate to
urgent dental needs, including infections and other problems that could
become life-threatening. Nationally, 59 percent of AI/AN adult dental
patients have untreated decay, this is almost three times as much as
U.S Whites. It is not uncommon to hear stories of elderly patients
waiting out in the cold for one of just a few dental appointments
available in one day. Or, for patients to wait for months to get an
appointment. Patients get frustrated with this system and often abandon
the search for care altogether. This delayed or deferred care has long-
term impacts over a patient's overall health and wellbeing.
NIHB and the Tribes continue to support the expansion of Dental
Therapists (DTs) to Tribes outside of Alaska as a safe, reliable, cost-
effective means for Tribal members to access oral health services. Some
Tribes in the lower 48 have created programs outside of IHS funding to
allow them to utilize DTs, but sadly, provisions in the Indian
Healthcare Improvement Act (IHCIA) \4\ make it difficult to use IHS
resources to use these effective providers. People with healthy teeth
and healthy smiles feels better about themselves and experience better
overall health outcomes. Our communities need our people and especially
our youth to smile again. We encourage the Committee to work with the
other relevant authorizing Committees to repeal this section of the law
so that IHS and Tribes can utilize scarce discretionary dollars in the
most cost-effective way possible.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ 25 U.S.C. 1616l(d)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Facilities: In FY 2019, Tribes recommend prioritizing facilities
funding in FY 2019. Increases will be used to increase maintenance and
improvement on IHS facilities, speed up the funding of projects on the
IHS Healthcare priority list, and improve sanitation conditions in
Tribal communities. IHS facilities represent some the oldest health
facilities in the nation and at current rates of funding, a new
facility built today would not be replaced for another 400 years. \5\
Investments in facilities will allow the care provided in our
communities to be on par with other health systems in the United
States. In Alaska, for example over 5,000 rural homes are considered
unserved by running water and wastewater. Individuals, instead, must
rely on ``honey buckets'' to dispose of waste. This is just
unacceptable. The FY 2019 Budget Request proposes a decrease of $361.7
million from the FY 2018 enacted facilities budget. NIHB emphatically
opposes this decrease and encourages Congress do continue to build
funding for facilities in FY 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ ``Federal Indian Trust Responsibility: The Quest for Equitable
and Quality Indian Healthcare--The National Tribal Budget Formulation
Workgroup's Recommendations on the Indian Health Service Fiscal Year
2018 Budget.'' June 2016. P. 64.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY 2019 President's Budget Request
The FY 2019 President's Budget Request includes $5.4 billion for
the IHS discretionary spending in FY 2019. This represents $113.7 below
the FY 2018 enacted budget. While we appreciate the proposals to
increase funding for direct care and substance abuse, several items in
the FY 2019 request are of particular concern for NIHB and the Tribes.
Community Health Representatives/Health Education:
The FY 2019 request eliminates funding for the Community Health
Representative and Health Education programs. Tribes are unambiguously
opposed to this cut. While the budget notes that the cut was proposed
in order to ``prioritize direct health care services,'' it is important
to note that CHRs are direct care. CHRs provide services like in-home
patient assessment of medical conditions, providing glucose testing or
blood pressure tests to determine if the patient should seek further
care, and providing transportation for medical care. They also help
interpret prescriptions which is critical to patient safety and the
elimination of this program would be detrimental to the health and
wellbeing of many Tribal communities. There are more than 1,600 CHRs
representing over 250 tribes in all 12 IHS Areas and exported CHR
program data in FY 2016 demonstrated that CHRs conducted 340,270 home
visits and provided 1,102,164 patient contacts/services on a variety of
health related conditions. However, it is likely that there are far
more contacts are made in reality but not reflected in data due to
reporting challenges associated with the RPMS system.
The purpose of the Health Education program is to provide
preventive health education, emergency response and public health,
chronic and communicable disease education. In addition, health
educators serve as liaison between individual, health care providers,
and community organizations to coordinate resources and services to
promote health education programs). IHS receives little funding for
preventative efforts, and these programs represent one of the few
consistent investments in an essential public health service--helping
to provide education efforts to community members in remote areas who
may never otherwise encounter a health professional.
In March 2018, NIHB sent a survey to Tribes to collect information
on the importance of CHRs and Health Educators in their communities. We
received a record 370 responses. Over 92 percent of respondents noted
that that could not provide health services at the same level without
CHRs. As one survey participant noted,
Both [CHR and Health Education] programs are essential to the
communities they serve. Without their services preventive
education and screenings will not be known. There would be no
other resource for community members to go to for information
or to have their questions answered quickly. It is extremely
hard for patients to ask questions to their provider, because
there is a time limit on one patient visit. Many of our elders
and youth will fall through the cracks and chronic diseases
will increase significantly.
In FY 2019, the TBFWG recommends CHRs are funded at $92.2 million,
which is an increase of $29.3 million above the FY 2018 enacted level.
The group recommends that Health Education is funded at $35.9 million,
an increase of $16 million from FY 2018 enacted budget.
Special Diabetes Program for Indians:
The FY 2019 President's budget also proposes to move the Special
Diabetes Program for Indians (SDPI), and other health programs, from
the mandatory side of the budget to discretionary funding. This major
policy shift was made with no consultation with Tribes, and the budget
offers no explanation of this change. NIHB and the Tribes remain
concerned that this shift will make this highly successful program have
less stable funding opportunities, and create additional pressure on
the already strained IHS discretionary budget. Without a commensurate
increase in other areas of the discretionary side of the budget, or to
the 302(b) allocation of the Interior, Environment and Related Agencies
Appropriations Subcommittee, SDPI funds are at serious risk. With a
decrease of 54 percent in End Stage Renal Disease of for AI/ANs over a
20 year period, SDPI represents one of the greatest public health
success programs this country has ever seen. It is simply irresponsible
to make such a major shift without first understanding the
ramifications that such a change would have. NIHB opposes this proposal
and encourages Congress to fully reject it as well.
Opioid Funding and use of Competitive Grants
The FY 2019 President's Budget Request also proposes $150 million
in competitive grants to ``combat the opioid epidemic and address
serious mental illness.'' This is part of the total $10 billion that
the Department of Health and Human Services would receive. Firstly,
this funding is a mere 1.5 percent set aside for AI/ANs despite the
disproportionate disease burden in Tribal communities and the federal
trust responsibility to Indian Country. Instead, the budget should
focus on including at least 10 percent set aside for Tribes across all
opioid related programs.
Secondly, Tribes are universally opposed to this funding being
distributed in the form of competitive grants. The health needs of
Indian people are chronic and multi-faceted; such needs deserve to be
addressed through committed, stable funding. In contrast, grant
programs are temporary, unreliable, non-recurring, and unable to
address the ongoing critical needs of Tribal communities. Under the
grant making process, some Tribes receive assistance and benefit from
somewhat consistent increases, while other Tribes do not. This creates
two pools of Tribes--those that have technical experience and financial
resources receive funding, while many others without this capacity see
no benefit in appropriated increases. The strings attached to federal
grants in terms of reporting, limitations on use of funds, and
timelines distract from patient care. Since 2008, 50 percent (about $40
Million) of the increases to the total Behavioral Health budget (Mental
Health and Alcohol & Substance Abuse Programs) is due to a growth in
special grant programs and initiatives rather than increases to
existing Behavioral Health programs. Instead of project or disease
specific grant funds, the IHS needs to prioritize flexible, recurring
base funds.
Grants create a ``disease de jour'' approach, where the funding is
tied only to an identified hot topic issue. For instance, if a patient
presents with an ``unfunded'' diagnosis that is not covered by grants
for specific disease categories that patient is left without many
alternatives. This does not bode well for the many chronic diseases
from which AI/ANs disproportionately suffer. For example, a large focus
on the methamphetamine epidemic 10 years ago may have distracted from
the rise in patients addicted to prescription pain medicine, thus
contributing to the opioid crisis in Indian Country today. While the
United States generally is now facing an opioid crisis, a particular
service unit in one IHS area may struggle most with alcohol addiction
and under the grant making process cannot redesign the available
programs and services to meet Tribal community needs. As such, IHS
should never use a grant program to fund ongoing critical Indian Health
needs.
Other Sources of Indian Health Funding
Medicaid
While the above recommendations address the IHS budget, the federal
trust responsibility for health extends beyond the IHS. For example,
Medicaid system is a critical lifeline in Tribal communities. Moving
Medicaid to a block grant system, as proposed in the President's FY
2019 Budget Request, will have major fiscal impacts on Tribal health
reimbursements, and would devastate Tribal health. Decreasing Medicaid
decrease scarce resources available to cover our cost of care, and
further restrict the eligible patient population. This puts an unequal
burden on the IHS budget which is so reliant on these resources to make
up our funding shortfalls. We urge Congress to ensure that American
Indians and Alaska Natives are exempt from any burdens put on Medicaid
like work requirements, so that fiscal strain doesn't unintentionally
fall back to the IHS. American Indians and Alaska Natives already have
access to health care through the IHS, so work requirements only serve
to inhibit the use of Medicaid in Tribal communities.
Good Health and Wellness in Indian Country
The President's FY 2019 Budget request eliminated substantial
funding from the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention at the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) along with zeroing out
the Good Health and Wellness in Indian Country (GHWIC) program
(currently funded at $16 million). The Good Health and Wellness in
Indian Country Program is CDC's largest investment in the wellbeing of
American Indian and Alaska Natives. GHWIC funding must be restored. The
twelve Tribes and eleven Tribal organizations in the program have
utilized community-driven, culturally adapted strategies to improve
public health in their communities. GHWIC is a lifeline for these
communities who would otherwise have no public health investment. In
fact, it is the only dedicated funding for AI/ANs at CDC. CDC has told
Tribal leaders on March 1, 2018 that they are replacing GHWIC with the
proposed ``America's Health Block Grant.'' That funding has no
indicated set aside for Tribes or epi-centers so there is zero
guarantee that this funding would reach AI/AN communities. Instead,
Congress should reject this elimination of GHWIC and double the size of
the program to $32 million in FY 2019.
LIHEAP and SNAP
In addition, NIHB remains concerns about the proposed cuts in the
FY 2019 budget to the Low Income Heating and Energy Assistance Program
(LIHEAP) and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP).
LIHEAP is a critical resource for low-income AI/ANs to heat their homes
which contributes to the health and well being of AI/ANs. There are 153
Tribes and tribal organizations who receive these funds directly in the
amount of approximately $37 million. The budget would also make major
changes and cuts to SNAP which would cut 22 percent of the program and
$213.5 billion over the next decade. The proposal would also would
redesign SNAP by using a portion of benefits to buy and deliver a
package of commodities to SNAP households. Indian Country knows all too
well the scourge of using nonperishable commodities instead of fresh
food, and it is reflected in high rates of diabetes, heart disease and
other chronic health issues among AI/ANs. Instead, Congress should
grant authority to empower tribes to run their own SNAP programs
through self-governance and support funding and programs targeted at
local agriculture, community gardens, and access to fresh food.
Conclusion
Thank you again for holding this important hearing and for the
opportunity to offer testimony for the record. You can find a more
detailed FY 2019 IHS Budget Request at www.nihb.org.
______
Dwayne Herrera, Governor; Everett P. Herrera, Lt. Governor
Cochiti Pueblo, NM. April 16, 2018
Congressman Steve Pearce,
Rayburn House Office Building, Washington, DC.
Congresswoman Michelle Lujan Grisham,
Cannon House Office Building, Washington, DC.
Congressman Ben Ray Lujan,
Rayburn HOB, Washington, DC.
Senator Tom Udall
Hart Senate Office Building, Washington, DC.
Senator Martin Heinrich,
Hart Senate Office Building, Washington, DC.
Re: the Elimination of IHS Community Health Representative
(CHR) and Health Education programs in President's 2019 IHS
Budget.
Dear Honorable Senators, Congresswoman, Congressmen:
As the Governor of the Pueblo de Cochiti, I write this letter based
on the understanding that the President's 2019 IHS Budget has
eliminated the Community Health Representative (CHR) and the Health
Education line items. In a small rural reservation like Cochiti Pueblo,
I know the CHR program allows us the only health providers that we have
to address almost all of our health issues. They are the only health
providers that live in our community and provide all types of services
or give the community the knowledge and access to services. This Pueblo
only receives 2 primary care clinic days a week from the Indian Health
Service. The CHRs are available for many and any health questions we
have as tribal leaders and educate us about Obamacare, Medicare, IHS,
MCOs and any research and outside providers giving our community
members health care. They have been doing this since the program was
started in 1968. We recently testified about the CHR program
elimination at the DHHS tribal consultation but to date, have not heard
any response from the agency. Therefore let me re-emphasize some
critical points of both line items by the following points:
The CHR program is a 50 year old line item in the IHS. The
CHR program is authorized under the Indian Health Care
Improvement Act (IHCIA) and this legislation is now permanent
federal legislation. Attached is the NMSCCHRA testimonies and
the Pueblo wholeheartedly support both testimonies. As tribal
leaders we expect federal agencies to follow funding guidelines
established by Appropriations Committees especially those line
items that have a significant tribal impact nationally.
The CHR program is familiar to all tribal members and use
the CHRs for their various health issues and needs. The Cochiti
CHR program has always been administered, operated and staffed
by `Commtmity based' tribal health providers under our Public
Law 93-638 contract The CHR program is a basic public health
service providing direct medical services, prevention and
intervention under the Pueblo's management structure. We have
daily access to our CHR staff as they speak our tribal language
and know all the community members of Cochiti Pueblo. The
Cochiti staff serve as dental assistants, enrollment guides for
Medicaid, Medicare and Private insurance, Emergency Management
coordinators, health educators, transportation to dialysis/
medical appointments, translators, homecare advocates and many
other community health services that are started and completed
by the staff.
Cochiti is a small Tribe and not a gaming Tribe. We rely on
federal funds to not only provide services but also have
benefitted from the PL 638 funding including Contract Support
Costs funding--Direct Contract support and Indirect Cost on a
yearly basis. The overhead funds pays for the Tribal
leadership, HR, Finance, Housekeeping salaries in addition to
facilities and Other administrative costs such as audits,
trainings, travel, supplies out of Indirect costs. For a small
Pueblo like Cochiti, it sustains and impacts our Tribal
government immensely. I can attest to the fact that I rely on
the CHRs on assistance and clarification when outside health
agencies, governments, vendors, MC0s, IHS, Veterans
Administration and other interested health partners approach
our tribal administration. Our staff are community members and
I trust their input on health matters and services.
The elimination of the two line items will have a major impact to
the Pueblo de Cochiti as our PL 638 contracted programs. As the
Governor of Cochiti Pueblo, I respectfully request the CHR and Health
Education line items remain in the IHS budget and be increased in the
overall IHS budget.
Respectfully submitted,
Dwayne Herrera,
Governor, Pueblo de Cochiti.
______
Santo Domingo Tribal Council--Resolution No: 04-2018-15
continued support of and reinstatement of the community health
representative (chr) and health education line items in the president's
2019 indian health service budget
WHEREAS, the Santo Domingo Tribe is a federally recognized tribe
with inherent sovereign authorities to develop laws, plans, and
essential health programs to meet our community needs, and has
successfully administered the Community Health Representative Program
(CHR), Emergency Medical Services (EMS), and Behavior Health Services
funding through the Indian Health Service (IHS) under PL 93-638 Indian
Self-Determination Act and as authorized under the Indian Health Care
Improvement Act (IHCIA); and
WHEREAS, Santo Domingo Tribe has provided direct medical services,
patient care, delivery of patient medication, non-emergency
transportation for appointments, health education & prevention,
interfacing with other public health & environmental services at the
local community level and language interpretation by local staff; and
WHEREAS, the CHR has been and continues to be a focal point and
cornerstone of most medical, public health, behavioral, environmental,
emergency patient care in our tribal community with working knowledge
of our community cultural values, norms and activities; and
WHEREAS, the CHR funding has supported, since its inception in
1968, the most essential primary healthcare, education, and
environmental services that has become a crucial and important
institutional and effective community-based health program; and
WHEREAS, Santo Domingo's CHR program has recently provided 4,184
home visits, 1085 non-emergency transports to health facilities, and
hosted 325 educational and special events in our community; and
WHEREAS, the tribal leadership has relied on the CHR's for health
interpretation, evaluations, input, health literacy, health insurance
issues, health education, federal and state partnership initiatives;
and
WHEREAS, the CHR's are the only health providers and advocates when
the local limited clinic hours and service providers are not available
or accessible for health services and emergencies; and
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the Santo Domingo Tribe directs
the 2019 President's Indian Health Service budget reinstate the CHR and
Health Education line items and increase the current funding amounts
including the overall Indian Health Service budget; and
BE IT FUTHER RESOLVED that the US House of Representatives and US
Senate assure that the mainstay of basic healthcare providers in our
local tribal communities remain in the IHS budget and support the
overall IHS budget as long as the United States has a responsibility to
provide health services to the Native Americans under the various
federal laws and federal protections afforded to Tribes.
CERTIFICATION
The foregoing resolution was enacted by the Santo Domingo Tribe
Tribal Council on April 23, 2018 by a unanimous vote at a duly called
meeting which a quorum of the Tribal Council was present.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Tom Udall to
RADM Michael Weahkee
Opioids and IHS Clinical Services
Question 1. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recently
reported that the rate of Hepatitis C infections tripled between 2010
and 2015--mostly due to the use of needles by a growing number of drug
users. Does IHS have any data on changing numbers of IHS patients
presenting with opioid use-related bloodborne infection diseases like
Hepatitis C and HIV/AIDS?
Answer. IHS does not have data on the changing numbers of IHS
patients presenting with opioid or substance abuse-related blood borne
infectious diseases like hepatitis C (HCV) or HIV/AIDS. Moreover, IHS
does not have the ability to monitor this correlation with its existing
EHR infrastructure or personnel. However, IHS, in collaboration with
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), is currently
undertaking a vulnerability study looking at the risk of HIV or HCV
transmission from injecting drug use.
Question 1a. Does IHS have any statistics on how rates of neonatal
abstinence syndrome have changed over the course of the ongoing opioid
crisis?
Answer. IHS has a limited capacity to evaluate American Indian and
Alaska Native neonatal abstinence syndrome or neonatal opioid
withdrawal syndrome rates. The majority of American Indian and Alaska
Native births occur at tertiary referral hospitals making data sharing
between the referral hospital and IHS challenging. IHS is currently
evaluating the prospect of future collaborations and strategies to
capture this data from other available data sets and partnerships.
Question 2. Your testimony states that IHS sought to ``prioritize
direct clinical health care services''. Please explain how that
priority--and the Department's priority of addressing the opioid
crisis--would allow tribal communities to respond to substance abuse-
related health complications?
Answer. Efforts to prioritize direct clinical health care services
are important for helping tribal communities address the health
complications of substance abuse. As part of this process, IHS will
continue working with tribes, through consultation and collaboration,
to improve access to prevention, treatment, and recovery support
services, including medication-assisted treatment. For many patients,
primary care is the first point of entry into the health care system.
Primary care and direct clinical health care enable patients to gain
access to behavioral health support and other supports necessary for
evidence-based care. IHS has a holistic approach, integrating physical,
mental, spiritual, and cultural components. Additionally, direct care
can help patients gain access to overdose-reversing drugs and support
more effective methods of dealing with pain without using prescription
opioid medications. Most importantly, as opioid use disorder is treated
more effectively, we know from research and experience that secondary
health complications decrease dramatically.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. John McCain to
John Tahsuda
Colorado River Indian Tribe, Arizona
Question 1. Water resources are critically important to western
Tribes and my home State of Arizona. I understand that the Colorado
River Irrigation Project (CRIP) on the CRIT reservation is operating at
53 percent efficiency. According to CRIT, the BIA is responsible for
conducting priority maintenance in the CRIP system but failed to so
from December 2017, and January and February of this year. Can you
explain why BIA proceeded with the ``dry-up'' of the CRIP but did not
conduct the maintenance work covered in the irrigation plan?
Answer. The BIA Colorado River Agency (CRA) Irrigation Project did
complete a significant amount of the maintenance identified in the
Tribe's Draft Plan, as submitted. Maintenance activities were conducted
on approximately 9 laterals and several sub-laterals, and included
inspections; adjusting, repairing, or removing and replacing turnout
check gates; cleaning, adjusting or replacing staff gauges; identifying
additional gates to replace; repairing canal lining with placement of
approximately 400 yards of gunite material; adding headwalls; replacing
a major culvert on 6th Avenue; and re-grouting existing turnout rings
and placing new turnout rings.
The Tribe's Five Year Plan was submitted to the BIA in final draft
as a deliverable for the Irrigation Engineering & Support Services
Program, Self-Determination Contract (No. A15AV00449) between the BIA
and the Tribe. The attached chart, derived from tables submitted in the
draft plan, shows the status of the recommended maintenance items after
maintenance work was conducted during the 2017 and 2018 dry ups.
Question 1a. Were there any BIA staffing shortages associated with
the delays in repairing the CRIP system?
Answer. The Project is currently operating with 32 staff positions
filled out of the total 64 approved positions. We have been moving to
fill many of the vacate positions. All Irrigation System Operator (ISO)
and Heavy Equipment Operator vacant positions are currently advertised
on USAJobs and will continue to be until filled, which is a new
approach. Applications will be reviewed every two weeks, and eligible
candidates will be referred to the hiring official for consideration
until all positions are filled.
Question 1b. The Tribe has asked BIA to increase its maintenance
fees for CRIP. What is the status of those increases?
Answer. The Tribe provided a comment on May 26, 2017, in response
to 2017 Proposed O&M rate (FRN 82-18774) recommending the O&M rate be
increased from $54/acre to $60.25/acre. The BIA Irrigation System
Manager determined there was adequate project funding for maintenance
and rehabilitation work during 2017, and thus made the decision to
postpone a Project O&M assessment rate increase for 2018. BIA will
evaluate the Tribe's recommended rate increase during the required
budget planning process with the project water users, taking into
consideration additional staff hired in the interim. The Tribe's
request will be included for discussion during that rate setting
process.
White Mountain Apache Tribe, Arizona.
Question 2. As you may know, the WMAT is on high-risk status for
failing to submit audits to the BIA on 638 services. The tribe is
currently on a cost-reimbursement basis with BIA. My understanding is
that the Tribe is working to provide the needed audits, but is still
seeking information from BIA on how to be removed from the agency's
high-risk list and avoid re-assumption of services. Please provide a
letter to the WMAT indicating what remaining steps the tribe must take
to achieve compliance.
Answer. The BIA will provide this information to the Tribe in the
near future.
Attachment
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
______
*RESPONSES TO THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS WERE NOT AVAILABLE AT THE TIME
THIS HEARING WENT TO PRINT*
Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Tom Udall to
Hon. Aaron Payment
Infrastructure
Question 1. Interior's budget includes a new ``The Public Lands
Infrastructure Fund,'' the aim of which is to provide up to $18 billion
to address what Interior calls the department's ``deferred maintenance
backlog,'' according to a press release from the agency. The fund would
support necessary repairs and improvement in national parks, national
wildlife refuges, and BIE schools. Does NCAI have priority areas for
this Infrastructure Fund, if enacted?
Question 2. The President's FY 2019 budget proposal for the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)'s Indian Housing
programs administered by the Office of Native American Programs (ONAP)
proposes significant cuts to Indian housing programs($131.2M in cuts
overall). One specific program, the Indian Community Block Grant (ICBG)
was zeroed out because the Administration believes the program is
duplicative of other HUD programs such as the Native American Housing
Block Grant under NAHASDA. The ICBG is used by tribal housing
authorities to leverage NAHASDA dollars for critical infrastructure
improvements to homes. Does NCAI believe the ICBG program is
duplicative or simply not needed?
DOI Reorganization
Question 3. Secretary Zinke proposes dividing Interior's various
bureaus into 13 geographic regions across the country based on
watershed and other natural resource boundary lines, an idea modeled on
John Wesley Powell's proposal that state boundaries follow watersheds.
Interior intends for these changes to improve agency collaboration and
efficiency by shifting more authority from Washington to communities
out West and by aligning regional offices for agencies like the
National Park Service and the Bureau of Land Management.
a. Does NCAI have views on Interior's proposed reorganization,
especially its potential impact on BIA regions and other agencies that
service Indian tribes, such as the Bureau of Land Management?
b. Has NCAI formally communicated these views to Interior?
Natural Resources Management
Question 4. Tribes manage 11 million more acres of land than the
entire National Park Service (with 95 million acres of land managed
either by tribes or the United States). Cuts to these natural resource
management programs will affect everything from agriculture and
forestry to water resources and wildlife and fish conservation.
Yet Interior's proposed budget would cut funds for natural
resources management by $46 million. Please explain why it is important
that the federal government fully fund these natural resources
programs.
Question 5. Previously funded at $9.9 million in FY 2017 and FY
2018, the BIA Tribal Resilience Program (formerly the ``Tribal Climate
Resilience Program'') provides federal resources to Tribes to build
capacity and resilience through leadership engagement, delivery of data
and tools, training and tribal capacity building. Direct funding
supports goes to tribally designed resilience training, adaptation
planning, vulnerability assessments, supplemental monitoring, capacity
building, and youth engagement. Interior's budget proposal eliminates
this program. Please explain NCAI's views on the Tribal Resilience
Program?
Opioids
Question 6. The President's FY 2019 Budget Proposal includes a
number of steep cuts to Indian Programs (e.g., -$131 million in HUD
Native Housing Programs from FY2017 levels, -$22 million in cuts to BIA
human services programs from FY 2017 levels, and -$27 million in cuts
to BIA public safety and justice programs). How do cuts to federal
funding for tribal housing, human services, and public safety programs
impact tribes' ability to continue efforts to combat the opioid and
substance abuse crisis facing many communities in Indian Country?
Question 7. Within HHS, the President's FY 2019 Budget Proposal
lists addressing the opioid epidemic as the first priority discussed in
its Budget in Brief document for the Department. The proposal also
includes reserving $150 million of the total $10 billion in proposed
opioid funding for the Secretary's use in Indian Country. The Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention recently reported that the rate
ofHepatitis C infection tripled between 2010 and 2015--mostly due to
the use of needles by a growing number of drug users. What impact would
lack of sufficient funding for IHS clinical and preventive health
combined with repeal of the Affordable Care Act and Medicaid
Expansion--one of the President's FY2019 Budget Proposals for CMS--have
on tribes?
______
Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Tom Udall to
Hon. Robert McGhee
Infrastructure
Question 1. Interior's budget includes a new ``The Public Lands
Infrastructure Fund,'' the aim of which is to provide up to $18 billion
to address what Interior calls the department's ``deferred maintenance
backlog,'' according to a press release from the agency. The proceeds
within the fund would go towards 150 Bureau of Indian Education schools
in 23 states. The FY19 proposal cuts BIE funding from $885M to $741M, a
reduction of $144M (or about 16 percent). Does USET support cutting
infrastructure line items and replacing them with this Fund?
DOI Reorganization
Question 2. Secretary Zinke proposes dividing Interior's various
bureaus into 13 geographic regions across the country based on
watershed and other natural resource boundary lines, an idea modeled on
John Wesley Powell's proposal that state boundaries follow watersheds.
Interior intends for these changes to improve agency collaboration and
efficiency by shifting more authority from Washington to communities
out West and by aligning regional offices for agencies like the
National Park Service and the Bureau of Land Management.
a. Does USET have views on Interior's proposed reorganization,
especially its potential impact on BIA regions and other agencies that
service Indian tribes, such as the Bureau of Land Management?
b. Has USET formally communicated these views to Interior?
Public Safety
Question 3. The Bureau of Indian Affairs distributes funding for
law enforcement in Indian Country based on historical allocations. The
BIA considers a number of factors to determine the budget increases to
meet the areas with the greatest need. These factors include
population, size of land base, staffing levels/shortages, violent crime
rate, volume of calls, and prevalence of drug/gang activity. But law
enforcement in Indian Country is severely underfunded and many tribal
communities face high violent crime rates. The Administration is
proposing a 7 percent cut to law enforcement funding in Indian Country.
This cut will affect the hiring of more officers and worsen the
response time to victims of crime. In addition to restoring funding and
increasing budget allocations, how can Congress ensure that tribal
communities are safer?
Natural Resources Management
Question 4. Tribes manage 11 million more acres of land than the
entire National Park Service (with 95 million acres of land managed
either by tribes or the United States). Cuts to these natural resource
management programs will affect everything from agriculture and
forestry to water resources and wildlife and fish conservation. Yet
Interior's proposed budget would cut funds for natural resources
management by $46 million. Please explain why it is important that the
federal government fully fund these natural resources programs.
Question 5. Previously funded at $9.9 million in FY 2017 and FY
2018, the BIA Tribal Resilience Program (formerly the ``Tribal Climate
Resilience Program'') provides federal resources to Tribes to build
capacity and resilience through leadership engagement, delivery of data
and tools, training and tribal capacity building. Direct funding
supports goes to tribally designed resilience training, adaptation
planning, vulnerability assessments, supplemental monitoring, capacity
building, and youth engagement. Interior's budget proposal eliminates
this program. Please explain NCAI's views on the Tribal Resilience
Program?
Opioids
Question 6. The President's FY20 19 Budget Proposal includes a
number of steep cuts to Indian Programs (e.g., -$131 million in HUD
Native Housing Programs from FY 2017 levels, -$22 million in cuts to
BIA human services programs from FY 2017 levels, and -$27 million in
cuts to BIA public safety and justice programs). How do cuts to federal
funding for tribal housing, human services, and public safety programs
impact tribes' ability to continue efforts to combat the opioid crisis?
Question 7. Within HHS, the President's FY 2019 Budget Proposal
lists addressing the opioid epidemic as the first priority discussed in
its Budget in Brief document for the Department. One of the key pieces
of combatting the opioid epidemic is putting more resources towards
prevention--both addiction prevention and prescription misuse. But
IHS's proposed budget would cut preventative health funding by $71
million from FY 2017 levels--including a complete zeroing out of IHS
health education funding. Is there a misalignment between the
Administration's stated goal of addressing prevention as part of its
opioid response plan and its cutting of preventative health at IHS?
Question 8. Within HHS, the President's FY 2019 Budget Proposal
lists addressing the opioid epidemic as the first priority discussed in
its Budget in Brief document for the Department. The proposal also
includes reserving $150 million of the total $10 billion in proposed
opioid funding for the Secretary's use in Indian Country. The Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention recently reported that the rate of
Hepatitis C infection tripled between 2010 and 2015--mostly due to the
use of needles by a growing number of drug users. What impact would
lack.of sufficient funding for IHS clinical and preventive health
combined with repeal of the Affordable Care Act and Medicaid
Expansion--one of the President's FY 2019 Budget Proposals for CMS--
have on tribes?
[all]