- GEOPOLITICS OF U.S. OIL AND GAS COMPETITIVENESS
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
GEOPOLITICS OF U.S. OIL AND GAS COMPETITIVENESS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON TERRORISM, NONPROLIFERATION, AND TRADE
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MAY 22, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-132
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-173PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas
KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama
AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
Amy Porter, Chief of Staff
Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director
Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------
Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade
TED POE, Texas, Chairman
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
PAUL COOK, California
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
NORMA J. TORRES, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
WITNESSES
Kenneth B. Medlock III, Ph.D., senior director, Center for Energy
Studies, Baker Institute for Public Policy, Rice University....
5
Mr. David Carroll, president and chief executive officer, Gas
Technology Institute...........................................
19
Ms. Sarah Ladislaw, director and senior fellow, Energy and
National Security Program, Center for Strategic and
International Studies..........................................
29
Ms. Samantha Gross, fellow, Cross-Brookings Initiative on Energy
and Climate, The Brookings Institution.........................
38
LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING
Kenneth B. Medlock III, Ph.D.: Prepared statement................
8
Mr. David Carroll: Prepared statement............................
21
Ms. Sarah Ladislaw: Prepared statement...........................
32
Ms. Samantha Gross: Prepared statement...........................
40
APPENDIX
Hearing notice...................................................
54
Hearing minutes..................................................
55
GEOPOLITICS OF U.S. OIL AND GAS COMPETITIVENESS
----------
TUESDAY, MAY 22, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 o'clock
p.m., in room 2200 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ted Poe
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Poe. This is a rectangular gavel but it ought to work.
The subcommittee will come to order. Without objection, all
members will have 3 days--5 days, rather--to submit statements,
questions, and extraneous materials for the record, subject to
the length limitation in the rules.
The U.S. oil and gas industry is a force multiplier for
American influence around the world. For decades, many of the
planet's great energy producers were regimes ruled by tyrants
who leveraged their oil wealth to oppress their own people and
pursue evil foreign policy.
However, thanks to American know-how, the United States has
unleashed its own energy potential, now becoming a major player
in the global market--I should say, the major player.
In large part, America's revival as an energy superpower is
a result of the shale revolution. Through the process of
hydraulic fracturing--or fracking, as it is called, which was
invented in the '40s and expanded recently to be more
efficient--we are now able to reach oil and gas deep within the
earth, where they were previously unreachable.
With this new technology, the U.S. has gone from the
world's largest oil importer to one of the world's largest
energy exporters. The United States primarily imports heavy
crude oil and exports light crude--Texas sweet crude, as we
call it.
Just a decade ago, the U.S. was importing 12.5 million
barrels per day of crude oil and fuel, and now it's just 4
billion.
Between 2010 and 2017, oil production rose from 5 million
barrels per day to 10 million barrels a day, approaching a
record last set in 1970.
This has allowed for a dramatic reduction of our dependence
on foreign oil, which ultimately strengthens our national
security. The United States has been talking about being energy
independent since I was born. I am glad to see that we are
finally getting to that point.
In the nearly 3 years since Congress ended restrictions on
exporting crude oil, the U.S. has beat market expectations and
surged its exports to a record 2.5 million barrels, and by 2022
we will export more oil than we import.
Some people wonder why we export and import both oils. The
United States uses heavy crude in its refineries, and it's too
expensive to switch from heavy crude to light crude.
So we import our heavy crude and then we export the light
crude that other nations use that we develop quite rapidly.
Also, we have natural gas production that has been setting
new records in every year since 2000 thanks to the innovations
of liquefied natural gas----LNG, as we call it. We ship this
growing resource anywhere in the world.
Last year, we became a net exporter of natural gas for the
first time in 60 years. In the coming years, it will only
improve as the market of natural gas consumers grows and more
exporting facilities come online.
America's comeback as an energy superpower has wide-ranging
geopolitical implications besides the economic benefits to the
United States and other countries.
Its obvious benefit for Americans and the U.S. economy is
that it reduces our trade balance and creates new well-paying
jobs and it also generates more revenue, making us a stronger
nation.
But it also means less money that is going into repressive
regimes all over the world who were previously dependent--we
were dependent on for oil, and since energy is more abundant,
the price of oil is decreasing.
Overall, the result is less money for Putin's Russia, the
Ayatollah's Iran, and Maduro's Venezuela--all totalitarian
regimes that oppress their people and make their living by
selling oil and gas.
With the low price of oil, international sanctions, and
their own economic mismanagement, these regimes, who could rely
on their oil wealth to fund their activities--their nefarious
activities--are instead seeking their economic--or sinking in
their economic tank.
Now the people are on the streets demanding accountability,
and Saudi Arabia and the Gulf States have long been important
partners of the U.S. because we needed their oil and their
leverage in stabilizing oil prices.
Now we can redefine our relationship with those countries
as well. This does not mean we should become isolationists or
abandon our traditional partners. It just means we should work
better.
We have oil, we have natural gas, and we need to give the
Europeans an alternative to the blackmail from Russia and
Russia's natural gas, especially Eastern Europe.
Several years ago, I was in Ukraine in the winter, and the
Russians turned off the gas. It was dark, it was cold, and
people died, and they did it for political reasons--to try to
put their muscle on Ukraine, which they are still trying to do.
But that's just one example of the way the Russians use
natural gas as a way to force other countries to deal with them
politically.
U.S. oil and gas exports also reinforce the importance of
free trade. I am a free trader. I think we should--that
includes NAFTA but we need to make NAFTA fair and free trade as
well, which talks are going on now.
About 60 percent of U.S. gas exports go to Mexico, which
provide a major boost to our trade balance, and Canada has also
become a major importer of America-refined fuels.
I have long thought that the United States--the four
countries of Canada, United States, Texas, and Mexico--should
work together to have a North American alliance on energy.
We could become the energy major player in the world on all
types of energy if we just worked a little bit more together to
make sure that we can use that as an economic advantage but
also as a geopolitical tool against these totalitarian regimes.
So I am looking forward to hearing what our witnesses have
to say on these issues, give us some insight, and also if there
are things that Congress needs to do or not do to make sure
that the United States continues its energy exploration.
I will now turn to my friend from Massachusetts, Mr.
Keating, for his opening statement and comments.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
letting us all know your true beliefs that Texas is a sovereign
country. It's something we suspected.
Mr. Poe. You didn't know that? [Laughter.]
Mr. Keating. Well, I do now. I know it now. So I'll bring
that message back to Massachusetts.
I would like to thank the chairman for convening today's
hearing. This is an important topic because there are a lot of
factors that make development efforts more effective and
enhance our national and global security.
However, there are fewer things that, without them, there
simply cannot be development or economic growth and adequate
levels of security would be really impossible to achieve and
energy is one of those things.
U.S. oil and gas exports--the topic of our hearing today--
are an interesting piece of the global energy puzzle and
shouldn't be considered lightly--both in terms of the possible
impact on our own energy policy and national security and also
on those of many other countries as well.
With the decision to export oil and natural gas, we also
have the opportunity to be highly strategic in thinking about
our energy export policies and the geopolitical context they
create.
For example, some European countries have considered
importing U.S. LNG to reduce their reliance on Russia to meet
their energy needs.
While we are facing Russia's destabilizing interventions
around the world, including our own democratic elections here
in the United States, we have to pay attention to shifts like
this that open up new opportunities to promote our own
strategic interests abroad.
In fact, energy was one sector proposed for inclusion in
the now-stalled Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership
with the E.U.--with the idea of bringing lower barriers to
exporting U.S. oil and gas to our friends and allies in Europe.
Additionally, two of our largest LNG customers are Canada
and Mexico. If the President does in fact withdraw from NAFTA,
that will have a big effect on the sector and on thousands of
jobs that support this industry here in the United States.
Even my own sovereign country, Massachusetts, which is not
an oil or natural gas-producing state, supports--we support
these industries with manufacturing and service sectors and
contribute a significant percentage of labor income to the
crude oil supply chain here in the United States.
Our oil and gas export policy has the potential to shape
the lives of countless Americans not only in daily economic
terms here but also in how we are ultimately impacted--how we
are impacted by the effects of our export policies abroad.
Just as we cannot be blind to the countless economic and
geopolitical implications of our U.S. oil and gas export
policy, we must also be vigilant about putting this policy in
context.
In a post-Paris Climate Agreement world, there is a nearly
universal commitment to addressing the impacts of climate
change.
Investments in clean energy and renewables will be a big
part of that, not just for the U.S. and other countries but for
developing economies as well.
The effects of global markets for oil and gas should also
be part of our conversation about the makeup of U.S. energy
exports.
What will be the breakdown of our energy exports? How much
will oil and gas be a part of that? How much will renewable
energy be part of that?
We are already seeing the reverse of this here in the
United States. In my district in New Bedford, Massachusetts,
Danish companies are involved in the development of wind energy
in what will be one of the biggest offshore wind energy
projects in the country.
Energy is a global issue. This could be a boon for American
workers and American households and companies looking to have a
consistent and affordable energy year round to heat and cool
their homes and, importantly, to grow their businesses, or it
could be a series of missed opportunities.
Our conversation today highlights oil and gas. However, it
would be a mistake to ignore how these different sources of
energy fit together to provide security and reliable economic
growth and to ignore the inevitable long-term trajectories of
our energy policies.
In choosing to export oil and gas, we have opened up a
world of opportunities for interacting with other countries,
global markets, conflicts, and even foreign policy
considerations that go along with it.
However, that still means we must evaluate this policy in
the context of our own energy and economic priorities, our
long-term security interests and the realities of the foreign
policy challenges that we face.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman from Massachusetts.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Rohrabacher, for an opening comment.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and we
note that energy and our ability to be self-sufficient at
energy or how much energy we will have to feed our economy has
been a major factor for decades, and we didn't quite realize
that until America became a net importer of oil and gas a
decade or several decades ago.
Before that, I mean, we didn't give it much thought, and
let's just note that once it was clear that America was headed
toward a shortage of oil and gas, we still had people in our
country who opposed the Alaskan Pipeline.
Had they--had they been successful, Mr. Chairman, in
preventing the Alaskan Pipeline because, I understand, caribou
were--it was going to hurt the caribou and, of course, those
predictions have proven exactly the opposite and we have more
caribou.
But that fanaticism that had them opposing the Alaskan
Pipeline would have had a huge negative impact on our economy
and also would have made us even more vulnerable during this
time period when we have been importing oil.
But we face the same kind of thing with fracking, where
fanatics have opposed fracking but yet it has given us now a
new self-sufficiency.
All of these things have incredible foreign policy
implications as well as economic implications for our country,
and we need to understand them. Thank you for holding this
hearing so we will have a better understanding.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman from California.
I will introduce our witnesses and, without objection, all
witnesses' prepared statements will be made part of the record.
Please keep your comments and your presentation to no more
than 5 minutes and I will--we will--have your presentation
filed in the minutes of the hearing.
Dr. Kenneth Medlock is the senior director of the Center of
Energy Studies at Rice University's Baker Institute for Public
Policy. Previously, he served as vice president for
conferences, United States Association for Energy Economics.
Dr. Medlock, thank you for being here and thank you for
what you do at Rice University. Very good reputation.
Mr. David Carroll is the president and CEO of Gas
Technology Institute. Since 2015, Mr. Carroll has also been
president of the International Gas Union, which is made up of
150 member associations and corporations representing 97
percent of the global gas market.
Ms. Sarah Ladislaw is director of the Energy National
Security Program at the Center for Strategic and International
Studies. Previously, she worked in the Office of the Americas
in the Department of Energy.
And Samantha Gross is a fellow in foreign policy at the
Brookings Institute and a fellow at the Cross-Brookings
Initiative on Energy and Climate.
Previously, she served as director of international climate
and clean energy at the Department of Energy.
Mr. Medlock, we will start with you. Thank you.
STATEMENT OF KENNETH B. MEDLOCK III, PH.D., SENIOR DIRECTOR,
CENTER FOR ENERGY STUDIES, BAKER INSTITUTE FOR PUBLIC POLICY,
RICE UNIVERSITY
Mr. Medlock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Keating.
I also want to thank the committee for accommodating me
during the past week.
I'll take a moment just to--my grandfather passed away. He
was a World War II veteran of the Navy, a member of the Mighty
Midgets. For those of you who don't know history, you can look
it up. It's a pretty decorated group.
He was very proud of his accomplishments but also very
understated, which I think is a quality that I hope many others
will emulate.
Regarding this particular testimony, shale has been utterly
transformative, and that's where I want to start, because if we
are going to have a conversation about U.S. soft power and U.S.
foreign policy prerogative related to oil and gas, we have to
acknowledge what's happened domestically on the shale front.
It has been transformative in more than just how most of us
talk about it. Most of us talk about it as if there is a new
source of supply that has emerged into the global market scene
that's actually resulted in a reduction in import dependence in
the United States.
We have seen our crude oil imports drop dramatically. We
are now net exporters of natural gas as well as petroleum
products or refined products.
But an important, I think, lesson in all of this, and this
is really what plays into the broader discussion of what
geopolitical ramifications are, if you go back to 2003, 2004,
2005, 2006, the world was really looking at the U.S. as a
declining oil and gas province--a province that ultimately
would continue to see declines in production, growth in demand,
and increasing import dependence.
There were a lot of very significant investments made in a
vertically integrated way to develop natural gas in remote
parts of the world, move it through liquefaction facilities
onto ships, and bring it to our shores.
Back in 2003, there were 47 different terminals that had
received certification to import liquefied natural gas. Now,
all of those, of course, didn't get built, but it was certainly
a signal.
What drove that? Well, oftentimes we forget, and it's not
that far long ago, but between 2003 and 2006, the price of
natural gas in the United States was higher than anywhere else
in the world.
And, of course, when you start talking about trade, you
start talking about impetus for investment. At the end of the
day, it really is about moving product from a low price to a
high price, and that's exactly what was happening.
Of course, when you have high prices, it also stimulates
other margins of response, and that's exactly what happened in
the domestic upstream.
It wasn't the vertically integrated measures. It was a lot
of relatively small, sometimes referred to as mom and pops, but
independents that really took entrepreneurial spirit to task in
the upstream.
In the Barnett Shale, for example, Mitchell Energy went in
and actually started to try new things in the Fort Worth Basin,
as it was previously known.
You know, drilling some vertical wells, making contact with
what was known to exist for a long time--geologists had been
talking about shales for decades. This is not new to a
geologist.
But figuring out ways to make the resource both technically
and commercially recoverable was really the big challenge. It
was a challenge that was put on the table by policymakers in
the late 1970s with the Eastern Gas Shales Project. It was
taken onboard by various institutions including the Gas
Technology Institute.
But, ultimately, what happened is you saw these high prices
that matriculated into the United States, as relative demand
growth and declining production resulted in significant
innovation.
The key thing about the United States that I think is
sometimes lost in the context of understanding what's happening
domestically and what it means globally is that we enjoy a very
unique set of regulatory and legal institutions in this country
that have afforded us the ability to see our production grow.
It actually fosters innovation. It fosters entrepreneurial
activity, and when you have that kind of environment, the sky
is the limit, quite frankly.
What I just said is not unique to oil and gas, though. It's
actually true across the energy value chain. So it is actually
imperative that if the United States is going to continue to
project its influence globally, one of the things that the U.S.
Government continue to foster policies and environments that
are conducive to entrepreneurial activity.
A couple of final statements along those lines--gas--what's
happened here, the Marcellus is to gas what the Permian is to
oil. A lot of people, I don't think, have fully internalized
that.
But when we start talking about what's going to happen over
the next decade in the oil space, there is--we have just begun
to scratch the surface. The big issue right now is water and
infrastructure.
The same thing could have been said about the Marcellus,
particularly with regard to infrastructure, not too long ago.
So when we look at what the Marcellus has meant for the North
American natural gas scene, it's important to recognize that
the Permian is likely to unveil the same sort of dramatic
transformation in not only the U.S. oil market but the global
oil market.
On the gas front, the U.S. now presents what we call a
credible threat to Russian hegemonic intent in Europe. You've
seen this in Lithuania with the construction of its natural gas
import facility.
Prices were instantly negotiated once that happened because
now Russia realizes there is something out there that can
actually take market, and that is something that is incredibly
important when you start talking about foreign policy
objectives and geopolitical influence.
And the U.S. is on the cusp of actually having significant,
significant impacts globally for the next several decades as a
result of what's happened domestically.
I'll stop there.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Medlock follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Mr. Medlock.
Mr. Carroll.
STATEMENT OF MR. DAVID CARROLL, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, GAS TECHNOLOGY INSTITUTE
Mr. Carroll. Thank you.
Chairman Poe, Ranking Member, Keating, members of the
subcommittee, thanks for the opportunity to provide some
testimony today.
David Carroll, president of the Gas Technology Institute--a
Chicago-based independent not-for-profit research organization
that turns raw technology into meaningful high-impact energy
solutions that benefit both the economy and the environment.
And I have the current additional honor of serving as the
president of the International Gas Union. My term wraps up next
month as the U.S. prepares to host the World Gas Conference
right here in Washington.
As my colleague, Dr. Medlock, just indicated, while shale
gas might seem like an overnight success to many, decades of
research by GTI, the U.S. Department of Energy, and industry
really provided the technical understanding needed to produce
this abundant resource.
And when GTI and Mitchell Energy back in 1991 completed the
first horizontal well in the Barnett, the U.S. energy
transformation had begun.
So you fast forward to today, and oil and gas production
from U.S. shale has become the world's swing supply, arguably
the biggest energy breakthrough in the last 50 years.
The oil and gas sector generates $1.2 trillion in GDP and
over 9 million U.S. jobs. But a powerful impact of shale gas is
the reduced prices to everyday consumers and families.
Increased use of gas in electricity generation has reduced
CO2 emissions from the power sector by 27 percent. U.S. net
energy imports have decreased from 30 percent of our total
energy needs in 2005 to about 7 percent last year.
And with the expansion of domestic energy production from
multiple sources including renewables in steady strides in
energy efficiency, we are approaching energy independence.
Shale gas has also enabled greater participation in the
global gas market. Let me give you a few stats from IGU's 2018
world LNG report, which is issuing next month.
Global trade in LNG last year grew by 10 percent, or 35
million tons, as projects in Australia and the United States
came online.
China alone represented one-half of the global growth in
LNG last year, as it shifts its energy mix toward natural gas
and away from coal in its effort to fight air pollution.
Qatar remains the world's largest LNG exporter with about
30 percent of the global market. Australia was second. The U.S.
was sixth.
There were over 90 million tons of liquefaction capacity
that are under construction right now, but a third of that
comes onstream this year in six countries, including Australia,
the U.S., and Russia.
So U.S. LNG now competes in a dynamic market with an
increasing number of producers and consumers, and yes, we are
now a major exporter.
But our success is not assured. Our competitors are not
standing still. They're investing. They're expanding. So we
must make efforts to enhance productivity in upstream
production and expand transportation networks and liquefaction
processes to keep pace.
A few comments about demand--about 70 percent of global
demand in liquefied natural gas will occur in non-OECD
countries. Let's take India, for example, which has an
ambitious goal of increasing gas in its energy mix from 6
percent today to 15 percent over the next 15 years.
LNG imports are going to play a role, as will more domestic
production, nationwide pipeline construction, and new city gas
distribution networks. Helping India enhance its energy
security, promoting its economic development, and improving the
environment is in our interests as a country.
Last June, President Trump and Prime Minister Modi
announced the U.S.-India Strategic Energy Partnership,
affirming the importance of our bilateral relationship.
Secretary Perry recently travelled to New Delhi where he
and Energy Minister Pradhan co-chaired the inaugural meeting of
this partnership.
As GTI's CEO, I've been in India over three times in the
last 18 months and have executed MOUs with two institutions to
train India's expanding energy workforce.
So these are, indeed, exciting times for natural gas in
India, to use them as an example, now the world's fourth
largest importer of LNG.
So, in conclusion, innovation in the natural gas sector
affords opportunities to enhance our economy, create jobs, save
consumers money, and engage in global trade. It's bolstered
by--it has bolstered our energy security and really given us
the flexibility in dealing with strategic partners around the
world.
It's important to remember that this success didn't happen
overnight, and it didn't happen by accident. So sustaining our
progress will require continued investments in research and
infrastructure.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Carroll follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Mr. Carroll.
Ms. Ladislaw.
STATEMENT OF MS. SARAH LADISLAW, DIRECTOR AND SENIOR FELLOW,
ENERGY AND NATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAM, CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES
Ms. Ladislaw. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Chairman Poe, Ranking Member Keating, and
members of the subcommittee. It's my pleasure to be here and to
talk with you today about the geopolitics of U.S. oil and gas
competitiveness.
My remarks and testimony represent my views and not my
colleagues and my institution.
As has been stated, the United States has experienced an
oil and natural gas production renaissance that has changed the
domestic and global energy landscape in some really important
ways.
The most direct linkage between U.S. oil and gas
competitiveness and geopolitics is the contribution it makes to
global and U.S. energy security.
First, it provides additional supply to a previously tight
market; second, U.S. tight oil adds a new kind of supply to the
market that takes months rather than years to ramp up and can
serve as a relief valve when markets are tight; third, the new
oil and gas supply source has added a sense of resource
optimism to the market.
Today, producers, consumers, and investors understand that
given the right price environment and investment conditions,
new oil and gas supplies can be brought to market.
The U.S. oil and natural gas supply surge is also good for
the U.S. economy and national security, as has also been
mentioned.
Oil and gas production in the United States is an important
source of job creation, economic growth, has provided crucial
stimulus to the economy during the post-Great Recession period,
and improves our balance of trade.
The benefits of U.S. oil and gas competitiveness should
not, however, obscure the risks that still exist to U.S. energy
security. Despite the rising level of exports, the United
States still imports a good deal of oil and natural gas.
As we approach a new hurricane season, it's important not
to forget the oil, gas, and electricity supply disruptions that
resulted from Hurricanes Harvey and Irma in 2017.
Finally, even the abundant supply of domestic oil and
natural gas is not a direct proxy for security. Delivery
systems are needed to get resources from the point of
production to the point of consumption, and in many cases, we
experience bottlenecks in that part of the energy system.
The U.S. oil and gas supply renaissance is also a good news
story for the places where energy intersects with geopolitics.
First, as I noted in my June 27 testimony to the House
Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere, North
America is now one of the most energy-advantaged regions in the
whole planet.
The energy resources contained in Canada, Mexico, and the
United States are second to none, and when combined with the
region's stable legal system, liberalized trading environment,
cross-border infrastructure, high-tech industries, and educated
and competitive labor force, it's hard to match in terms of its
potential.
It's important to look at the U.S. relationship with Canada
and Mexico as an opportunity to build on these natural
advantages.
Second, U.S. oil and gas can add to the diversity of supply
available to other countries in helpful ways. One key example
is the additional supplies made available to Europe.
The availability of additional supply sources was part of
the equation that led to the capture of--excuse me, the
departure of oil index pricing and long-term gas contracts in
Europe.
As my colleague at CSIS has recently written, this does not
mean Europe is less dependent on Russia for its gas supplies
necessarily. In 2017, Europe actually increased gas imports
from Russia, along with other countries.
The additional import options and availability of global
supplies are, of course, good for Europe's gas supply security,
but, has not in reality lessened the energy ties between Europe
and Russia, nor has it fundamentally changed the geopolitical
dynamics within the region with regard to Ukraine.
Third, major oil-producing economies like Saudi Arabia,
Russia, and other members of the Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries, or OPEC, have had to reevaluate a number
of oil market and geopolitical factors as it relates to U.S.
tight oil production.
First, the oil price drop in 2014 that resulted from a
variety of factors, including the rapid onset of U.S. oil
supply growth and subsequent period of low prices caused OPEC
to reevaluate its position within the market, both in 2014 and
again in 2016.
In order to be effective, Saudi Arabia, as the leader of
OPEC, struck up an alliance with Russia and several other non-
OPEC countries to withhold oil supply from the market in order
to stabilize prices until markets came to rebalance.
It's unclear how deep and abiding the alliance between
Russia and Saudi Arabia is beyond their current market
management arrangement.
But the relationship has been accompanied by a deepening of
Russian diplomatic and investment activity throughout the
Middle East.
The second effect on major supplying countries is the area
of economic planning and diversification. The most notable
example of this is the economic and social reform plan launched
in 2016 called Saudi Vision 2030.
Through this plan, Saudi Arabia intends to revamp its
domestic economy to rely less on oil and diversify its income
sources.
Leaving the challenges of implementing this vision aside,
it's important to note that many countries that depend on oil-
derived revenue to fund their governments have taken steps to
insulate their economies from periods of sustained low prices.
This, of course, has been done in the face of low oil
prices. So the sustainability of those reforms may be in
question when prices rise again, but the reforms were a direct
result of the oil price drop brought on by U.S. supply.
Notably, countries like Venezuela, once among the largest
and most successful oil-producing countries in the world, have
suffered a great deal under the pressure of low oil prices
after years of neglect and mismanagement under the current and
previous leadership.
One often hears it asserted that the increased production
of U.S. oil and gas has served to lessen U.S. reliance or
entanglement in the Middle East. In fact, this has hardly been
the case.
The perceived U.S. withdrawal from the Middle East was
sparked by a desire to draw down in the wartime posture of the
Middle East and shift the strategic focus to striking a
security balance in Asia.
The U.S. is no freer from entanglements in the Middle East
than it was before the onset of U.S. oil and gas supply
revolution, though it is less concerned about energy security
thanks to the low oil price environment of the last several
years.
Following the release and announcement of the U.S.
intention to withdraw from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action--the Iran agreement--the Trump administration showed
that the U.S. still relies on Middle East oil supplies to help
guarantee price stability in the region.
As I have written in other publications, energy and foreign
policy are often inextricably intertwined. But the ability for
policymakers to use very--to use energy resources as tools of
targeted foreign policy leverage or even energy dominance is
misguided.
I will be happy to take any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ladislaw follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Poe. Ms. Gross.
STATEMENT OF MS. SAMANTHA GROSS, FELLOW, CROSS-BROOKINGS
INITIATIVE ON ENERGY AND CLIMATE, THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION
Ms. Gross. Thank you to Chairman Poe, to Ranking Member
Keating, for the invitation to testify today. I am Samantha
Gross.
I am a fellow at the Brookings Institution in foreign
policy, and my work focusses on energy and environmental
geopolitics.
As everyone here has said today, the renaissance in U.S.
oil and natural gas production over the past decade has been
nothing short of remarkable.
Technological advances unlocked new resources and in 2013
made the U.S. the world's leading producer of petroleum
hydrocarbons.
We talk now about peak oil demand, whereas not that long
ago in my career we were all focussed on peak oil supply and
whether we were going to run out of oil. A big part of that
change in attitude has been the change in U.S. production.
Nonetheless, we still import millions of barrels of oil
each day at prices set on the global market based on global
trends. The United States is not influenced by the ups and
downs of global oil prices and how they react to world events.
For example, today's prices at the pump reflect the
upcoming reimposition of sanctions on Iran and also Venezuela's
plummeting oil production.
Even though we are still a significant net oil importer,
growing U.S. oil production has changed the balance of power in
the global oil market.
For example, as others have talked about, crude oil prices
took a nosedive in late 2014. The average oil price in 2015 and
2016 was less than half of what it had been for the previous 4
years.
OPEC finally decided to act at the end of 2016 to reduce
its production and try to push up prices. But in an
unprecedented move, it teemed up with Russia to make this
happen--a signal of OPEC's declining power and also of the
supply glut that growing U.S. production had created.
Unlike for oil, the U.S. is a net exporter of natural gas
and has been the world's largest gas producer since 2009. A
greater U.S. influence is really more likely to be a gas story
than an oil story.
For one reason, natural gas trade differs in important ways
from trade in oil. Gas is more difficult to transport and to
store, and so expensive infrastructure and long-term contracts
also often tie buyers and sellers together.
This less liquid market means that gas sometimes can be
more political, as we see in Russian gas trade and the fact
that they sometimes have Europe over a barrel with gas
pipelines.
Another important reason for the greater influence of gas
is that the world is shifting toward natural gas as a preferred
fuel. Natural gas has the lowest carbon emissions of any fossil
fuel, creates much lower local air pollution than coal, and is
a natural partner to renewables in power production since gas-
fired power can start up and ramp up and down very quickly in
response to changes in renewable energy production and demand.
This global shift toward gas plays into the U.S. strength
in natural gas production and can also help move the world
toward a lower carbon energy system.
Mexico is, today, the largest consumer of U.S. natural gas
and we now, as a result of this trade, have an energy trade
surplus with Mexico.
Last year, the value of energy exports to Mexico were more
than twice the value of energy imports from Mexico.
As others have mentioned, U.S. LNG is also a supply source
that could somewhat reduce Europe's dependence on natural gas
from Russia.
Today, U.S. LNG supply is just getting warmed up, and
exports to Europe right now are quite small. But the promise of
more supply to come, not just from the United States but from
others as well, gives Europe a bit more leverage with Russia in
terms of natural gas supply.
The U.S. is now a crucial source of global oil and gas
supply. But in the middle of this talk about our energy
influence, I want us to keep one important thing in mind, and
that is that the U.S. energy industry is not structured to use
its production toward geopolitical ends.
Unlike the national companies, oil companies of OPEC, the
U.S. industry is made up of dozens of companies that make
individual investment and production decisions based on
profits, not on policy.
The U.S. supply of price-responsive nonpolitical oil and
gas contributes to well-functioning global energy markets and
reduces the influence of those who want to use their oil and
gas supply toward political ends, and this provides a benefit
to energy consumers everywhere.
But oil and gas companies generally aren't tools of U.S.
foreign policy. We also must remember that the Unites States is
a major oil and gas consumer as well as a producer,
particularly for oil.
Our energy security depends on the global market. Supply
disruptions, as Sarah pointed out, don't just happen abroad.
Hurricanes and floods have brought serious disruptions in our
domestic energy supply.
Our interconnections with the world and our variety of
suppliers are key to U.S. energy security, a source of strength
and resilience rather than of weakness.
This concludes my prepared remarks, but I look forward to
your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Gross follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Poe. I thank all members of the panel. Without
objection, the chair will recognize the gentleman from Florida
first, Mr. Mast.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Chairman. I appreciate it.
And Ms. Ladislaw, I wanted to hit you on this but I was
also glad to hear you speak about this, Ms. Gross--and I was
wondering if you could expand a little bit on what's going on
not just with supply disruption--I think we are a little bit
more familiar with what that can look like here in the United
States of America, but when we branch out and we look at supply
disruption in terms of what can happen in Qatar, in Australia,
obviously, that you could be looping in the relationship with
the proximity of Iran, when we are talking about Qatar but,
more specifically, Australia and Russia: What are the natural
disaster supply disruptions that we could see, you know,
affecting the chains in those places?
Ms. Ladislaw. I will start and then turn it to Sam.
I mean, I think when you look at Australia, it's not a
natural disaster supply disruption, but, you know, Australia
has a really important example of a story that is meaningful to
the U.S.
It built out a huge amount of natural gas export capacity
and then experienced a position where their domestic industries
were paying prices that were higher than the export markets to
which they were selling natural gas, and they had to threaten
to curtail natural gas exports from Australia as a result.
And that was just because they weren't able to, you know,
expand supplies enough for their domestic market. It was
something that took lots and lots of people by surprise. But it
harkens back to that midstream infrastructure comment that I
brought up before, which is if you have all the gas in the
world but if it's in the ground and it can't get to the people
that need it, it doesn't do anybody any good.
And so, there's a lot of domestic politics in Australia
right now that are really centered around this idea of we've
got to make sure we make the domestic market whole as well as
be able to, you know, meet our export arrangements.
It's not geopolitical. It's not sexy. It's just business,
right? And so I think we--it was probably one of the things
that took the U.S. Government so long when it came to exporting
LNG facilities here in the U.S. to getting those permits right.
There was a concern here whether their domestic resource
base would be adequate for us to support the export of gas and
also meet those needs here.
So kind of a wonky logistical issue; one that we seem to
have gotten beyond. But Australia thought they got beyond it,
too, and then it kind of hit them in the face unexpectedly.
Ms. Gross. Just a brief comment to that, and that is that
there was definitely concern when the Department of Energy was
approving--was starting to approve LNG exports that it would
push up domestic gas prices.
We haven't seen that thus far. Granted, LNG is just getting
warmed up here. But one thing that I think points to the fact
that we may get this right is that you see a lot of industries
coming back to the United States based on the promise of low
gas prices.
In particular, there's been a real renaissance in chemical
industry here in the United States. And so they're making
significant financial bets on the fact that gas prices in the
U.S. will remain quite reasonable.
And so, you know, we'll see what happens. But there's
significant money betting that that will go right.
Mr. Mast. Sticking with that same triangle of nations,
could you point to any differences on the broad strokes in
terms of what creates competitive advantages and disadvantages,
based upon environmental regulation for the--for the refinement
and the production of natural gas rather than mining? Thank
you.
Ms. Ladislaw. In those three countries?
Mr. Mast. Yes. Australia, Russia----
Ms. Ladislaw. So this is a good question. I am not sure
I've got the best answer for what creates competitive
advantages. All three economies function very differently in
terms of how they pursue both domestic gas production, export,
and investment for petrochemicals.
I think one of the interesting things is for a long time
both Russia and Qatar functioned as the least cost producers of
gas with a readily available resource base and, therefore, they
had a natural advantage to refining in petrochemical industries
in terms of what they were able to invest.
The U.S. has been able to do a heck of a lot more of that
business in recent years as a result of that. In terms of
environmental permitting, I really can't speak to that issue.
Mr. Mast. Does anybody on the panel have anything to offer
in terms of broad stroke differences between environmental
permitting across those nations?
I will take that. Yes, sir.
Mr. Carroll. Yes. I would just say that in the case of
Russia in particular, I think the lack of available data,
especially with regard to environmental impact, methane
emissions, and the like is a little more suspect and a little
less available.
That said, some of the major producers are working to
mitigate those emissions is one example.
Mr. Mast. Thank you.
The chair will now yield back. Thanks for the time.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman from Florida.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from the Republic of
Massachusetts, Mr. Keating.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am sorry for your loss, Dr. Medlock.
The overall rosy picture--before I get into international
issues, a quick domestic question, though. The impression was
the U.S. is going to be in a great position, flowing with
cheaper, cleaner energy.
But there are portions of the United States that may not
have as rosy a forecast. Now, where I am in Massachusetts,
sometimes the access issues become difficult, and we faced some
problems there.
Are there other parts of the country, and how does a place
like that cope with those problems?
Dr. Carroll, do you want to start?
Mr. Carroll. The first thing you did this winter was get a
ship of LNG in from Russia from the Amal plant, which helped
deal with the--in order to keep your heat going and your power
being generated there.
That's, clearly, as I look across the United States, the
biggest constraint in pipeline capacity is in that New England-
New York area, which constrains the flow of gas both into the
northeastern U.S. and eastern Canada as well.
And it's a shame, given the huge quantities of affordable
gas that are located in Marcellus just a couple hundred miles
away.
So as I see it, that would be a critical--a critical
opportunity to increase the infrastructure. That said, how do
you get around it today? You could import, as you did with LNG
through the Everett Terminal in Massachusetts.
You can, of course, move more toward renewables as best you
can to minimize the demand for fossil fuels. But as, again, I
look across the country, that pinch point up there is probably
the most acute.
Mr. Keating. And they're closing--decommissioning a nuclear
plant there, too.
So anyone else have anything to add about the U.S.
difficulties?
Mr. Medlock. Thank you for the question, and I think this
actually brings up a good opportunity to draw out a parallel
that Sarah actually just raised with regard to Australia.
The very high natural gas prices they experienced in the
state of South Australia in Victoria were the result of a lack
of sufficient pipeline capacity to move gas from where it's
produced to where it was needed.
That is something that will happen in perpetuity until
either capacity is added or storage options are added in the
region, and I've had some conversations with the foreign
minister there about this. They're looking at all of those
issues.
The thing that they run into constantly, though, is local
opposition to anything related to fossil fuels. And so they
continue to push back on anything until the price jumps and
then they realize, well, this isn't really a viable option, and
it's led to some interest in developing floating re-gas
capability to back door--the end of pipe constraint that exists
to access those markets.
In a lot of ways, that's what Everett serves currently in
the New England market. It serves as a way to sort of back door
that end of pipe market when you have demand rise because it
gets very cold, for example.
Interestingly, as was just pointed out, this past winter we
saw a cargo of Russian LNG that was reloaded in the U.K. land
in Boston and I know that got some people's hairs on edge,
right?
Mr. Keating. It didn't affect me, though. [Laughter.]
Mr. Medlock. Well, no, but----
Mr. Keating. But if I could--I am running out of time--just
want to ask one international kind of question. We use
sanctions a great deal in our country now with major oil and
gas-producing countries like Iran, Russia, Venezuela.
How is that working, and what are the effects of that? I
know Ms. Ladislaw mentioned that, but particularly the other
three panelists, or we can hear more from Ms. Ladislaw.
Ms. Gross. It depends on which sanctions and where. I will
say that the sanctions that we are putting back in place on
Iran will be quite effective.
The reason why these sanctions are so effective or will be
so effective is that they're focused on the U.S. banking
system, and so you can't clear Iranian oil or gas through the
U.S. banking system.
Given that--given that the dollar is the reserve currency--
that oil trade happens in dollars--that makes it extremely
difficult for them to sell abroad.
And so that sort of sanction is extremely difficult to get
around. You may see it some, particularly with respect to the
Chinese, who can do some trade without doing--without using
dollars.
But I think those sanctions will be incredibly effective in
cutting exports from Iran.
Ms. Ladislaw. I think financial and energy sector related
sanctions have been very effective when they're implemented
multilaterally because it doesn't just make the, you know, sort
of air from this part of the balloon go to some other place,
right, which happens with oil, quite typically.
I think the longer-term issue is what's the long-term
consequence for a intensely global industry that has to deal
with--I don't know when Russian energy sanctions or financial
sanctions will ever go away.
I don't see an end to that. And so countries around the
world are looking for ways to work around them and so it's
creating a whole different sort of alternative in financing and
technology and a whole bunch of other things for countries that
would really just like to stay away from our ability to reach
them.
It's a long-term problem, but I do think it's one that
we've got to keep on the horizon, particularly when we don't
know when the sanctions will go away.
Mr. Keating. My time has expired. I yield back.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman.
Once again, I thank all of you for being here. I have the
philosophy I am for everything below the ground and everything
above the ground. I am for all of the above and below.
We haven't talked about several of those, like renewables
and wind power, solar energy. We'll do that at a later hearing.
When I was in India and talked to the foreign minister
there, the foreign minister kept saying 1,300,000,000 people,
and finally it dawned on me that there's 1 billion more people
in India than there are in the United States.
That's a lot of folks, and I think I saw every one of them
when I was over there. The conversation was about getting LNG
from the United States to India.
We can set an--and I agree with you, the United States
looks at energy differently because these companies are all in
the business to make a profit--capitalism, if we can use that
word--as opposed to nationalized energy companies.
But it does have the geopolitical effect, as well--as--
maybe not the primary objective, but it does have that
objective.
And so can you highlight for me selling natural gas where
we are with India? My understanding is we can develop it,
produce it, send it across the ocean, and sell it to them and
they can buy it cheaper than they can drill it themselves, and
we still make a profit.
So where is that going? Dr. Medlock, do you want to comment
on that?
Mr. Medlock. I would be happy to. Thanks for the question.
I think you're touching on something that's actually bigger
than just India. Currently, when we have discussions about
geopolitical influence of the U.S. energy renaissance, we tend
to want to focus on what's happening in Europe with regard to
Russia because that's sort of the thing that's hot button--
that's very relevant right now.
But if we put a longer-term view on this, you quickly come
to the realization that if I just put my hands on a map around
China, India, and the ASEAN countries, that's 3 billion people
in a part of the world that's growing at a clip of greater than
5 percent a year.
So for the next 20, 30, years, that is the engine that's
going to drive the shape of the energy landscape globally. The
better we could connect with rulers in that part of the world,
with industries in that part of the world, with individuals in
that part of the world, the more influence we'll actually be
able to have over the--over how that sort of all those
geopolitical relationships ultimately shake out.
That will actually convey tremendous benefit to the U.S.
Government and its people, quite frankly, as we go forward over
the next two to three decades.
Moving beyond that, we still haven't even touched on, if we
are going to do the math, another 3.3 billion people that live
in sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, Central Asia, and the
Middle East.
You're talking about a massive number of people outside of
where we conventionally talk about, or traditionally talk about
trading oil and natural gas that we have the ability to reach
and make contact with--again, to shape and influence
discussions around energy, around foreign policy, et cetera.
And energy is a great way to do that because energy is the
go of things, to steal a quote. It is the thing that drives
economic engines around the world and it will always be the
case, regardless of the form of energy. It's always going to be
important.
Mr. Poe. I recently met with the Speakers of the House of
Ukraine and Moldova and Georgia, and they are working together
to move more to the West, to democracy, et cetera.
What is--what is the United States doing energy wise for
those three specific countries? Anything?
Or are they developing their own resources? Are we selling
them our fuel? Does anyone want to comment on those three
specific countries?
Ms. Ladislaw. I don't know each of them individually in a
great deal of detail. My understanding is the strategy is
threefold.
One is to sort of help with the internal governance,
particularly in Ukraine, of their domestic energy system, which
has been sort of fraught with oh, gosh, a whole bunch of
different problems.
Two, is to make sure the interconnections in the market
within Europe is as efficient as possible and can work those
countries into the system, and then the third is dealing with
Russia vis-a-vis energy supplies into Europe and making sure
that they have sort of a level playing field for negotiating
prices. I can't speak too much beyond that, though.
Mr. Poe. Dr. Medlock.
Mr. Medlock. Yes, let me add one thing to that.
I think the strategy really has been one of trying to
promote a different type of governance around markets that
allow for more flexibility in the delivery of different types
of supply.
So this, ultimately, allows for this credible threat
hypothesis that I mentioned earlier to be realized in Europe.
So this gets to liberalization of markets--you know, actually
seeing price signals that are transmitted across the European
continent that allow for expansion of pipeline capacity,
connecting different points of entry into the continent,
allowing back haul services to move from Western to Central to
Eastern Europe, which didn't exist really to any extent just a
decade ago.
All these sorts of things have actually allowed more
flexibility and fungibility of gas molecules in the European
market, and that's really the best you can do absent a direct
point of contact.
The Ukraine--there's no ability to import LNG into the
Ukraine. So U.S. gas isn't going to land there unless it lands
in India and moves via back haul by pipeline.
Same thing with Moldova, Romania--you name all those
countries that are sort of blocked, right. It's a similar sort
of issue.
So it really is about altering market structure and
conveying the advantages that a different market structure will
actually bring in terms of providing energy security, and this
is fundamentally a trade question.
Mr. Poe. The--I think Mexico and United States and Canada
are intertwined dramatically in the energy field. Dr. Medlock,
there's a small business guy in Houston that has all of--he's a
manufacturer. He's an assembler.
He has all those little parts made in Mexico that are
brought in to his business in Houston. He assembles them, then
he sends them out to the Houston ship channel. Of course, we
get fuel from Canada as well.
Let me hear just what all four of you think on this basic
concept of--we can call it free trade--regarding energy and
energy supply--this energy supply chain.
Do you think it's a good idea? Do you think--what do we
need to do to make it better for our economy?
Each one of you can comment on it. All right. Mr. Carroll,
we'll start with you.
Mr. Carroll. I will just put it in perspective from the
natural gas side throughout North America.
If you look at it as a--as a unit, we get about seven--look
at U.S. demand. About 7 percent of that is actually imported
from Canada.
There's a net on that in terms of we send them some, they
send us some. And about 7 percent of our production goes to
Mexico.
So it's--you can look at it as 93 percent of what we
produce, we consume. But there is some movement between the
continents and, it's--the integrated North American market I
can tell you is the envy of the world.
So there's a--there's a lot of power and competitive
advantage based on the way that mechanism works.
Ms. Ladislaw. Yes, I think----
Mr. Poe. Ms. Ladislaw.
Ms. Ladislaw [continuing]. The super boring issue of sort
of standards and policy harmonization, which has always been
kind of boring for, you know, from a policy perspective. It's
something we can continue to do, particularly as we are
inventing new technologies and digitalization within the
electric power sector.
All of these things we have mechanisms--trilateral
mechanisms between all three countries to be able to do that. I
just think we need to continue to do those things.
I see more threats to the integrated North American economy
from the way that we are approaching the NAFTA trade
arrangement right now but also from steel tariffs and other
things that are, broadly, discouraging for companies that
really would like to have a North American frame of mind.
The other big threat is actually one that Representative
Keating brought up, which is that infrastructure is challenging
in all three countries right now. I think what we need to do is
look at particular places like the Gulf Coast area or the
Northeast or even, you know, the West Coast where we've got
really big advantages from a resource space or from a
technology and innovation standpoint and try and build kind of
regional innovation hubs, regional energy hubs, where we
understand how the infrastructure and the educational and
university environment and the business environment all sort of
paddle in the same direction toward really making the most of
those advantages. I just don't think we've thought that way
yet.
Mr. Poe. Ms. Gross.
Ms. Gross. I agree with everything the folks to the right--
to the right of me have said, but I will add just an additional
point. It's really also a no-brainer.
It's a no-brainer from a trade and economic perspective.
It's also a no-brainer from an environmental perspective.
Any time you're taking these products and shipping them to
nearby markets, that's a real advantage. You're also allowing
Mexico to take advantage of the significant natural gas
reserves that we had here.
The Mexican energy sector has significantly restructured
recently and allowed much more outside participation. It's
bringing more renewable energy, and the gas is a fantastic
partner for that.
And so not only is this good for the United States, good
for--you know, good to have a regional energy system, it's also
good from an environmental perspective. I think we can give it
two thumbs up from any number of points of view.
Mr. Poe. Dr. Medlock.
Mr. Medlock. I think Sarah's points are fantastic,
actually. The integrated nature of the North American market
conveys massive amounts of opportunity both on the
environmental front and the commercial front.
Commercially, you connect markets, you connect consumers
with producers, you actually make those transactions lower
cost, which actually helps grown businesses. It does all sorts
of things that are fabulous for job creation, wealth creation,
et cetera, on both sides of the border.
Environmentally, you have actually seen in Mexico--and Sam
was just referring to this--you have seen in Mexico a reduction
in fuel oil use in power generation.
Why is that? Well, it's because you have got a low--you
have got low cost natural gas that's being produced just north
of the border and it's moving south and it's being put into
natural gas-combined cycle generation facilities and it's
allowing Mexicans to actually reap the benefits of the North
American gas boom just like we do in Texas, just like we do in
Massachusetts, just like we do anywhere.
So those types of benefits actually when they're conveyed
broadly as a result of trade that can actually occur unimpeded
are tremendous on both commercial and environmental fronts.
Mr. Poe. Well, thank you all. I appreciate your being here
and also your expertise. It's fascinating to have all of you
all here to enlighten us about the way things really are. So
it's very good.
Thank you, and this subcommittee is adjourned.
Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 3:04 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]