- REAUTHORIZING THE HIGHER EDUCATION ACT: SIMPLIFYING THE FAFSA AND REDUCING THE BURDEN OF VERIFICATION
[Senate Hearing 116-361]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-361
REAUTHORIZING THE HIGHER
EDUCATION ACT:
SIMPLIFYING THE FAFSA AND
REDUCING THE BURDEN OF VERIFICATION
=======================================================================
HEARING
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION,
LABOR, AND PENSIONS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
ON
EXAMINING REAUTHORIZING THE HIGHER EDUCATION ACT, FOCUSING ON
SIMPLIFYING THE FREE APPLICATION FOR FEDERAL STUDENT AID AND REDUCING
THE BURDEN OF VERIFICATION
__________
MARCH 12, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
41-392 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2021
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION, LABOR, AND PENSIONS
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee, Chairman
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
PATTY MURRAY, Washington
RICHARD BURR, North Carolina
BERNARD SANDERS (I), Vermont
JOHNNY ISAKSON, Georgia
ROBERT P. CASEY, JR., Pennsylvania
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
SUSAN M. COLLINS, Maine
CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
BILL CASSIDY, M.D., Louisiana
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas
TIM KAINE, Virginia
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska
MARGARET WOOD HASSAN, New
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
Hampshire
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
MIKE BRAUN, Indiana
DOUG JONES, Alabama
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
David P. Cleary, Republican Staff Director
Lindsey Ward Seidman, Republican Deputy Staff Director
Evan Schatz, Minority Staff Director
John Righter, Minority Deputy Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
STATEMENTS
TUESDAY, MARCH 12, 2019
Page
Committee Members
Alexander, Hon. Lamar, Chairman, Committee on Health, Education,
Labor, and Pensions, Opening statement.........................
1
Baldwin, Hon. Tammy, Ranking Member, a U.S. Senator from the
State of Wisconsin, Opening statement..........................
3
Murray, Hon. Patty, Ranking Member, a U.S. Senator from the State
of Washington, Opening statement...............................
3
Witnesses
Scott, Kristina, Executive Director, Alabama Possible,
Birmingham, AL.................................................
9
Prepared statement...........................................
10
Summary statement............................................
14
Meotti, Michael, Executive Director, Washington Student
Achievement Council, Olympia, WA...............................
15
Prepared statement...........................................
16
Summary statement............................................
19
Wiederspan, Dr., Mark, Executive Research Officer, Iowa Student
Aid, Des Moines, IA............................................
20
Prepared statement...........................................
22
Summary statement............................................
27
Scott, Taylor, Dr., Michele, Chief Program Officer, College Now
Cleveland, Cleveland, OH.......................................
28
Prepared statement...........................................
30
Summary statement............................................
34
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL
Statements, articles, publications, letters, etc.
Addendum to the Testimony of Kristina Scott..................
50
Washington State College Bound Sign up Form Example..........
53
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Response by Kristina Scott to questions of:
Hon. Elizabeth Warren........................................
55
Hon. Jacky Rosen.............................................
56
Response by Dr. Mark Wiederspan to questions of:
Hon. Elizabeth Warren........................................
58
Hon. Jacky Rosen.............................................
61
Response by Dr. Michele Scott Taylor to questions of:
Hon. Elizabeth Warren........................................
62
Hon. Jacky Rosen.............................................
65
REAUTHORIZING THE HIGHER
EDUCATION ACT:
SIMPLIFYING THE FAFSA AND
REDUCING THE BURDEN OF VERIFICATION
----------
Tuesday, March 12, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in room
SD-430, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lamar Alexander,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Alexander [presiding], Collins, Cassidy,
Scott, Braun, Baldwin, Casey, Murphy, Kaine, Hassan, Jones, and
Rosen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ALEXANDER
The Chairman. Good morning. The hearing for the Senate
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions will please
come to order. Senator Murray has asked Senator Baldwin to be
the Ranking Member today, and we welcome her and her interest
in this topic. And after she and I make an opening statement, I
will then introduce the witnesses and we will hear from each of
them.
There are not many things that United States Senators can
do that will cause 20 million Americans to say thank you, but
we are on the verge of doing one of those things. And that is
by reducing the free application for Federal Student Aid, the
FAFSA, from 108 questions to two dozen questions, and eliminate
the need for families to give their financial information to
the Government twice. This will help 400,000 families in
Tennessee, 350,000 families in Senator Murray's Washington
State, and we could go right up and down the line here among
the Senators and identify the families and the students that
our work could help.
A volunteer mentor with Tennessee Promise, which is our
state's program that provides two years of free community
college, told me that the FAFSA, the form that 20 million
students fill out--for those who might not be familiar with it,
this is just what it looks like. Most people fill it out
online, but it is 108 questions long. This volunteer mentor
told me that the FAFSA that 20 million families fill out has a
chilling effect, in her words, on students and parents. The
former President of Southwest Tennessee Community College in
Memphis told me he believes he loses 1,500 students each
semester because the FAFSA is too complicated. East Tennessee
State University said a third of their applicants,
approximately 10,000 are selected each year for what is called
verification, a complicated process that stops Pell Grant
payments, while the students and their families scramble to
submit their Federal tax information or prove they did not have
to file taxes. Our former Governor Bill Haslam told me that
Tennessee has the highest rate of filling out the FAFSA, but
still the single biggest impediment to more students enrolling
in Tennessee Promise. And one of the questions I hear from most
students is can you please make it simpler to apply for Federal
aid.
Five years ago, in a hearing before this Committee, we
heard that the vast majority of questions on the FAFSA are
unnecessary. So, I asked the four witnesses at that time if
each could write a letter to the Committee recommending how he
or she would simplify the FAFSA. The witnesses looked at each
other and they said we do not have to write you four letters
because we can write you one letter because we agree. And so,
they did, and Senator Bennet who was then a member of the
Committee said at the time, well if that is true and if there
is that much agreement, then why don't we do what you
recommend. So, we started talking with Senators, students,
college administrators, and others about how to simplify the
FAFSA. Started gaining traction. First, the Obama
administration allowed families to fill out the FAFSA using
their tax information from the previous year, so that they
could apply to school in the fall rather than have to wait
until spring. And second, the Trump administration has put the
FAFSA application on a phone app. I was in Sevier County High
School in Tennessee in November, Dolly Parton' s high school by
the way, and saw students zipping through the FAFSA on their
iPhone.
Third, last year the Senate passed legislation that Senator
Murray and I introduced that allows students to answer up to 22
questions on the FAFSA with just one click and will stop
requiring students to give the same information to the Federal
Government twice. I cannot tell you how many times families
have asked me in Tennessee, why do I have to give the same
information to the Federal Government twice.
The final step should be our bipartisan solution that will
reduce the number of questions on the FAFSA from 108 to between
15 and 25. In 2015, Senator Bennet and I, along with Senator
Booker, Burr, King, Enzi, Warner, and Isakson introduced
bipartisan legislation that would have reduced the number of
FAFSA question to two, but after discussions with college
administrators and states, we realized we needed to keep some
questions, or states and schools would have to create their own
additional forms that students would need to fill out so we
wouldn't have gained anything. Over the last four years, we
have improved that legislation and now believe we can move
forward with bipartisan legislation that would reduce the FAFSA
to 15 to 25 questions.
Here is what all of these improvements meant to the 20
million families that fill out the FAFSA every year. One, it
reduces the questions, 108 to between 15 and 25. Two,
dramatically decreased the number of students selected for
verification because students' tax data would automatically
transfer to the Department of Education, which would greatly
reduce the need for verification. Many students and counselors
tell me the verification process is worse than filling out the
FAFSA. Three, simplifying the form in the verification process
should encourage more students to apply for Federal aid, which
will ensure that eligible students receive the Pell they
deserve. Four, students can now complete the FAFSA on their
iPhone. Five, families can now apply for Federal aid sooner
because they can use information from last year's tax return.
Six, students can find out as early as the eighth grade how
much Pell Grant funding they may be eligible for. And seven,
there is a $6 billion advantage to tax payers. That is the
amount the Department of Education estimates is issued in
improper payments every year.
These are seven huge advantages and are the result of five
years of bipartisan hearings and work by Senators, and work by
both the Obama and the Trump administrations. These bipartisan
discussions have produced a lot of agreement on simplifying the
number of questions, and the purpose of this hearing is to
learn what we need to know before taking the final step. Now I
also hear from students, can you make repaying student loans
simpler. And a large number of Senators both Republicans and
Democrats have suggested streamlining the nine ways to repay
student loans to two different ways. These include Senator
Warner, Senator King, Rubio, Merkley, Burr, Senator Baldwin,
and others. I have proposed having just two ways to repay
student loans. That is the same idea that many of these other
Senators have too.
One, a plan based on a borrower's income, which would never
require the borrower to make payments of more than 10 percent
of his or her discretionary income. If a borrower wanted to pay
off their loan, the other option would be a 10-year payment
plan with equal monthly payments similar to a 10-year mortgage.
And under both options, a borrower's payment would come
directly from their paycheck. This proposal would make it
easier for more than 9 million borrowers annually and any of
the current 42 million borrowers with outstanding Federal loan
debt to take advantage of a simpler and more affordable way to
repay their loans.
Finally, from administrators I hear, can't you do something
about the jungle of red tape, the administrative burden that
wastes time and money that could instead be spent on students
to help administrators overwhelmed by what the Kerwin-Zeppos
report called ``a jungle of red tape.'' And I propose that we
simplify Federal regulations that take time and money away from
educating students, basically following the recommendations of
that report. There are other steps this Committee is
considering to make college worth students' time and money, but
we also have the opportunity to greatly simplify the chilling
effect applying for Federal aid has on students today.
Senator Baldwin.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR BALDWIN
Senator Baldwin. Thank you, Chairman Alexander, and I would
like to submit Senator Murray's opening statement for the
record.
The Chairman. Thank you. It will be.
------
[opening statement of senator murray]
Thank you Chairman Alexander.
I am pleased this Committee is working toward a comprehensive
reauthorization of the Higher Education Act that addresses some
of the most important issues students are facing in higher
education.
It is also a positive step that this Committee is working to
find common ground--in contrast with the approach taken by the
current administration.
Just yesterday--the President proposed to slash more than $200
billion in Federal student aid through cuts to
campus-based aid,
Pell Grant funding,
and student debt relief
to pay for proposals that have all been soundly
rejected by Congress.
Instead of that divisive approach--we are working together to
achieve a reauthorization that responds to the realities faced
by our students and their families.
I have made it very clear that in order for a reauthorization
to be truly comprehensive--it must address four student-
centered priorities.
Making college more affordable and addressing the exploding
student debt crisis . . .
Holding colleges accountable for student's success . . .
Increasing access and opportunities for historically
underrepresented students . . .
Ensuring our students are able to learn in an environment free
from discrimination, harassment, and assault.
Simplifying the FAFSA would certainly help make college more
affordable and accessible for some students . . .
But that alone will not adequately address these challenges.
I hope during our conversation today we can approach this issue
as one piece in a larger puzzle that includes providing more
aid,
support,
and investment in our students.
While I am glad we are having another hearing on the Chairman's
top priority . . .
There are many difficult challenges at hand in this
reauthorization and I look forward to digging into other issues
of concern in my caucus,
including campus safety,
accountability,
and more.
But today's topic at hand is potential changes we can make to
the FAFSA to connect students with the support they need.
I believe one of the most beneficial things we can do to help
students receive their financial aid is to reduce the burden of
verification.
We're asking our students to jump through hoops to provide the
same financial information over and over again . . .
. . . and this immense burden is resulting in students leaving
money on the table.
When students can't complete the overly complicated process of
verification--referred to as the ``verification melt''--they
often drop out altogether.
We can--and should--eliminate unnecessary questions on the
FAFSA form and make it seamless to transfer over tax
information . . .
But any changes we make must ensure that low-income students
not only have access to Pell Grants, but also easy access to
campus-based aid,
state-based financial aid,
and Federal benefit programs to help with the costs
of food, housing, health care, and more.
This is personal for me--I wouldn't have been able to go to
college without the help of Federal financial aid including
Pell Grants and Work Study programs.
I'm not alone in this . . .
Colleges want to ensure low-income students have the support
they need . . .
But if we inadvertently push them to increase the burden on
students by filling out two or more forms----
the FAFSA
and school-specific forms . . .
Low-income students could potentially struggle even more than
they already do to get the help they need.
We need to ensure the questions are targeted to ensure the
students who may need more support--including
first generation college students,
students who aren't in contact with their parents,
homeless and foster youth,
student parents,
veterans and servicememembers,
and more----
are getting the help they need.
The data collected from the FAFSA should be used not just to
connect students with financial benefits----
but also to help students throughout their time in
college.
Thankfully--we're already making progress on getting students
the help they need.
At the request from Congress--the Obama administration allowed
students to apply for financial aid earlier,
with more accurate tax return information,
and also streamlined the FAFSA for homeless and
foster youth.
In last year's spending bill, I helped establish new methods
for colleges to securely share FAFSA data with a student's
consent to connect them with Federal benefits programs
including,
Medicaid,
SNAP,
Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women,
Infants and Children--or WIC
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families,
and more.
In my home State of Washington--we're working together to get
the word out about FAFSA completion and to provide students
with additional support to navigate the financial aid process.
Now--students can apply for the FAFSA through an app on their
phones and fill it out at their own pace.
I hope as we work to reauthorize the Higher Education Act--we
can build on this progress . . .
. . . and make it easier for students to access financial aid
and the benefits and support they need to succeed in higher
education.
However--as we work through this vast and complicated
reauthorization, there are steps that can be taken right now to
ease the burden on students.
Under the Trump administration, low-income students are being
flagged for verification at a rate much higher than in previous
years . . .
The process to transfer over tax return information on the
FAFSA is clunky and frequently doesn't work for many who try to
use it.
Secretary DeVos must take steps to address these flaws and to
help low-income students access the benefits and aid they need
without jumping through unnecessary hoops.
Finally, I want to touch on a topic I mentioned briefly at the
beginning of my statement.
Simplifying the FAFSA and easing the burden of verification are
important steps to address our goals of making college more
affordable and accessible to students . . .
But it does not do enough to truly address the skyrocketing
costs of college.
Right now the maximum Pell Grant is only $6,195--not nearly
enough to cover all of the costs students incur while in higher
education.
While
the Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant or S-
E-O-G,
Work Study,
state financial aid,
and other grants and scholarships can help . . .
This patchwork system usually doesn't come close to meeting the
total costs of college, including
transportation,
textbooks,
housing,
food,
child care,
and more.
I've heard from students who are living in their cars . . .
Can't afford the hundreds of dollars they are required to spend
on text books . . .
Can't find affordable child care near campus . . .
Many can't afford to even eat.
A recent study by the Government Accountability Office
confirmed that hunger on college campuses is a widespread and
national issue,
but nearly two million students who were eligible for
help paying for food weren't getting it.
If we are serious about connecting students to Pell Grants--we
must also be serious about
connecting them to other benefits
and truly making college affordable through this
reauthorization.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here today . . .
As we have a conversation around improving the FAFSA today--I
hope we can do it with the other issues surrounding college
affordability in mind.
Thank you.
______
Senator Baldwin. I also want to thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Ranking Member Murray, for convening this important hearing and
for the work toward advancing a much needed reauthorization of
the Higher Education Act. I am really looking forward to
hearing from our witnesses today about how this Committee can
continue to improve the process by which students and their
families access student aid through FAFSA. And I am
particularly interested to hear more about the issue of income
verification and its impact on low-income students.
While I agree we must do more to remove barriers that
discourage students from seeking and receiving financial
support for which they qualify under current law, doing so is
only one step in making higher education more accessible and
affordable. So, I believe we must also commit to strengthening
and expanding our Federal financial aid programs in order to
help students in need afford the true cost of college and earn
a higher education without taking on suffocating debt. As we
work toward a comprehensive Higher Education Act
reauthorization, I hope this Committee will build on today's
conversation about improving access and affordability by also
focusing on strengthening and improving institutional
accountability, as well as addressing discrimination and safety
on college campuses.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Baldwin. I am pleased to
welcome our witnesses today. I turn to Senator Jones to
introduce the first witness.
Senator Jones. Thank you, Chairman Alexander, I appreciate
that. I am pleased to welcome this morning and introduce Ms.
Kristina Scott. Ms. Scott is the Executive Director of Alabama
Possible located in Birmingham, Alabama. Alabama Possible is a
statewide nonprofit whose mission is to remove barriers to
prosperity through education, collaboration, and advocacy.
Alabama Possible has several initiatives to accomplish their
goals, including Cash for College that encourages Alabama high
school students to complete the FAFSA. Due to her work and
others throughout the state, Alabama had the fourth highest
increase in FASFA completions from 2017 to 2018.
Today she will share some of the challenges that students
face while completing the FAFSA, and broader issues surrounding
college access. Ms. Scott, thank you so much for joining us
today. I really look forward to hearing your testimony.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Jones. And on behalf of
Senator Murray, it is my pleasure to introduce Michael Meotti,
Executive Director of the Washington Student Achievement
Council. In that role, he manages the State's Financial Aid
College Readiness and College Savings Programs. Before being
appointed to the Washington Student Achievement Council, he
served as Commissioner of the Connecticut Department of Higher
Education, Executive Vice President of the Connecticut Board of
Regents for Higher Education, and President of the United Way
of Connecticut. He received his bachelor's degree and JD from
Georgetown University.
Senator Murphy. I know Senator Murray likes to claim Mr.
Meotti, but he is really one of ours.
The Chairman. That is true. Senator Murphy, would you like
to make any comment about his time in Connecticut?
Senator Murphy. No, you did him justice.
The Chairman. Good. Thank you very much. Our next witness,
Dr. Mark Wiederspan, Executive Research Officer of the Iowa
College Student Aid Commission. His research focuses on college
affordability, the design of Federal and state financial aid
programs. Dr. Wiederspan is an affiliated researcher at the
University of Michigan's Education Policy Initiative. He was a
faculty member at Arizona State University. He earned his
master's and Ph.D. at the University of Michigan.
Final witness is Dr. Michelle Scott Taylor, Chief Program
Officer at the College Now Greater Cleveland. College Now
Greater Cleveland provides college advising, financial aid
counseling, scholarship retention services to over 29,000
middle school, high school, and adult learners per year. She
was coordinator of access and retention at John Carroll
University. Is a senior research analyst for Cosmos
Corporation. She is also the CEO and Principal of Global
Learning Solutions, a consulting firm she started that provides
a variety of services to small businesses and nonprofits. She
earned her degrees from Pittsburg and Kent State University and
the University of Akron.
We thank all four of you for being here today. I would
remind each of you if you could summarize your comments in
about 5 minutes, then that will leave more time for Senators to
ask you questions. Ms. Scott, let us start with you.
STATEMENT OF KRISTINA SCOTT, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ALABAMA
POSSIBLE, BIRMINGHAMN, AL
Ms. Scott. Thank you, Chairman Alexander, Senators Baldwin
and Jones, and Members of the Committee for this opportunity to
share what we have learned from students like Caitlin, who
lives in rural Northwest Alabama.
Caitlin's parents are not in her life, and her grandparents
raised her. However, they do not have a legal custody or
guardianship relationship, which is very common. Caitlin filed
her FAFSA to qualify for her local Promise scholarship, and she
was selected for verification. Her father would not provide his
tax transcript, and even though her grandfather wrote to the
President and to Governor Kay Ivey, the community college could
not clear the verification. The only reason she is in college
today is because the local scholarship foundation decided to
step up and pay the entire cost of her tuition. Well, she had a
good result. Most students are not as lucky as Caitlin.
Alabama Possible provides direct services to nearly 1,500
Birmingham, Alabama area students, and we lead the statewide
Cash-for-College FAFSA Completion Campaign, which brings
together 328 high schools with the Alabama State Department of
Education, community college system, Commission on Higher
Education, our local Bold Goals Coalition, and scores of other
partners. In our work, college includes technical and academic
certificates and degrees from two-year and four-year colleges.
Congress and the U.S. Department of Education have worked
together to simplify the financial aid process and thank you
for those efforts. However, the FAFSA continues to be a barrier
to post-secondary attainment. Most people get help filing their
taxes from something like H&R Block, or we use TurboTax, or you
go and get help from a federally funded volunteers and tax
assistance program. And so, one of my questions is, do we need
to build a similar system for FAFSA completion, or would our
limited public and private resources be better spent supporting
students' success? That is why we ask you to increase financial
aid form completion and thus improve post-secondary attainment
and workforce readiness with three approaches.
First, streamline the FAFSA. The FAFSA has more than 100
questions, but nearly one-third apply to fewer than 1 percent
of filers. The FAFSA also uses confusing terms like emancipated
minor, and Federal student aid had to create a flowchart in
order to explain who a student's parent is, for purposes of
filing the FAFSA. A streamline FAFSA with 15 to 25 questions
about the student, their family, and where they want to go to
college will give the Department the ability to assess a
student's need. Another opportunity to streamline the FAFSA is
allowing students who face parental abandonment, abuse, or
neglect, like Caitlin, to submit their FAFSA as a provisionally
independent student after answering one screening question.
Colleges would be required to contact their admitted students
to discuss the next steps for applying for a dependency
override. So, the burden would be placed on the college rather
than on the student.
Second, focus the process on funds available to pay for
college. Students who complete their FAFSA get a student aid
report with their expected family contribution. I have seen
this over and over again that focusing the financial aid
process in what a family is expected to pay rather than the aid
they qualify for is a barrier to college access and success. In
addition, if the neediest students had an expedited process
which awarded Pell Grants to those students whose families
received means-tested Federal benefits such as the SNAP, then
those students would know that they could pay for college
without having to resubmit income data. One of the reasons that
College Promise programs have a powerful impact is that
students get a clear message that they will be able to pay for
their education after high school and means testing could have
a similar impact for low-income students.
Third, decrease of verification burden. Roughly half of all
Pell-eligible filers are flagged for verification, an estimated
25 percent of applicants then abandon the financial aid
process, making it less likely that they will enroll in
college. A shocking 59 percent of Birmingham city schools
graduates last year who filed a FAFSA, were selected for
verification. And even with the fixes to the verification
algorithm, 38 percent of this year's Birmingham city schools
FAFSA filers have been selected for verification. By
comparison, the IRS audits fewer than 1 percent of tax filers
with an adjusted gross income of up to $500,000.
Today, our bank accounts connect with our budgeting and tax
software, and we should not have to ask family to continually
re-enter complicated financial information. This is unnecessary
red tape. And not--all students can even use the data retrieval
tool. Perhaps they do not file taxes, or they file as head of
household, they have to provide a verification letter or a tax
transcript, and that is an extra hurdle to jump through. IRS
data sharing could fix these issues both on the filing side and
on the verification side. The American economy depends on
having a qualified workforce. Making post-secondary education
more accessible and affordable for families would streamline
the financial aid process and result in a stronger and more
prosperous Nation.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Scott follows:]
prepared statement of kristina scott
Thank you, Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and Members
of the Committee for this opportunity to discuss how simplifying the
Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) and reducing the
burden of verification will make education after high school more
accessible and attainable for all students, especially low-income and
first-generation college-going students.
Alabama is the Nation's sixth poorest state, and 900,000
Alabamians, 300,000 of whom are children, live below the poverty line.
I lead Alabama Possible, a statewide nonprofit organization dedicated
to breaking down barriers to prosperity through advocacy, education,
and collaboration.
A low-income student is only half as likely as a high-income
student to complete a postsecondary certificate or degree by age 26.
However, those low-income Americans who do obtain a college degree are
five times more likely than their peers to rise out of poverty. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\
Postsecondary Attainment: Differences by Socioeconomic Status
(2015). Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.
nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator_tva.asp.
Alabama Possible began our college access work in 2009 with a
small, direct service program that teamed high school students with
college students to plan, prepare, and pursue their college education.
From the very beginning, we defined college to include a broad range of
valuable postsecondary credentials, including technical and academic
certificates and degrees from two-and four-year colleges and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
universities.
We started with a misperception that students didn't want to go to
college. Instead, we quickly learned that our students wanted to go to
college, but they had no idea how to pay for it. They did not know that
financial aid, including Pell Grants, is available for students like
them.
These Alabama students' stories reflect national research findings:
most low-income students who do not apply for aid do not do so because
they believe that they are not eligible. That's true even though a
large percentage of these students would receive aid if they filed
their FAFSA. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\
Radwin, D., Wine, J., Siegel, P., and Bryan, M. (2013). 2011-
12 National Postsecondary Student Aid Study (NPSAS:12): Student
Financial Aid Estimates for 2011-12 (NCES 2013-165). Institute of
Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. nces.ed.gov/pubs2013/
2013165.pdf.
The National College Access Network wanted to know more, so they
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
did a nationwide quantitative survey. Their findings include:
1. The whole question of ``eligibility'' is moot if students
don't actually know anything about financial aid.
2. There is no lack of information about financial aid; it's
just not getting to the students who need it most.
3. Students who did not apply for financial aid were more
likely to have a negative perception of loans.
4. Males were more likely to be misinformed or uninformed about
financial aid and do not want aid in general.
5. Students who did not apply for financial aid were more
likely to prefer to pay for their schooling out of pocket.
6. Many students who did not apply for financial aid were not
confident that they could rely on their schools for support.
7. Students who did not apply for financial aid were more
likely to believe that their parents did not want to share
their information.
8. Students whose parents did not attend college were as likely
to apply for financial aid as those whose parents did attend
college.
9. Latino students were more likely to believe that there were
opportunities to receive financial aid. \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\
Cook, K., Morgan, E., Ciaramella, A., Keller, M., Kantrowitz,
M., Jones, K., Schlaikjer, E., and Ahern, M. (2016). Financial Aid
Eligibility Mindsets Among Low-Income Students: Why Do Some Believe
They Can't Receive Financial Aid for College? National College Access
Network and Huge. collegeaccess.org/images/documents/HugeResearch.pdf.
We listened to our students and quickly pivoted to emphasize FAFSA
completion and financial aid. Today, we provide direct services to
nearly 1,500 Birmingham-area students and lead the statewide Cash for
College campaign, which brings together 328 high schools along with the
Alabama State Department of Education, Alabama Community College
System, Alabama Commission on Higher Education, the Bold Goals
Coalition (a regional cradle-to-career network), and scores of other
partners. Together, we build a school-wide college-going culture by
raising expectations for student success and supporting all students
with tools and relationships necessary to pursue their education after
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
high school.
We aim to build a system which supports students pursuing
postsecondary education, and the FAFSA presents an overwhelming barrier
for too many students and families. For many families, the FAFSA is
longer than their tax form.
We are in the midst of tax season. Most people get help filing
their taxes from for-profit tax preparers like H&R Block and TurboTax
or local nonprofits participating in the federally funded Volunteers in
Tax Assistance (VITA) program. \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\
IRS Urges Taxpayers to Choose a Tax Preparer Wisely for the
Filing Season Ahead (2014). Internal Revenue Service. irs.gov/newsroom/
irs-urges-taxpayers-to-choose-a-tax-preparer-wisely for-the-filing-
season-ahead.
Do we want to build a companion system for FAFSA completion, or
would our limited public and private resources be better spent
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
supporting student success?
Congress and the US Department of Education have worked together to
simplify the FAFSA in recent years, and we applaud those efforts.
Improvements include the FAFSA opening on October 1 instead of January
1, use of prior-prior year taxes, expanded implementation of the IRS
Data Retrieval Tool, the MyStudentAid app, and access to student-level
FAFSA completion data for educators.
However, by June 30 of last year, only 54.7 percent of Alabama's
2018 high school seniors completed their FAFSA. That is below the
national average and ranks 31st among our fellow states. \5\ As a
result, Alabama families left $47.4 million in Pell Grants on the table
and millions more in need-and merit-based scholarships, grants, and
work-study jobs. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\
Form Your Future FAFSA Tracker (2018). National College Access
Network. public.tableau.com/profile/
bill.debaun.national.college.access.network#!/vizhome/
FormYourFutureFAFSA-Tracker-2018-19FAFSACycleThroughJune292018/
CurrentWeekRanking.
\6\
Helhoski, A. (2018). Students Missed Out on $2.6 Billion in
Free College Money. Nerdwallet. nerdwallet.com/blog/2018-fafsa-study/.
That's why we are here to ask you to increase FASFA completion, and
thus improve postsecondary attainment and workforce readiness, with
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
three approaches:
First, streamline the FAFSA. The current FAFSA poses more than 100
questions to prospective college students. \7\ Nearly one-third of the
questions apply to fewer than 1 percent of all filers. \8\ The FAFSA
also uses terms such as ``emancipated minor'' that are unfamiliar to
many applicants, and Federal Student Aid had to create a flow chart to
determine who is a student's parent for purposes of the FAFSA. \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\
2019-20 Free Application for Federal Student Aid (2018). U.S.
Department of Education. studentaid.ed.gov/sa/sites/default/files/2019-
20-fafsa.pdf.
\8\
Better for Students: Simplifying the Federal Financial Aid
Process (2015). Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
postsecondary.gatesfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/FAFSA-
Approach_FINAL_7_7_15.pdf.
\9\
Who's My Parent When I Fill Out the FAFSA? U.S. Department of
Education. studentaid.ed.gov/sa/sites/default/files/who-is-my-
parent.png.
A streamlined FAFSA with 15-25 questions about the student, their
family, and where they want to go to college would give the US
Department of Education the ability to assess a student's need while
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
cutting out unnecessary and often-intrusive questions.
Another opportunity to streamline the FAFSA is allowing students
who are unable to provide parent information because they face parental
abandonment, abuse, or neglect to submit their FAFSA as a
``provisionally independent'' student after answering a single
screening question. The student would receive an Estimated Family
Contribution (EFC) and estimated Pell Grant award amount based on the
provisional independent status. The student's Institutional Student
Information Record (ISIR) would indicate the provisional status, and
schools would be required to reach out to admitted students to discuss
the next steps for applying for a dependency override.
This situation makes me think about Caitlyn, who lives in rural
Northwest Alabama. Her community has a promise scholarship to the local
community college which requires that students complete the FAFSA.
Caitlyn's parents are not in her life, and her grandparents raised her.
However, they do not have legal custody or guardianship. During her
senior year, Caitlyn filed her FASFA with the help of her school
counselor. Unfortunately, she was selected for verification, and her
community college asked for a copy of her father's tax transcript. Her
father would not give it to her, and despite her grandfather's vocal
advocacy, including writing to Alabama Governor Kay Ivey, her community
college could not clear the verification. The only reason she is in
college today is because the private scholarship foundation decided to
cover the entire cost of her tuition. While she had a good result, most
students are not as lucky as Caitlyn.
Streamlining the FAFSA will provide low-income families with the
financial and emotional relief they need when preparing for college.
Second, focus the process on funds available to pay for college.
Today, students who complete their FAFSA get a Student Aid Report,
which informs them of their Expected Family Contribution, or EFC. That
number, in turn, is used to calculate access to Pell Grants and other
need-based financial aid. Focusing the process on what a family is
expected to pay, instead of on grants and other assistance for which
they qualify, is confusing and off-putting for the low-income families
we serve.
In addition, if the neediest students had an expedited process
which awarded Pell Grants to students whose families received means-
tested Federal benefits, such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program, then those students would know that they could pay for college
without having to resubmit income data they have already provided to
qualify for those benefits. One of the reasons that college promise
programs have a powerful impact is that students get a clear message
that they will be able to pay for their education after high school.
These recommendations could similarly impact college-going outcomes for
low-income students.
Third, decrease the verification burden. Verification is an audit-
like process to confirm information provided on the FAFSA. Roughly half
of all filers eligible for a Pell Grant are flagged for verification.
An estimated 25 percent of applicants abandon the financial aid process
after being flagged for verification, making it much less likely that
they will enroll in college. \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\
Warick, C. (2018) FAFSA Verification: Good Government or Red
Tape? National College Access Network. collegeaccess.org/images/
documents/Verification_White_Paper_2018.pdf.
A shocking 59.2 percent of 2018 Birmingham City Schools graduates
who filed a FAFSA were selected for verification. \11\ Even with the US
Department of Education's fixes to the verification algorithm, \12\
37.8 percent of this year's Birmingham City Schools FAFSA filers have
been selected for verification. \13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\
FAFSA Completion. Alabama Commission on Higher Education.
fafsa.ache.edu.
\12\
McCarthy, K. (2018). ED Adjusts Verification Selection
Algorithm, Selection Rates to Normalize. National Association of
Student Financial Aid Administrators. nasfaa.org/news-item/14035/
ED_Adjusts_Verification_Selection_Algorithm_Selection_Rates_to_Normalize
\13\
FAFSA Completion. Alabama Commission on Higher Education.
fafsa.ache.edu.
By comparison, the IRS audits fewer than 1 percent of tax filers
with an adjusted gross income of up to $500,000. \14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\
Enforcement: Examinations. Internal Revenue Service.
www.irs.gov/statistics/enforcement-examinations.
Increasing data-sharing among Federal agencies, particularly the
Internal Revenue Service, would help repair the leaky FAFSA pipeline.
\15\ While families can use the IRS Data Retrieval Tool (IRS DRT) to
transfer information from their Federal income tax returns to the
FAFSA, it is not always a smooth process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\
The Leaky FAFSA Pipeline (2017). National College Access
Network. collegeaccess.org/images/documents/leakyFAFSApipeline.jpg.
I had my own difficulties using the IRS DRT last fall when I tried
to file my FAFSA to test out the new MyStudentAid app. I could not
remember what tax form I used: the 1040, 1040A, or 1040EZ. I made the
wrong choice and had to start the process all over again. I graduated
from law school, and I know how to fill out forms. If I had trouble, I
can only imagine how difficult it can be for a first-generation student
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
and their family.
In a day and age when our bank accounts automatically sync with our
bookkeeping and tax software, we should not have to ask families to
repeatedly enter and re-enter complicated financial information.
Government can work more efficiently by breaking down barriers between
agencies.
Applicants who cannot use the IRS DRT for some reason, such as they
forget which tax form they used, are not required to file taxes, or
they or their parent filed as the head of household, may be required to
provide an IRS Tax Return Transcript or a Verification of Non-Filing
Letter. Students selected for verification typically must also provide
these documents to their school's financial aid office.
When families cannot access their tax transcript electronically, it
takes up to two weeks to get it via mail. However, if the student or
their family has moved or it sent to a different address from the one
on their tax return two years prior, then it can take up to six weeks
to receive it by mail.
IRS data sharing would simplify this process, reduce errors, and
eliminate barriers to financial aid eligibility. As a result, more
students who apply for financial aid would actually receive financial
aid.
Simplifying the FAFSA and reducing the burden of verification is
urgent, because postsecondary education is the bridge between jobs and
the labor skills gap.
Next year, 65 percent of all jobs will require education beyond
high school. \16\ However, only 47.6 percent of working-age Americans
hold postsecondary credentials. \17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\
Carnevale, A., Smith, N., Strohl, J. (2013). Recovery: Job
Growth and Education Requirements Through 2020. Georgetown University
Center on Education and the Workforce. cew.georgetown.edu/recovery2020.
\17\
A Stronger Nation: Learning Beyond High School Builds
American Talent. Lumina Foundation.
strongernation.luminafoundation.org/report/2019/#nation.
In Alabama, only 43 percent of adults had valuable postsecondary
credentials as of 2017, while 51 percent of job openings will require
such a credential by 2025. \18\ In order to close this gap, Governor
Kay Ivey set a goal of adding 500,000 individuals with valuable
postsecondary credentials to the state's workforce. In her Success Plus
plan to achieve this bold goal, she recognized that financial aid is a
critical component of improving educational and workforce outcomes.
\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\
Success Plus Dashboard. Alabama Workforce Council.
alabamaworks.com/successplus/.
\19\
Alabama statewide Attainment Committee (2018). Success Plus:
Preparing Alabama's Workforce for Opportunities and Growth. Alabama
Workforce Council. alabamaworks.com/wp-content/uploads/
2018.04.30_SuccessPlus.pdf.
The American economy depends on having a qualified workforce.
Making postsecondary education more accessible and affordable for
families by streamlining the financial aid process will result in a
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
stronger, more prosperous nation.
Thank you again for the opportunity to share our stories and
insights with you.
______
[summary statement of kristina scott]
We are here to ask you to simplify the Free Application for Federal
Student Aid (FAFSA) and reduce the burden of verification with three
approaches:
First, streamline the FAFSA. The current FAFSA poses more than 100
questions to prospective college students. Nearly one-third of the
questions apply to fewer than 1 percent of all filers. The FAFSA also
uses terms such as ``emancipated minor'' that are unfamiliar to many
applicants, and Federal Student Aid had to create a flow chart to
determine who is a student's parent for purposes of the FAFSA. A
streamlined FAFSA with 15-25 questions about the student, their family,
and where they want to go to college would give the US Department of
Education the ability to assess a student's need while cutting out
unnecessary and often-intrusive questions.
Another opportunity to streamline the FAFSA is allowing students
who are unable to provide parent information because they face parental
abandonment, abuse, or neglect to submit their FAFSA as a
``provisionally independent'' student after answering a single
screening question. The student would receive an Estimated Family
Contribution (EFC) and estimated Pell Grant award amount based on the
provisional independent status. The student's Institutional Student
Information Record (ISIR) would indicate the provisional status, and
schools would be required to reach out to admitted students to discuss
the next steps for applying for a dependency override.
Second, focus the process on funds available to pay for college.
Today, students who complete their FAFSA get a Student Aid Report,
which informs them of their Expected Family Contribution, or EFC. That
number, in turn, is used to calculate access to Pell Grants and other
need-based financial aid. Focusing the process on what a family is
expected to pay is confusing and off-putting.
In addition, if the neediest students had an expedited process
which awarded Pell Grants if they already receive means-tested Federal
benefits, then those students would know that they could pay for
college without having to resubmit income data they have already
provided to qualify for those benefits.
Third, decrease the verification burden. Verification is an audit-
like process to confirm information provided on the FAFSA. Roughly half
of all filers eligible for a Pell Grant are flagged for verification.
An estimated 25 percent of applicants abandon the financial aid process
after being flagged for verification, making it much less likely that
they will enroll in college. By comparison, the IRS audits fewer than 1
percent of tax filers with an adjusted gross income of up to $500,000.
Increasing data-sharing among Federal agencies, particularly the
Internal Revenue Service, would help repair the leaky FAFSA pipeline.
While families can use the IRS Data Retrieval Tool (IRS DRT) to
transfer information from their Federal income tax returns to the
FAFSA, it is not always a smooth process. We should not have to ask
families to repeatedly enter and re-enter complicated financial
information. Government can work more efficiently by breaking down
barriers between agencies.
Applicants who cannot use the IRS DRT for some reason may be
required to provide an IRS Tax Return Transcript or a Verification of
Non-Filing Letter. Students selected for verification typically must
also provide these documents to their school's financial aid office.
When families cannot access their tax transcript electronically, it
takes up to two weeks to get it via mail. However, if the student or
their family has moved or it sent to a different address from the one
on their tax return two years prior, then it can take up to six weeks
to receive it by mail.
IRS data sharing would simplify this process, reduce errors, and
eliminate barriers to financial aid eligibility. As a result, more
students who apply for financial aid would actually receive financial
aid.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Scott.
Mr. Meotti.
STATEMENT OF MICHAEL MEOTTI, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, WASHINGTON
STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT COUNCIL, OLYMPIA, WA
Mr. Meotti. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Student Achievement Council is a State Higher Education
Agency. It is somewhat of an unusual name, but I have had the
privilege of working with my peers around the country,
including some of my colleagues from every state around the
table right now in terms of Committee Members. And we are
involved in financial aid and a full range of higher education
policy issues. Washington is a very strong partner with the
Federal Government in financial aid and higher education in
general. Our total state grant programs are almost equal to the
total Pell investment for Washington residents attending
Washington public and private institutions. It is a 54-46
split. Governor Inslee has proposed a College Promise
scholarship model pending in the legislature right now. If that
passes, it will turn that grant, aid program into an
entitlement and I am sure we will probably, ultimately become a
majority partner financially when measured against grant aid on
the state and Federal level.
We are also a very strong partner in the actual work of
helping young people, and older and returning adults,
understand the availability of financial aid and access to
higher education. We started in 7th and 8th grade with our
College Bound Scholarship, which is a very simple process for
students and families to become a part of. We get data from
every school in the state on their free and reduced price lunch
population. We pre-populate a form, print it, send the forms in
bulk back to the schools, the schools give it to students'
parents, they check a couple of boxes and sign it. One of the
boxes is a pledge to fill out the FAFSA when they get to 12th
grade. We now have over 70 percent of our free and reduced
price lunch populations statewide in the College Bound
Scholarship Program. The problem though is when they get to
12th grade. A third of those who enrolled in College Bound do
not fill out a FAFSA and do not access those funds because we
use FAFSA in the state as part of--as the process for awarding
financial aid in the state.
In order to help deal with that, a few years ago we
launched a web portal. So, we update on a weekly basis to every
high school in the state on an individual student level,
whether or not a student has filed the FAFSA, and if they have,
they will know if it is in error-state. And so, we work very
closely with them not only to try and increase the rate of
filing, but also to try to manage the error rate and get that
as low as possible.
We do a lot of technical assistance for our 12-year
campaign with high schools and community organizations and want
to thank Senator Murray for her constant support of messaging
our work, including just recently taping a public service
announcement for the campaign. We, like every place in the
country, have a laundry list of stories of people struggling
with verification. People in our Native American tribes earn
substantial income from exercising their treaty rights and
things like fisheries. They do not have the tax documents to
respond to verification. Foster youth are frequently asked to
get court orders of dependency, and many young people are stuck
with trying to get a W-2 from a few years ago from a national
branded fast food chain who they think they work for, and they
do not realize they work for franchisee ``z''--this office is
maybe who knows where. And that is where they get any
documentation on the W-2. It is really not a fair partnership
to have students, schools, and states to compensate for a
broken verification system.
We also believe strongly in making the most of all the
investments to support lower-income Americans. We do use the
free and reduced price lunch system as a way to deal with our
College Bound Program. We are also working closely with our
sister state agencies in Medicaid, SNAP, TANF, and the like, to
coordinate around the possibility of doing faster completion
and program cross enrollment for the families that they serve.
Americans do not live in the silos of these Government
programs. We have an obligation in our state-Federal
partnership to break through those barriers. Just let me close
by sharing four recommendations. Probably get a unanimous
feeling across the board here that simplifying the FAFSA is
good but right now I think the real problem is the verification
system.
Second, we need to connect students to all available public
support, especially the major public assistance programs that
are already part of a state-Federal partnership. We need to
increase investment in Pell and other grant programs. And we
need to leverage the Federal investment to increase state
support for higher education, including building more student
friendly pathways to financial aid. Washington State stands
ready to work with this Washington and the Federal Government
to build a vibrant partnership on these essential issues.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Meotti follows:]
prepared statement of michael p. meotti
Introduction
Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and distinguished
Members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify today
on the state partnership with the Federal Government to expand access
to post-secondary education through financial aid.
My name is Michael Meotti, and I am the Executive Director of the
Washington Student Achievement Council (WSAC). WSAC is the state's
higher education agency and plays a leadership role in state higher
education policy. We also manage a wide variety of state financial aid
programs, college readiness programs including GEAR UP, the state's 529
plans. We also conduct research that informs state decision making and
community practice.
I served in leadership roles in a state higher education agency and
public higher education system in another state. I have worked closely
with colleagues and other stakeholders around the country in various
initiatives to increase student access and success. And before my work
in higher education, I led nonprofit organizations that worked to
increase economic success for lower income households with a focus on
how to connect people to the Federal, state and community resources.
Building a stronger state-Federal partnership
The state of Washington is already a strong partner with the
Federal Government in expanding access to higher education especially
for students from lower income households. Our state's investment in
student grants to Washington residents going to college in state almost
matches the total Pell grants awarded to these students. We rank #2
among all states in state need-based aid per full time equivalent
undergraduate student.
But we need to do more to build an environment in which all
Americans can achieve their life goals in an affordable and student-
friendly educational environment. As we sit here today, the state
legislature is moving forward on Governor Jay Inslee's proposal to
fully fund our state need grant. If passed, the rechristened College
Promise Scholarship Program will match the entitlement of the Pell
grant so that we can serve all eligible students.
The Federal partnership with states must go beyond the investment
in aid. Just making financial aid available is not sufficient to
overcome the challenges that face students from lower income and first
generation households and students of color. While states such as
Washington do collaborate with the Federal Government in concept, we
could benefit from a more formal partnership supported with funding to
promote additional investments in affordability and accessibility for
higher education. The good news is that modest investments and Federal
incentives to states to support outreach, counseling and support
programs can go a long way to maximize the return on investment on our
financial aid dollars.
Partnering in the work to support access to financial aid
Washington invests in an extensive body of work to support access
to financial aid. Much of our work focuses on supporting high schools
in their efforts to increase high school graduation and college
enrollment. We are also launching a new initiative to help adults
understand their program options and available financial support for
educational pathways.
Washington's work to support access to financial aid starts in
middle school. We are one of the few states that have a state funded
college promise program. Our College Bound Scholarship (CBS) engages
7th and 8th grade students from lower income households to consider a
college going path and to understand that financial aid is there to
make it affordable.
The College Bound enrollment process is simple. Almost all schools
in the state upload a student roster to our agency so that we can pre-
populate a ``sign up'' form. WSAC then prints these forms in bulk and
sends the forms to our schools who distribute them to students and
parents. Students and parents need only sign the form (sample attached)
after checking a few boxes to attest to income level, commit to getting
good grades and completing a FAFSA or WASFA (application for state aid
for undocumented students) in 12th grade.
In the 11 years since College Bound started enrolling middle school
students, the statewide sign up rate reached 70+ percent of all
students in the free and reduced price lunch program. Early cohorts
enrolled in CBS have graduated from high school and enrolled in college
at higher rates than their peers.
Despite these good signs of progress by College Bound students,
WSAC staff realized that more than a third were not completing a
financial aid application in their senior year. We launched our 12th
Year Campaign several years ago to help high schools increase FAFSA and
WASFA completion rates among all students.
WSAC provides a web-based FAFSA data portal to all high schools in
the state. Approximately 95 percent of high schools have signed data
sharing agreements to have access to the portal. School staff can see
which students have filed a FAFSA and if any applications are in
``error state'' which may mean that a student needs to correct some
information. We update this data on a weekly basis throughout the
school year so that school-based staff has almost real time access to
the status of their students.
Both WSAC and high school staff help students make the necessary
corrections to resolve whatever has put an application into error
state. Last year, the statewide error rate in FAFSA applications filed
by high school seniors declined to 4.4 percent. I am hopeful that we
can soon add verification rate information in the data available to
WSAC and high schools to help us support students through this process
as well.
The 12th Year Campaign currently provides technical assistance and
outreach materials to 197 partners (165 high schools and 27 community
organizations). The number of partners has been growing annually.
Partner high schools report a FAFSA completion rate 10 percentage
points higher than non-partner schools. WSAC launched the Plus 5 Push
initiative to encourage partners to work toward an annual increase of 5
points in their application rates. Our staff has developed a variety of
school recognition techniques to motivate higher performance as we can
continue to explore how we can better achieve our goals.
We are particularly proud to work with our state's US Senators and
congressional delegation to include their leadership voices to
encourage students. Just this year, Senator Murray recorded a Public
Service Announcement urging students to continue their education and
reach out to supports that can help them receive the financial aid that
makes that possible.
Struggling with the added complexity of the FAFSA verification
process
We know that the FAFSA verification process is now a major obstacle
to getting financial aid. Our analysis of US Department of Education
data shows that 31 percent of FAFSA applications or over 155,000 in
total, filed in 2017-2018 were selected for verification. The data
system won't allow us to determine how many of these applicants never
received financial aid, but the stories from our frontline partners
paint a horror story.
Washington is the home of 29 federally recognized Indian tribes.
Many of our educational institutions have staff working directly with
tribal governments and their members to support access to higher
education. One community college staff member reports that almost every
tribal member who files a FAFSA is selected for verification. Many of
these students earn a living by exercising tribal rights in fisheries
and other economic activity and are not subject to taxes. This makes
verification very complicated. In addition, many of these students do
not participate in the types of financial transactions that are used to
enable online verification and must use mail verification. In her
words, ``many of my students are already apprehensive about college and
are almost looking for an excuse to not continue.''
The state of Washington is deeply committed to supporting
educational success for foster youth. They are automatically enrolled
in our College Bound program and are eligible for additional supports
along their educational pathway. A local nonprofit that provides some
of these supports has too many frustrating stories to tell about foster
youth required to obtain dependency court orders and tax transcripts to
get financial aid. Obviously, this is a world of government process and
forms that would befuddle even highly educated adults, let alone some
of our most fragile youth seeking to continue their education.
One of our high school partners in GEAR UP and the 12th Year
Campaign shared a story about how many challenging steps can exist in
the verification process. A student was selected for verification. High
school staff helped him obtain the requested tax transcript thinking
that would resolve the issue. Weeks later an additional verification
request asked for the student's W-2 from work at a fast food restaurant
two years earlier. Like most high school students (and probably many
Americans), he had no idea how to go about getting a tax form from a
former employer and didn't understand that he hadn't worked for the
nationally recognized chain but for another corporation that was the
franchisee. High school staff helped him navigate to the franchisee's
corporate office to get his W-2. There were additional requests for
more information even up until a few days before he was able to enroll
in a community college with a financial aid package.
WSAC is committed to better understanding and helping to resolve
the challenges caused by the verification process. However, we do all
of this work on the College Bound Scholarship and 12th Year Campaign
with just a few staff positions. The budget pending in our state
legislature does add an additional position to our work. But it is not
a fair partnership to ask states, high schools or colleges to
compensate for what is clearly a broken and counterproductive
verification process.
Making the most of our investments to support low income students
Many state and Federal programs that do not have the word
``education'' anywhere in their title can support educational success
among the low-income populations they serve. Better alignment across
all these programs with state and Federal financial aid programs can
significantly help students meet the total cost of enrolling in higher
education programs. Washington already uses the free and reduced price
lunch system to support a more student-friendly enrollment process in
our College Bound program.
WSAC is working with our sister state agencies that manage the
Washington Medicaid, WIC, SNAP, TANF and childcare subsidy programs to
understand how we can collaborate on our shared goals of success for
the state residents we all serve. The issues under discussion are broad
ranging but do include cooperating at a program operation level to
help, for example, both young people and adults in Medicaid households
to maximize state and Federal financial aid for college. We are also
building on an existing body of work at many campuses to maximize
student enrollment in all public support programs for which they are
eligible. We believe that states can build coordinated systems to do
this rather than rely on random individual supports.
Americans don't live their lives in the silos of government
programs. We can, and must, make the different investments work
together to help all Americans succeed in the educational pathways that
help them achieve their dreams.
Closing
Washington is an active partner with the Federal Government in both
the money and the work that needed to support educational success for
all Americans. We in Washington know that we have a lot to do to make
our state a fully supportive environment for all students. We know we
have to invest more and work harder and smarter. And, respectfully, so
does the Federal Government.
Our state has adopted an ambitious goal that 70 percent of
Washington adults in the first half of their career (25-44 years old)
should have a post-secondary credential. This would be a big step up
but it would create enormous benefit for the people, families,
employers, communities and regions of our state. Many states across the
country have adopted similar ambitious goals.
In order to achieve these goals, we must overcome many obstacles
that stand in the way of access and success to higher education. These
obstacles are particularly severe for low-income families, students of
color, first generation students and most adults seeking their first
postsecondary credential. We will not achieve our goals without
significantly increasing educational attainment among lower income
students of all ages, including working adults.
Too often, the higher education debate focuses on tuition and fees
that are the nominal price tag for college. The cost of going to
college is much more than that. College takes time. For most Americans,
that is time taken away from their ability to contribute to their
household's basic needs for a place to live, food, transportation and
more. We will not significantly increase educational success without
understanding and meeting those essential needs.
Both states and the Federal Government need bold solutions and new
investments to put college within reach for working families. As the
Committee works on the historic reauthorization of the Higher Education
Act, I would recommend four specific proposals for your consideration:
1. Simplifying the FAFSA and verification process by
transferring tax information more seamlessly for applicants
2. Connecting students with all of the sources of financial
support that might be available to support their financial
needs, including means-tested benefit programs available at the
Federal, state, and local levels
3. Increasing the overall investment in Federal financial aid
like Pell, SEOG, and Work-Study, and making it easier for
students to access these programs
4. Leveraging the Federal investment to get states to provide
additional support for higher education and conduct additional
outreach and support of FAFSA completion through a state-
Federal partnership.
Washington state will do its part to help address the needs
students face, but it needs a partner here in the other Washington.
______
[summary statement of michael p. meotti]
Building a stronger state-Federal partnership
Washington is a full financial partner with the Federal Government
as measured by total spending on need-based grants to state residents
enrolled in public and private institutions. Washington ranks second
among all states on undergraduate need-based aid per FTE student.
Partnering in the work to support access to financial aid
Washington invests in an extensive body of work to support access
to financial aid. Historically most of our work focuses on supporting
high school students. We are launching a new initiative to help
returning adults.
Our College Bound Scholarship (CBS) engages 7th and 8th grade
students in a simplified enrollment process based on forms pre-
populated with data provided by school districts. The 12th Year
Campaign provides technical assistance and outreach materials to 197
partners (165 high schools and 27 community organizations). Senator
Murray recorded a Public Service Announcement urging students to apply
for financial aid.
Struggling with the added complexity of the FAFSA verification
process
Federal data shows 31 percent of FAFSA applications in Washington
filed in 2017-2018 were selected for verification. The data system
won't allow us to determine how many of these applicants never received
financial aid, but the stories from our frontline partners paint a
horror story. The verification system is very difficult for members of
tribal nations, foster youth and others.
Making the most of our investments to support low income students
WSAC is working with our sister state agencies that manage the
Washington Medicaid, WIC, SNAP, TANF and childcare subsidy programs to
understand how we can collaborate on our shared goals of success for
the state residents we all serve.
Closing
We recommend four specific proposals for your consideration:
1. Simplifying the FAFSA and verification process by
transferring tax information more seamlessly for applicants
2. Connecting students with all of the sources of financial
support that might be available to support their financial
needs
3. Increasing the overall investment in Federal financial aid
like Pell, SEOG, and Work-Study, and making it easier for
students to access these programs
4. Leveraging the Federal investment to get states to provide
additional support for higher education and conduct additional
outreach and support of FAFSA completion.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Meotti, and thank you for
flying all the way across the country to be with us today.
Dr. Wiederspan, welcome.
STATEMENT OF MARK WIEDERSPAN, EXECUTIVE RESEARCH OFFICER, IOWA
STUDENT AID, DES MOINES, IOWA
Dr. Wiederspan. Chairman Alexander, Senator Baldwin and
Members of the Committee, we have a motto at Iowa College Aid,
and it is that college changes everything. And indeed, it does.
Individuals who obtain a post-secondary degree not only
earn more over their lifetime, but also obtain a range of non-
monetary benefits, such as lower unemployment rates, increased
life expectancy, and improved quality of life for their
children. Any individual should have the same opportunity to
obtain these benefits. However, trends in college enrollment
indicate that the likelihood of attending college depends on
one's family income, and race and ethnicity. One of the
explanations for these gaps relates to the complexities in our
financial aid system, which creates a significant barrier to
college enrollment.
Over the past decade, there have been significant efforts
to simplify the FAFSA, and I applaud those who have made those
changes possible. However, the application is still long and
contains many questions, which are still complicated to answer.
Students are still not aware that after completing that, how
information they provide calculates in the EFC, nor how it
determines their financial aid eligibility. Even after
completing the FAFSA, some students may be required to provide
additional information because of verification. Roughly 30
percent of FAFSA filers are selected for verification annually.
Unfortunately, there is no public information available on the
Department of Education's criteria for determining who is
selected for verification.
Through my research, I have found that verification is
targeting the individuals who need financial aid the most. For
2017-18 academic year in Iowa, roughly 55 percent of Pell
eligible students were selected for verification in comparison
to 6 percent of non-Pell eligible students. Students selected
for verification many times are unaware of their selection or
lack the knowledge to complete it. If a student can complete
the paperwork, the student may be delayed in receiving their
financial aid because of the institution's time spent
completing the process. Because selection for verification is
highly associated with Pell eligibility, institutions that have
a high share of Pell students carry a heavier burden in
verifying students. Using Iowa FAFSA filers as an example, for
2017-18, 47 percent of filers intending to attend a community
college were selected for verification, compared to
approximately 17 percent at a public four-year institution.
Verification is not only a burden, but it creates an enrollment
barrier.
I have analyzed the extent to which selection for
verification impacts students likelihood to enroll in college.
Through my examination, I have found that Pell eligible
students selected for verification are significantly less
likely to enroll than their Pell eligible counterparts who are
not selected for verification. And the impact is greater at
community college, a sector that has a large Pell population.
Creating a streamline FASFA that is easy for students to
understand is possible. Research, such as my own, has
demonstrated that EFC and Pell eligibility can be approximated
with a high level of precision with only a handful of elements
that are gathered from their current income tax form. But the
success of simplification depends on students' ability to use
DRT. In recent years, some individuals were not able to use DRT
because of outages or the IRS suspending its use, which
occurred in 2017.
Based on the information I have presented in my testimony,
my general recommendation for FAFSA and verification
simplification is this. One, determine EFC and Pell eligibility
and awards on a limited number of questions, and use the data
elements that are available from the IRS as needed. Two, create
and support more data transfer between the IRS and the U.S.
Department of Education to the DRT transfer. The exchange of
more information between the two agencies can help alleviate
the need for verification. This also means expansion of DRT to
institutions and all students. For example, non-tax filers
currently must receive a letter confirming their non tax filing
status, which then they need to provide to their institution. A
process could be developed where this letter is automatically
pushed to institutions rather than having students download the
letter, sign it, and then submit it to their institutions.
Three, work with states to determine which non-financial
data elements on the FASFA are needed to determine state aid
eligibility. In my written testimony, I have provided you with
a list and an example of some of the non-financial elements
that my state, at a minimum, would need to determine the state
aid eligibility. Four, reinstate the 30 percent verification
cap at institutions, which would reduce the verification burden
for institutions that have a high number of Pell eligible
students. And five, so long as the CPS is selecting systems to
be verified, they should make the selection process more
transparent by providing students with more information on why
they were selected for verification and make the criteria or
formula to determine verification known.
My written testimony has more details. Thank you for
providing me the opportunity to appear before you today. I look
forward to any questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Wiederspan follows:]
prepared statement of mark wiederspan
Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and Members of the
Committee:
My name is Mark Wiederspan, Executive Research Director for the
Iowa College Student Aid Commission (Iowa College Aid), which is a
state agency dedicated to increasing college access, success, and
completion in Iowa. Prior to and during my tenure at Iowa College Aid,
I conducted and published several research studies examining the
feasibility of simplifying the Free Application for Federal Student Aid
(FAFSA) and the impact of verification on college enrollment for Iowa
FAFSA filers. Thank you for providing me the opportunity to testify on
both of these topics and to suggest possible reforms that could enhance
our current financial aid system.
Importance of Going to College and Significance of the College
Enrollment Problems
Higher education has long been recognized as providing individuals
with a diverse range of economic and social benefits. In 2015, full-
time workers with an Associate's degree earned roughly $10,000 more
annually than workers with a high school diploma (Ma, Pender, and
Welch, 2016). The benefits are even larger for Bachelor's degree
recipients, as they experience an earnings gain of roughly $24,600
annually. In addition to these monetary benefits, individuals with a
postsecondary degree also obtain a range of non-monetary benefits in
the form of lower unemployment rates, improved health, increased life
expectancy, and an improved quality of life for their children (Ma,
Pender, and Welch, 2016).
Any individual, regardless of income and race, should have the same
opportunity to obtain these benefits. However, national trends in
college enrollment indicate that the likelihood of attending college
varies according to one's family income and race/ethnicity, with a
higher percentage of higher-income and white students attending college
than lower-income students and students of color (Bailey & Dynarski,
2011; NCES, 2018). In my state of Iowa, for the graduating high school
classes between 2014 and 2016, there was a 27 percentage point
difference in college enrollment between non-recipients of free and
reduced price lunch (77 percent) and recipients (50 percent) (IDE,
2018).Regarding race and ethnicity, roughly 71 percent of whites
attended college right after high school graduation, compared with 55
and 58 percent for Latino and African American students, respectively.
What explains these enrollment gaps? Broadly speaking, researchers
have put forth several explanations. Some suggest that as a result of
inequality in access to resources, some students are less academically
prepared for college-level coursework, which affects their access to
and success in college (Bettinger & Long, 2009; Ellwood & Kane, 2000;
Greene & Foster, 2003). Others suggest the increasing inability of
students to finance their college education due to rising tuition
prices, a decrease in the purchasing power and availability of
financial aid, and rising unmet financial need are key factors (College
Board, 2018a, 2018b; Goldrick-Rab, 2016; Hemelt & Marcotte, 2011). A
third explanation is that the complexities in our financial aid system,
coupled with students' information constraints and lack of financial
aid knowledge to overcome these complexities, creates a significant
barrier to college enrollment. This last explanation bears further
elaboration and is the focus of my testimony today.
Completing the FAFSA is Confusing and Complex
In its current form, the FAFSA is more than five pages long and
contains over 100 questions, longer than the 1040A or the 1040EZ. To
complete the form, students need access to paperwork pertaining to
their income and savings, parents' income and savings (if a dependent),
their receipt of government assistance programs, and their amounts of
untaxed income and other liabilities (such as education tax credits and
child support paid or received). Even after they fill out the FAFSA,
students are not provided clear information regarding how the
information they submitted determines their financial aid eligibility.
The FAFSA complexity and its impact on college enrollment can be
illustrated through a well-known and frequently cited randomly
controlled experiment (Bettinger, et al., 2012). Students from low-
income families who visited tax-preparation centers and received
personal assistance in completing the FAFSA (the intervention) were
significantly more likely to enroll in college and obtain a Pell Grant
than students from families who did not receive such service.
The complexity of the FAFSA makes it hard to reach students who
need it the most. Many students do not have the resources or knowledge
to complete the form. As Heroff and Feeney (2010) report, ``low-income
students and those who are first generation or who have lower access to
guidance counselors are significantly less likely to complete the FAFSA
on time and therefore access important financial aid'' (p. 19).
Over the past decade there have been significant efforts to
simplify the FAFSA. We have seen the elimination of questions,
introduction of ``skip-logic,'' the ability to automatically import tax
information from the IRS through the Data Retrieval Tool (DRT), and the
use of prior-prior income tax information, which allows students to
apply months earlier than they could before.
I applaud those who made these changes possible, as they are a step
in the right direction. However, the application is still long and
contains complicated questions (such as untaxed income, value of
investments, and the amount of child support paid or received).
Students are still not aware of how the information they provide
calculates an Expected Family Contribution (EFC), nor how it determines
their financial aid eligibility. Students do have the opportunity to
collect necessary documents and to complete the FAFSA on the Web
Worksheet prior to beginning the online form. This allows students to
know what is going to be on the application. But it remains uncertain
whether this proactive step reduces the time, confusion, and overall
complexity of the form.
FAFSA Verification is a Burden for Students and Institutions
Even after completing the FAFSA, students wanting to go to college
can still face barriers. Some students may be required to provide
additional information because of verification, a process in which
postsecondary institutions need to verify that the information students
have provided on the FAFSA is correct.
Roughly 30 percent of FAFSA filers are selected for verification
annually. Unfortunately, there is no public information available on
the U.S. Department of Education's formula or criteria for determining
who is selected for verification. Due to Iowa College Aid's
administration of state-funded scholarship and grant programs, our
agency receives Institutional Student Information Records (ISIR) from
the U.S. Department of Education's (ED) Central Processing System (CPS)
for all Iowans who file the FAFSA. With this data, I am able to provide
some insight into who is more likely to be selected for verification.
Unfortunately, the results demonstrate that verification is
targeting the poorest individuals who need financial aid the most. For
the 2017-18 academic year, approximately 33 percent of all Iowa filers
were selected for verification. However, being Pell-eligible
significantly increases a student's likelihood of being selected, as
roughly 55 percent of Pell-eligible students were selected for
verification, in comparison to the 6 percent of non-Pell-eligible
students. I find that this gap in selection between Pell-eligible and
non-eligible students is consistent with previous FAFSA submission
years and mirrors findings of previous studies examining verification
(Cochrane, et al., 2010; Warick, 2018). Because of this sharp
difference in verification selection, I will focus the remainder of my
discussion on Pell-eligible students.
Among Pell-eligible filers in Iowa, there is substantial variation
in who is selected for verification:
Filers who successfully used the IRS Data Retrieval
Tool (DRT) to file their FAFSA were less likely to be selected
for verification than filers who did not or were not eligible
to use DRT (31 percent vs 64 percent).
Non-tax filers were more likely to be selected than
tax filers (62 percent vs 53 percent).
Filers who were not eligible for an automatic zero
EFC or whose EFC was calculated with the full needs test were
more likely to be selected than their auto-zero or simplified
needs counterparts. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\
A simplified needs test formula considers asset information,
whereas the full needs test does not.
Independent students were more likely to be selected
for verification than dependent students (65 percent vs 40
percent). This selection difference is attributed to
independent students being less likely to use the DRT and more
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
likely to be non-tax filers.
Because the Pell Grant is the largest federally funded financial
aid program, verification is done to ensure that Pell awards are given
to students who have the greatest financial need. However, the process
of having students collect additional information to verify that their
FAFSA is correct can be a burden and time-consuming, both for the
student and the institution performing the verification.
Students selected for verification many times are unaware of their
selection or lack information needed to complete the process (Davidson,
2015; Cochrane, et al., 2010). If a student can submit the necessary
verification paperwork, the student may be delayed in receiving their
financial aid because of the institution's time spent completing the
verification process, which can take over a week (MacCallum, 2008).
Starting in 2012-13, institutions were no longer required to verify
30 percent of their FAFSA filers; selection is now determined through
the CPS. In eliminating this 30 percent cap, institutions are now
required to complete the verification process for every selected
student. This means that the distribution of selected students can vary
across institutions. Because selection for verification is highly
associated with Pell eligibility, institutions that have a high share
of Pell students carry a heavier burden in verifying students than
institutions with a small share of Pell students. Using Iowa FAFSA
filers as an example, 47 percent of students intending to attend a
community college were selected for verification during the 2017-18
academic year, compared to the approximately 17 percent and 25 percent
at 4-year public and private non-profit colleges, respectively.
Verification is not only a burden but also creates an enrollment
barrier (Wiederspan, 2019). In my most recent research, I analyzed the
extent to which selection for FAFSA verification impacts students'
likelihood to enroll in college. \2\ Through my examination of all
Iowans who filed the FAFSA for the first time from the 2012-13 to the
2016-17 academic year and were Pell-eligible, I found:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\
A copy of this paper is available at: https://
www.iowacollegeaid.gov/sites/default/files/
Impact_of_Verification_on_Iowa_FAFSA_Filers.pdf. Appendix is available
at https://www.iowacollegeaid.gov/sites/default/files/
Impact_of_Verification_on_Iowa_FAFSA_Filers_APPENDIX.pdf.
Pell-eligible students selected for verification were
roughly 2.3 percentage points less likely to enroll than their
Pell-eligible counterparts who were not selected for
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
verification.
The impact of verification is greater at community
colleges, the sector with the largest Pell-eligible population
and the largest share of students selected for verification in
the state. Pell-eligible students who indicated a community
college on their FAFSA and were selected for verification were
3 percentage points less likely to enroll than students who
indicated a community college but were not selected.
Students who received an automatic zero EFC or had an
EFC calculated under the simplified needs test were less likely
to be selected for verification. However, students who were
selected for verification and received an automatic zero EFC or
an EFC that was calculated under the simplified needs test were
significantly less likely to enroll than their nonverification,
full needs test counterparts. The difference in enrollment
rates between these two groups ranged from 4 percentage points
at public 4-year institutions to roughly 7 percentage points at
community colleges.
Among the Pell-eligible students who were selected
for verification and refiled their FAFSA, over 90 percent did
not experience a change in their Pell-eligibility status.
Verification complexity is not limited to students and their
families. Iowa provides FAFSA reports to all public high schools in the
state, an initiative that Iowa College Aid oversees. Through these
reports, school counselors can know which students have completed the
FAFSA and identify which students have been selected for verification.
While most counselors know what the FAFSA is, our agency has been
fielding questions from school counselors about verification. Many
school counselors are unfamiliar with verification and unsure of the
assistance they can provide students. Through the development of
reference materials and conference phone calls, Iowa College Aid is
doing its best to advise these school counselors on how they can help
students.
Feasibility of Simplification
Creating a streamlined FAFSA that is easier for students to
understand is possible. With my co-authors Dr. Susan Dynarski at the
University of Michigan and Dr. Judith Scott-Clayton at Columbia
University, my research has demonstrated that most of the financial
information collected on the FAFSA does little to determine aid
eligibility (Dynarski & Wiederspan, 2012, 2015; Dynarski, Scott-
Clayton, & Wiederspan, 2013). EFC and Pell eligibility can be
approximated with a high level of precision with only a handful of
elements: adjusted gross income (of parents and students), taxes paid,
state of residence, family size, parents' and independent students'
marital status, type of income tax form file, and the number of family
members in college. Most of these elements can be gathered from the
current income tax form.
In one of our calculated simulations, where we used only a handful
of these elements with prior-prior income tax return information, we
found that almost 70 percent of applicants experience no change in
their Pell eligibility (Dynarski & Wiederspan, 2012). In terms of the
actual award they could receive, the simulated change in Pell amounts
was less than $500 for 78 percent of applicants.
Additional research examining FAFSA simplification has found
consistent results: even with a reduced number of questions, the
application can still target those whom financial aid is intended to
serve (Baum, et al., 2012; Dynarski & Scott-Clayton, 2007; Kelchen &
Jones, 2015; Reuben, Gault, & Baum, 2015).
The success of simplification also depends on the students' ability
to use the DRT. Being able to automatically import tax information from
the IRS to the FAFSA creates a less burdensome process in gathering the
necessary tax information and should be able to reduce time for
completing the form. However, DRT can only succeed if there is adequate
support for this function. In recent years, some individuals were not
able to use DRT because of outages or the IRS suspending its use, which
occurred in 2017.
Addressing Simplification Concerns
Should there be a change to a more simplified form with fewer
questions, some worry states will lack the detailed information they
need to administer their own financial aid programs. Previous research
from Pingel (2017) found most states use three of five major FAFSA
elements to administer state aid programs. These five elements are
demographic information, EFC, other income or asset information, date
the application was filed, and institutions listed on the form,
although the specific elements used varied across states.
Many states, like Iowa, rely on the EFC to determine financial aid
eligibility. We have a separate application to assist students in
identifying their eligibility for specific Iowa aid programs, but this
application does not replace the FAFSA. As I discussed previously,
results demonstrated that an EFC calculated with a simplified form can
be closely approximated to an EFC under the full FAFSA. Given this,
many states should be able to target their aid programs appropriately.
Previous research from Baum and colleagues (2012) found that minor
changes in EFC have little to no effect on the distribution of state
aid.
State aid administrators will likely be more concerned with the
reduction of non-financial questions in the application, as some of the
demographic questions help to identify state aid eligibility. Should a
more simplified FAFSA be used, the U.S. Department of Education will
need to work with states to determine the essential non-financial
elements. For Iowa, we have determined that, at a minimum, we would
need elements that determine (1) citizenship status; (2) length of
residency in the state; (3) grade level; (4) degree or program being
pursued; and (5) the list of schools that students report to receive
their FAFSA information.
Concluding Recommendations
Based on the information presented in this testimony, my general
recommendations for FAFSA and verification simplification are to:
Determine Pell eligibility and awards on a limited
number of questions and use the data elements that are
available from the IRS as needed.
Create and support more data transfer between the IRS
and U.S. Department of Education through the DRT transfer. The
exchange of more information between the two agencies can help
alleviate the need for verification.
Expand the use of the DRT transfer to allow
institutions and individuals, regardless of their tax filing
status, to utilize the tool. For example, non-tax filers
currently must receive a letter confirming their non-tax filing
status, which they then need to provide to their institution. A
process could be developed where this letter is automatically
pushed to institutions rather than having students download the
letter, sign it, and then submit it to their institution.
Work with states to determine which FAFSA non-
financial data elements are needed to determine state aid
eligibility and eliminate nonessential elements.
Reinstate the 30 percent verification cap at
institutions, which would reduce the verification burden for
institutions with a high number of Pell-eligible students.
As long as CPS selects students to be verified, they
should make the selection process more transparent by providing
students with more information on why they were selected for
verification and making the criteria or formula determining
selection known.
Thank you again for providing me this opportunity to speak with you
today. I look forward to your questions.
References
Baum, S., Little, K., Ma, J., & Sturtevant, A. (2012). Simplifying
student aid: What it would mean for states. New York, NY: College
Board.
Bettinger, E., & Long, B. (2009). Addressing the needs of under-
prepared college students: Does college remediation work? Journal of
Human Resources, 44(3), 736-771.
Bettinger, E., Long, B., Oreopoulos, P., & Sanbonmatsu, L. (2012).
The role of application assistance and information in college
decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA Experiment. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 127(3), 1205-1242.
Bailey, M., & Dynarski, S. (2011). Inequality in postsecondary
education. In G.J. Duncan & R.J. Murnane (eds.), Whither opportunity:
Rising inequality, schools, and children's life changes (pp. 117-132).
New York, NY: Russell Sage.
College Board. (2018a). Trends in college pricing: 2018. New York,
NY: College Board.
College Board. (2018b). Trends in student aid: 2018. New York, NY:
College Board.
Cochrane, D., LaManque, A., & Szabo-Kubitz, L. (2010). After the
FAFSA: How red tape can prevent eligible students from receiving
financial aid. Oakland, CA: The Institute for College Access & Success.
Davidson, J.C. (2015). Improving the financial aid process for
community college students: A literature review of FAFSA
simplification, information, and verification. Community College
Journal of Research and Practice, 39, 397-408.
Dynarski, S., & Scott-Clayton, J. (2007). Pell grants on a
postcard: A proposal for simple and predictable Federal student aid.
(Discussion Paper 2007-01). Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, The
Hamilton Project.
Dynarski, S., Scott-Clayton, J., & Wiederspan, M. (2013).
Simplifying tax incentives and aid for college: Progress and prospects.
Tax Policy and the Economy, 27(1), 161-201.
Dynarski, S., & Wiederspan, M. (2012). Student aid simplification:
Looking back and looking ahead. National Tax Journal, 65(1), 211-234.
Dynarski, S., & Wiederspan, M. (2015). Revisiting FAFSA
simplification: Expanding access to the IRS data retrieval tool. (EPI
Policy Brief #1). Ann Arbor, MI: Education Policy Initiative. Retrieved
from http://www.edpolicy.umich.edu/files/brief-1-revisiting-fafsa.pdf.
Ellwood, D.T., & Kane, T. (2000). Who is getting a college
education? Family background and the growing gaps in enrollment. In S.
Danzinger & J. Waldfogel (Eds.), Securing the future: Investing in
children from birth to college (pp. 283-324). New York, NY: Russell
Sage Foundation.
Greene, J., & Foster, G. (2003). Public high school graduation and
college readiness rates in the United States. Education Working Paper
No. 3. New York, NY: Manhattan Institute, Center for Civic Information.
Goldrick-Rab, S. (2016). Paying the price. Chicago, IL: The
University of Chicago Press.
Heller, D. (1997). Student price response in higher education: An
update to Leslie and Brinkman. The Journal of Higher Education, 68(6),
624-659.
Hemelt, S., and Marcotte, D., (2011) The impact of tuition
increases on enrollment at public colleges and universities.
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 33(4), 435-457.
Heroff, J., & Feeney, M. (2010). Barriers to need-based financial
aid: The relationships between income, geography, social capital and
the FAFSA. SSN eLibrary. Retrieved from https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=1639612.
Iowa Department of Education (IDE). (2018). State of Iowa--
Postsecondary readiness reports: Summary 2018. Retrieved from https://
reports.educateiowa.gov/PostSecondaryReadiness/Content/pdf/
PPR_2018_Summary.pdf.
Kelchen, R., & Jones, G. (2015). A simulation of Pell grant awards
using prior prior year financial data. Journal of Education Finance,
40(3), 253-272.
Kim, J. (2010). The effect of prices on postsecondary education: An
update to Heller. Higher Education in Review, 7, 23-46.
Ma, J., Pender, M., and Welch, M. (2016). Education pays 2016: The
benefits of higher education for individuals and society. Washington,
DC: College Board.
MacCallum, M. (2008). Effect of financial aid processing policies
on student enrollment, retention, and success. Journal of Student
Financial Aid, 37(2), 17-32.
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES). (2018). The
condition of education: 2018. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Education. Retrieved from https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2018/2018144.pdf.
Pingel, S. (2017). Simplification may not be so simple: Gauging
state alignment with the FAFSA. Denver, CO: Education Commission of the
States. Retrieved from https://www.ecs.org/wp-content/uploads/
Simplification-May-Not-Be-So-Simple-Gauging-state-alignment-with-the-
FAFSA.pdf.
Reuben, K., Gault, S., & Baum, S. (2015). Simplifying Federal
student aid: How do the plans stack up? Washington, DC: The Urban
Institute. Retrieved from https://www.urban.org/research/publication/
simplifying-Federal-student-aid-how-do-plans-stack/view/full_report.
Warick, C. (2018). FAFSA verification: Good government or red tape?
Washington, DC: National College Access Network.
Wiederspan, M. (2019). Impact of verification on Iowa FAFSA filers.
Des Moines, IA: Iowa College Aid. Retrieved at https://
www.iowacollegeaid.gov/sites/default/files/
Impact_of_Verification_on_Iowa_FAFSA_Fi lers.pdf.
______
[summary statement of mark wiederspan]
Importance of Going to College and Significance of the College
Enrollment Problems
Higher education offers individuals a range of
economic and social benefits.
There are significant income and race/ethnicity gaps
in who is attending college.
Many students are deterred from going to college
because of the complexities and burdens in our financial aid
system.
Completing the FAFSA is Confusing and Complex
Despite recent changes to the FAFSA application
process, the form is still longer and more burdensome than
Federal income tax forms.
Many low-income students do not have the resources
nor the knowledge to complete the form.
Studies have demonstrated that the FAFSA is a barrier
to college and undermines the effectiveness of financial aid.
FAFSA Verification is a Burden for Students and Institutions
Even after completing the FAFSA, students can still
face barriers because of verification.
Research demonstrates that verification is targeting
the poorest individuals who need financial aid the most.
Institutions with a high share of Pell-eligible
students carry a heavier burden in verifying students than
institutions with a smaller share of Pell-eligible students.
Filers selected for verification are significantly
less likely to enroll in college than their non-verification
counterparts.
Feasibility of Simplification
Research has demonstrated that EFC and Pell
eligibility can be approximated to a high degree with only a
handful of questions.
The use of DRT holds promise in making the FAFSA
easier to complete, but DRT success depends on the adequate
support for this function.
Concluding Recommendations
Determine Pell eligibility and awards from a limited
number of questions and use the data elements that are
available from the IRS as needed.
Create and support more data transfer between the IRS
and U.S. Department of Education through the DRT transfer. The
exchange of more information between the two agencies can help
alleviate the need for verification.
Expand the use of the DRT transfer to allow
institutions and individuals, regardless of their tax filing
status, to utilize the tool. For example, non-tax filers
currently must receive a letter confirming their non-tax filing
status, which they then need to provide to their institution. A
process could be developed where this letter is automatically
pushed to institutions rather than having students download the
letter, sign it, and then submit it to their institution.
Work with states to determine which FAFSA non-
financial data elements are needed to determine state aid
eligibility and eliminate nonessential elements.
Reinstate the 30 percent verification cap at
institutions, which would reduce the verification burden for
institutions that have a high number of Pell-eligible students.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Wiederspan.
Dr. Scott Taylor, welcome.
STATEMENT OF MICHELE SCOTT TAYLOR, CHIEF PROGRAM OFFICER,
COLLEGE NOW CLEVELAND, CLEVELAND, OH
Dr. Scott Taylor. Good morning, Chairman Alexander, Senator
Baldwin, and Members of this distinguished Committee. Thank you
for the opportunity to provide testimony on the barriers to
accessing financial aid as students and adults pursue post-
secondary opportunities.
College costs and issues of affordability are significant
challenges facing young people and adults. The reauthorization
of The Higher Education Act can address key policy levers
critical to ensuring that more low-income students, and
increasingly middle-income students, can afford higher
education. In Ohio, these challenges are specially pronounced
due to the state's higher-than-average cost of attendance. To
enroll in post-secondary, most Ohioans must borrow loans or
qualify for grants. These resources in addition to even
institutional merit aid and scholarships can only be accessed
through the completion of the FAFSA. Unfortunately, both the
real and perceived complexity of the FASFA form, often followed
by an unwieldy verification process, serves as a hindrance to
college access for the students who need it the most, including
our homeless and at-risk for homeless youth, foster youth, and
young adults aging out of the foster care system.
Each year only 45 percent of low-income students complete
the FASFA. Of the Pell eligible students, 25 percent are lost
in the verification process and ultimately do not enroll. So,
simplifying the FAFSA form and reducing or redesigning the
verification process is needed, but it is not enough. We must
continue to support comprehensive strategies that make post-
secondary more accessible and affordable. Federally supported
programs like GEAR UP and TRIO, implement and iterate on best
practices for promoting early college access and awareness
about college affordability. In addition, we must continue to
increase the Federal investment in the Pell Grant, which now
only covers about 29 percent of the total cost of attendance at
a four-year institution as compared to 79 percent back in 1975.
We also encourage the publishing of more data by the Federal
Government, disaggregated by race and ethnicity to fully
understand who is using existing Federal programs and who is
being left behind. This helps organizations like College Now
ensure we are not exacerbating already whitening equity gaps.
I am the Chief Program Officer at College Now Greater
Cleveland where our mission is to increase educational
attainment. It is the first of its kind in the Nation since our
inception in 1967. We have become the largest college access
provider in Ohio, and we remain one of the largest in the
Nation, currently serving 29,000 students. My role is to
provide leadership for our programs and services, but in
addition to providing direct service to high school and middle
school students, I have spent much of my career working with
adult learners and students on college campuses. For many
students who I have personally supported, mentored, mothered,
coached, and dragged across the finish line, as well as for
thousands of students that College Now serves, I can assure you
that getting to and through college is a full-time job just
beyond being a college student. And I can say this because I
have witnessed it, and I have lived it.
Coming from a poor family where neither of my parents nor
immediate family members had earned a college degree, I was not
exposed to what David Connolly calls college knowledge and
transition information. I had been told my entire life that if
I did well in school, I can go to Harvard for free. Well I did
do well in school, but it was in the context of a lower
resourced public school system and an equally low-resourced
family. I was not provided enough information about affording
college or the process of getting there. So, I navigated my way
through with enough Pell Grant dollars and work-study to allow
me to focus on my academics. I did not have to worry so much
about my school bill, however I did apply to become an RA so
that I could get free room and board.
This is the very reason why I work in higher education, and
that is where College Now comes in, to help students like me
and students like Brandon. So, Brandon, he is a student who is
eager to raise himself and his family out of poverty. He
attempts to complete the FAFSA himself and not with a College
Now advisor, but we later find out that he answers numerous
questions incorrectly, such as his family size, such as his
dependency status. He thinks because he contributes to the
family household by paying rent and buying groceries that he
should be declared independent, but we all know that is not
true when it comes to the FASFA. Subsequently, he finds out
about these errors and he is selected for verification, but it
is after importing scholarship deadlines have passed. So, we
helped him correct the FAFSA. We gave him a College Now
scholarship, but then we banned him from doing the FAFSA alone
again in the future.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Scott Taylor. Did you know that low-income students are
more likely to be selected for verification when they have a
zero EFC? When selected for verification, a student should be
able to provide proof of enrollment in other means-tested
Government benefits such as SNAP, as discussed earlier. Not
only that, if you are selected for verification at one
institution, you are likely to be selected at multiple. But
there is some hope. Just being here today and sharing this with
you gives me hope.
In places like Ohio and other states, we are setting
aggressive goals for increasing educational attainment. We are
implementing strategies to mitigate barriers, such as applying
and competing for Federal grants to increase awareness and
preparedness, raising millions of dollars in scholarship
dollars, working with state agencies to increase support for
post-secondary, and making community college free, such as in
the great state of Tennessee, and many other activities. In
Cleveland specifically, we were recently named a Say Yes to
Education city, the final of four chapters to be established,
raising enough scholarship funding for two generations of
students.
I would like to thank you for this opportunity. If there is
any additional information I can provide, please ask. I am
here, do not hesitate, and I am proud and honored to be of
service to you and your deliberations today.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Scott Taylor follows:]
prepared statement of michele scott taylor
Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and Members of the
Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on the barriers
that students face when accessing financial aid and, in turn, pursuing
postsecondary opportunities.
College costs and issues of affordability are a significant
challenge facing our young people and our adults. The reauthorization
of the Higher Education Act can address key policy levers critical to
ensuring that more low-income students--and increasingly--those from
middle-income backgrounds as well can afford higher education.
In Ohio, these challenges are especially pronounced due to the
state's higher than average ``cost of attendance.'' According to a 2016
report by Vanderbilt University's Peabody College of Education and
Human Development and the Penn State University Graduate School of
Education, Ohio ranks 45th in the Nation in key college affordability
metrics (Institute for Research on Higher Education, 2016). The average
cost of attendance at a public college or university for an Ohio
resident in 2018-19 was $26,275 (College Now, 2019). This compares to
$20,770 nationally (Value Penguin, 2019). To afford to enroll in
postsecondary, most Ohioans must borrow loans or qualify for grants.
These resources, in addition to even institutional merit aid and
scholarships, can be accessed only through successfully completing the
Free Application for Federal Student Aid, or the FAFSA--an oft-used
measure of need by financial aid providers and not just the Federal
Government.
Unfortunately, both the real and perceived complexity of the FAFSA
form, often followed by an unwieldy verification process, serves as a
hindrance to college access for the most in-need students, including
our homeless and at-risk for homeless youth, foster youth, and young
adults aging out of the foster care system. Each year, only 45 percent
of low-income students complete the FAFSA, missing out on $24 billion
in financial aid (Kofoed, 2016). Of those students who do successfully
complete the form and are deemed Pell eligible, a total of 25 percent
are lost to the verification process and do not enroll (Warick, 2018).
It is critical that Congress continues to simplify the FAFSA and the
resulting verification process so that more students, especially those
who are first-generation and low-income, can actually pursue
postsecondary education.
Simplifying the Federal financial aid process is key; but not
enough. We must think comprehensively about strategies for making
postsecondary more accessible and affordable to vulnerable populations.
Federally supported programs like GEAR-UP and TRiO (which includes
Talent Search and Upward Bound, for example) implement and iterate on
best practices for promoting much earlier college access and awareness
about college affordability. In addition, we must continue to increase
the Federal investment in the Pell grant--which now only covers 29
percent of the total cost of attendance at a four-year school for an
in-state student. This is a staggering decline from 1975, when the Pell
grant covered 79 percent of the cost of attendance (Center on Budget &
Policy Priorities, 2018). We also encourage the publishing of more data
by the Federal Government--disaggregated by race and ethnicity to fully
understand who is utilizing existing Federal programs--and who is being
left behind. The availability of such information can help ensure
nonprofits, like College Now, are serving the most in need and directly
addressing known equity gaps.
My name is Dr. Michele Scott Taylor, and I have served as the Chief
Program Officer at College Now Greater Cleveland for more than eight
years. In this role, I provide strategic leadership for the
organization's comprehensive and diverse programmatic efforts,
including school-based and community-based college access and success
advising programs, as well as Federal programs such as Talent Search,
GEAR UP, Upward Bound, and 21st Century Community Learning Centers. I
work to ensure that our programs and services represent best practices
and are on the cutting-edge of college access and success research,
policy, and practice. In addition to providing direct service to high
school students as recently as last night, I have just as much, or even
more experience, working with adult learners and college students--
having served in diverse functional areas on college campuses including
in student affairs, admissions and financial aid, and multicultural/
diversity affairs. I also teach in undergraduate and graduate programs.
For many students whom I personally have supported, mentored, mothered,
coached, and dragged across the finish line, as well as for thousands
of students that College Now serves, getting to and through college is
a full-time job beyond the academics. I can say this because I have
witnessed it and lived it.
Coming from a family with low-income, where neither of my parents
nor immediate family members earned a degree, I was not exposed to what
David Conley calls college knowledge and transition information. \1\ I
had been told my entire life that if I did well in school, I can go to
Harvard for free. While I did do well, it was within the context of a
lower resourced public-school system and an equally low-resourced
family! I was not provided enough information about affording college
or the process of getting there! So, I navigated my way through with
enough Pell grant dollars and aid to allow me to focus on my academics.
I didn't consume myself with worry about my school bill (though I did
become an RA to get free room and board!) This, in honesty, is the
reason why I have committed my life to working in higher education,
first on college campuses and now in that space where high school
students and adults prepare for and pursue all kinds of postsecondary
opportunities and become successful. That's where College Now comes in
and helps students like Symone . . .
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\
C:-Users-mscotttaylor-OneDrive-College-Now-Greater-Cleveland-
4Keys-Conley.pdf.
Symone is a second semester freshman at a large public institution
currently struggling to pay her spring school bill. She filled out the
FAFSA twice now and was not awarded the Pell grant either time, which
is frustrating because her father is a construction worker and her
mother is unemployed. On paper, it appears that her family has more
money than they actually do. She has expressed that the government does
not take into account the realities of her life (a common reality of
the FAFSA). Her parents have other children and siblings of their own
that they help out financially when it is necessary which,
unfortunately, is quite often. Symone has applied to countless
scholarships and received some of them, however, she was not eligible
for countless others as a result of the FAFSA's calculation of her
``need.'' Symone is mentally and emotionally stressed from trying to
figure this out. We are working to keep her in school as long as
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
possible and hopefully to degree completion.
College Now's mission is to increase postsecondary educational
attainment through college and career access advising, financial aid
counseling, and scholarship and retention services. It was the first
organization of its kind in the Nation--providing scholarships and
college access services to support students going into higher
education. Since our inception in 1967, we have become the largest
college access provider in Ohio and remain one of the largest in the
nation. College Now is a national leader, including serving as a
founding member of the National College Access Network in 1995 and as a
model for other organizations around the country.
We assist over 29,000 individuals--middle and high school students
as well as adult learners--helping them pursue their dreams of going to
and succeeding in some form of education beyond high school. Many of
our students are from low-income families and are first-generation
college goers. We provide important services to adults pursing higher
education for the first time, attempting to go back and finish, or
seeking to retool their skills in light of rapid changes in the world
of work. For us, serving adults is critical to the success of
developing our region's talent and closing our existing skills gap. As
in many parts of the country, there are simply not enough 18-year-olds
graduating from high school and heading to postsecondary educations to
meet current and projected employer demands.
By 2025, 65 percent of jobs will require some postsecondary
degrees, but today only 44 percent of Ohio working-age adults have any
education or training beyond a high school diploma. In Northeast Ohio
alone, there are approximately 500,000 people who have some college but
no degree. In Cleveland, educational attainment is just ridiculous at
only 27 percent. Time after time, while we seek to support those
looking to improve their lives, affording needed further education
rings loud as a key barrier. An additional--albeit an unnecessary and
yet easier to remove--barrier is the current process through which
students can even access financial aid that is available: the FAFSA
form and verification process.
While Symone's story about affording college is very common, those
from Melina and Brandon, which are about actually completing the FAFSA
form, are stories we experience every day--getting tax and financial
information from ``parents.''
Melina has DACA, but her parents are undocumented. While they pay
taxes, they are concerned about using the data retrieval tool because
they are worried about being deported. Melina has already received a
scholarship from her college that will allow her to attend, but she is
scared of asking the wrong person for help with her next step in
verification. Therefore, she doesn't take the next steps.
Brandon, a student who is eager to raise himself and his family out
of poverty, attempts to complete the FAFSA himself (and not with our
College Now advisor). We later find out that he answered questions
wrong such as family size and dependency status (he thinks because he
supports his family financially and pays his own living expenses, he
should be considered independent). Subsequently, he finds out about
these errors and his selection for verification post important
scholarship deadlines. Now what does he do!
Having Federal financial aid is crucial to the college-going
process but completing the FAFSA form is a barrier for many students.
Not all students are fortunate enough to have a relative, school
counselor, or college access advisor available to help them through the
process. And as with filing your taxes, help is frequently needed.
Given the impact on students' ability to attend college,
simplifying the FAFSA form is a necessary step in the quest to make
college more affordable. Several organizations have promoted a system
to simplify the form that would group students based on their financial
strengths and then have them follow pathways with respect to their
FAFSA completion based on their unique circumstances with the ultimate
objective of allowing for a far shorter FAFSA form.
To be fair, creating the FAFSA form was well intended. One of the
goals was to have a universal form because before 1992, students could
use various forms to apply for Federal financial aid. But they also had
to complete a separate state form and additional forms for each
institution to which they applied. And yet creating the FAFSA was not
enough. Fast forward to today, approximately 300 selective
postsecondary institutions also require that students, yearly, complete
the CSS profile and/or their own form before awarding their
institutional aid because they believe the FAFSA is inadequate.
Further simplifying the FAFSA form isn't enough. We must also work
to address issues related to verification. Verification occurs when
students who submit the FAFSA are asked to submit additional documents
to the college's financial aid office to support the information
entered on the FAFSA. The process is intended to reduce fraud and
ensure the integrity of these distributions. Once selected for
verification, financial aid cannot be dispersed until the process is
complete.
The process itself is cumbersome to students causing upwards of 25
percent of Pell eligible students to ``melt'' between being selected
for verification and their enrollment. Furthermore, low-income students
are more likely to be selected for verification because students who
are calculated to have a zero expected family contribution (EFC)
(meaning their household income is less than $25,000) have a higher
chance of being selected for verification than their wealthier peers.
While it seems abundantly reasonable that the Federal Government and/or
a college or university would want to conduct its due diligence before
awarding financial aid dollars, if selected for verification, a student
should be able to provide as sufficient evidence proof of enrollment in
another means-tested government benefit (e.g., SNAP).
Not only that, the current verification selection algorithm also
means that if you're selected for verification at one institution, you
are likely to be selected at multiple institutions. This increases the
barriers to getting aid because each college has its own verification
process usually requiring students to submit a combination of tax
returns, W-2 statements, 1099 forms, and other legal documents.
There is Deanna . . .
Deanna is currently a student at local Northeast Ohio community
college studying to become a nurse. Deanna has relied on the Pell grant
for the last 2 years. She turned in all the required paperwork and
registered for classes. After the semester began, she was notified that
she had been dropped from her classes because she owed a balance. When
she spoke with her Financial Aid office, she learned that all her
Federal aid had been revoked. The Financial Aid office claimed to have
not received her necessary paperwork by its verification deadline.
Because the school year had already started and Deanna had been
attending classes, she had to re-pay the Federal aid for which she was
eligible. As long as there was an outstanding debt on her account, she
would also be ineligible to receive any future Federal aid.
This missed verification deadline cost Deanna thousands of dollars.
She not only lost her Federal aid last year, she also lost a
scholarship that required an award letter and proof of Pell grant
eligibility. On top of all of that, she now had to pay for her tuition
out-of-pocket while also trying to make payments on the debt she
shouldn't have owed in the first place.
Our receiving colleges are burdened with the task of verifying
student information impacting their student yield rates by creating
additional processes that serve as barriers.
Communities, students, families, school districts, and
postsecondary institutions are working to help students surmount these
and other barriers to education. The consequences of not doing so are
evident in educational attainment rates, the skills gaps, earning
potentials of family members, rates of poverty (especially among kids),
and the list goes on and on.
But there is some hope--just being here and sharing this with you
gives me hope. In places like Ohio and other states, we are setting
aggressive goals for increasing educational attainment. We are
implementing strategies to mitigate the barriers: such as competing for
Federal grants to increase awareness and preparedness of student and
families; raising millions in scholarship dollars; working with state
agencies to increase state support for post-secondary; and making
community college free, among many other activities. In Cleveland
specifically, we were recently named a Say Yes to Education city, the
final of four chapters to be established. Our theory of action is to
provide comprehensive wrap-around services along students' K-12
educational paths and then offer last-dollar tuition scholarships for
graduating high school seniors. In Cleveland, the community has raised
enough scholarship funding for two generations of students! Completing
the FAFSA is a requirement for receiving the Say Yes scholarship, and
College Now's commitment is to ensure that we provide enough support to
help these students get through the form and verification process!
The Federal Government has also taken steps to mitigate barriers to
post-secondary including: the use of Prior-Prior year taxes, which
supports student completing the FAFSA earlier; opening the FAFSA form
in October versus January; implementing the IRS Data Retrieval Tool;
and creating a mobile responsive website and app, with partners such as
NCAN. Likewise, funding continues for programs such as GEAR UP and TRiO
(but not enough), but there is so much more that needs to be done . . .
Congress can address issues related to the FAFSA and verification
process including:
decrease the number of data elements on the FAFSA,
thus decreasing the number of items that need to be verified;
allow FAFSA filers receiving means-tested benefits to
receive an auto zero EFC, and not selecting those students for
verification, based on their means-tested benefits receipt
use data-sharing across Federal agencies to confirm
the receipt of the means-tested benefits; and
amend Internal Revenue Code Section 6103 to allow for
direct sharing of data between the Departments of Treasury and
Education.
In addition to these direct fixes, Congress can legislate numerous
recommendations to force the enactment of the changes by the Department
of Education and through the NRMP.
Opportunities abound to support kids and adults across the Nation
and especially in Ohio with necessary post-secondary education. Our
ability to compete as a region, a state, and a nation requires more of
our students (who come from low-income backgrounds and/or are first-
generation goers) to increase their educational attainment. We are the
rising demographic.
Thank you again for this opportunity. If there is any additional
information that I can provide to support your work on higher education
and college access issues, please do not hesitate to contact me. I am
proud and honored to be of service to your deliberations.
______
[summary statement of michele scott taylor]
College costs and issues of affordability are a significant
challenge facing our young people and our adults. The reauthorization
of the Higher Education Act can address key policy levers critical to
ensuring that more low-income students--and increasingly--those from
middle-income backgrounds as well can afford higher education.
In Ohio, these challenges are especially pronounced due to the
state's higher than average ``cost of attendance.'' According to a 2016
report by Vanderbilt University's Peabody College of Education and
Human Development and the Penn State University Graduate School of
Education, Ohio ranks 45th in the nation in key college affordability
metrics (Institute for Research on Higher Education, 2016). The average
cost of attendance at a public college or university for an Ohio
resident in 2018-19 was $26,275 (College Now, 2019). This compares to
$20,770 nationally (Value Penguin, 2019). To afford to enroll in
postsecondary, most Ohioans must borrow loans or qualify for grants.
These resources, in addition to even institutional merit aid and
scholarships, can be accessed only through successfully completing the
Free Application for Federal Student Aid, or the FAFSA--an oft-used
measure of need by financial aid providers and not just the Federal
Government.
Unfortunately, both the real and perceived complexity of the FAFSA
form, often followed by an unwieldy verification process, serves as a
hindrance to college access for the most in-need students, including
our homeless and at-risk for homeless youth, foster youth, and young
adults aging out of the foster care system. Each year, only 45 percent
of low-income students complete the FAFSA, missing out on $24 billion
in financial aid (Kofoed, 2016). Of those students who do successfully
complete the form and are deemed Pell eligible, a total of 25 percent
are lost to the verification process and do not enroll (Warick, 2018).
It is critical that Congress continues to simplify the FAFSA and the
resulting verification process so that more students, especially those
who are first-generation and low-income, can actually pursue
postsecondary education.
Simplifying the Federal financial aid process is key; but not
enough. We must think comprehensively about strategies for making
postsecondary more accessible and affordable to vulnerable populations.
Federally supported programs like GEAR-UP and TRiO (which includes
Talent Search and Upward Bound, for example) implement and iterate on
best practices for promoting much earlier college access and awareness
about college affordability. In addition, we must continue to increase
the Federal investment in the Pell grant--which now only covers 29
percent of the total cost of attendance at a four-year school for an
in-state student. This is a staggering decline from 1975, when the Pell
grant covered 79 percent of the cost of attendance (Center on Budget &
Policy Priorities, 2018). We also encourage the publishing of more data
by the Federal Government--disaggregated by race and ethnicity to fully
understand who is utilizing existing Federal programs--and who is being
left behind. The availability of such information can help ensure
nonprofits, like College Now, are serving the most in need and directly
addressing known equity gaps.
Congress can address issues related to the FAFSA and verification
process including:
decrease the number of data elements on the FAFSA,
thus decreasing the number of items that need to be verified;
allow FAFSA filers receiving means-tested benefits to
receive an auto zero EFC, and not selecting those students for
verification, based on their means-tested benefits receipt
use data-sharing across Federal agencies to confirm
the receipt of the means-tested benefits; and
amend Internal Revenue Code Section 6103 to allow for
direct sharing of data between the Departments of Treasury and
Education.
In addition to these direct fixes, Congress can legislate numerous
recommendations to force the enactment of the changes by the Department
of Education and through the NRMP.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Scott Taylor. Thanks to each
of you. Why don't we now go to a round of five-minute
questions, and I will ask you to keep your questions and
answers within the five minutes so everybody can have a chance.
I will begin.
Let us start with, we have been at this for five years now,
and you would think after five years we could go ahead and do
it. That might be something that--and I think there has been a
real benefit to that. I remember when Senator Bennet and I
listened to the same testimony and we asked the four witnesses,
would you each write us a letter about how to fix the FAFSA,
and they all looked at each other and said, we do not need to.
You know, we agree. We will write you one letter. And since
then, we have gone through the process that I described in my
opening statement.
I think we are pretty close to agreement with many Senators
understanding it. Two things I want to focus on today. One is,
and my question, verification and expected family contribution.
Now, one of the complaints is that, in regard to today, is that
the verification process is focused on low-income students
disproportionately, but Senator Murray and I introduced
legislation which passed the Senate, and we hope we can
persuade the House to do that, which would allow people who
filled out the FAFSA to, with one click, answer the 22
questions that can be answered by IRS data.
Dr. Wiederspan, you have done lots of study on this.
Wouldn't that exchange of information from the IRS to the
Education Department greatly reduce the need for verification?
Wouldn't there just be a lot less of it?
Dr. Wiederspan. Yes.
The Chairman. Because is it not that the information that
is basically being verified when you fill out the same
information here, the same information there. They are catching
you to see if you make a mistake.
Dr. Wiederspan. Yes. In fact, one of my last papers was
looking at the feasibility of using prior income tax return
information with those exact elements that you were talking
about, based on the bill that you and Senator Bennet had
introduced. And basically, we had found that 70 percent of
students would notice no change in their Pell eligibility, and
it would definitely reduce the need for verification because
the elements that they are being flagged for verification is
coming from the IRS. So, there would be no need to have them
report that information again.
The Chairman. Mr. Meotti, you talked about verification
too. There is also the issue of self-reported data that some
students are asked, like untaxed income for example. If we
eliminate that and if we also made it so you do not have to
give information to the Government twice, the bill Senator
Murray and I have sponsored, wouldn't that in your--what effect
would that have on ``verification'' in Washington State and in
Connecticut were you have worked?
Mr. Meotti. Yes. I think the challenge can be greatly
diminished if we, just look at a comprehensive refund, just
basically a common sense approach, most Americans would feel if
you looked at this and said yes, the Federal Government is
asking you to--one agency of the Federal Government is asking
you to get a document for another agency of the Federal
Government to prove to you what they already filed with them
under penalty of law at the IRS, right. And I also think there
are also a whole series of common circumstances that are
associated with the families that tend to be very low income
that were then causing them to go through extra effort to
document, only to ultimately verify that they are eligible but
with loss of students along the way. So, I think it all could
be done.
The Chairman. The Department of Education also estimates
that there are about $6 billion in mistakes each year with the
current system. Some students are paid a little more than they
should be, some paid a little less, so eliminating most of the
current verification system and replacing it with the exchange
of information between the IRS and the Education Department
should reduce those mistakes. Let me move to another confusing
part of the Federal Student Aid Application. That is the
expected family contribution. Now, that is a mystifying thing
as well. Isn't it possible that we could use some simpler table
or simpler calculation rather than putting students through the
so called expected family contribution maze of the number of
questions in order to calculate it for a typical high school
student? That student would need to answer fifty questions and
use seven charts to complete the calculation. How can we
simplify that? Anyone?
Mr. Meotti. Speaking from our perspective in Washington, I
think there is a lot of opportunities to identify people by
status and some other program like the way we use free and
reduced price lunch. If you are in it, we get the data and we
make you eligible. We do ask you to sign to attest to that, and
that is it. So, I do think that those kinds of approaches would
address kind of the issues that you raised.
The Chairman. Well, my time is up, but I want to thank
Senator Murray for her leadership in working with a number of
us to try to stop the practice of the 420 million families who
fill out the FAFSA every year, having to give the Federal
Government the same information twice, and I hope we can
persuade the House of Representatives that that is a good idea.
Senator Baldwin.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Want to have a
little bit of feedback from you, Mr. Meotti, about the so
called work penalty. We have had previous hearings on FAFSA
simplification and identification of need in this process. And
there has been a recognition from witnesses that those students
who must work while attending school in order to meet the true
needs not just of the cost of college but also food, housing,
transportation, health care, child care, and more, that the
current system includes a work penalty that can reduce a
student's need-based aid if he or she obtains too much money
from work, putting him or her in an impossible situation. While
ideally students would not have to work in order to afford
college, I believe that we need to take steps to ensure that
those who must work are not pushed further into financial
difficulty by losing their Pell Grants or other need-based aid.
I am going to be soon re-introducing the Working Students
Act, which would increase the income protection allowance, the
amount a student can earn from work without endangering his or
her need-based aid. But, Mr. Meotti, do you agree that we need
to address this barrier that some students face when we
evaluate their need in accessing Federal financial aid?
Mr. Meotti. Yes. I mean, I think there is still in the
background culture in all this notion that college students are
18 to 22 years old and dependent members of a household where
someone else is paying the bills. The reality, like in our
financial aid programs, a third or more of the students we
serve are over the age of 25. They are not dependents. Someone
else is not paying the bills for the household. They are
working. They probably have children. A quarter or more of our
air recipients have children, very similar to Pell, I am sure.
The reality is if we want to, serve the labor markets we
have now in this country, there are going to have to be people
of all ages. Many of them will be getting their first
undergraduate credential, maybe a certificate or an associate's
degree, let alone a baccalaureate. They have to work, that is
absolutely imperative of life for them.
We have to have a system that recognizes it is not what
higher education might have looked like in the late 40's and
50's. And even then, I think it was not quite what we thought
it was then. But clearly now, it is not.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you. For a first-generation college
student without family or other supports, even the simplest
FAFSA will likely not be enough to get them to understand that
college could be for them, let alone how they should go about
affording it. I am a big supporter of Federal TRIO and GEAR UP
Programs, which help low-income and first-generation students
explorer college options, successfully apply and enroll,
persist through their programs, and even explore graduate
education.
I also strongly support the 21st Century Community Learning
Centers Program, which funds after school activities that
include things like mentoring, career exploration, and skill
building that helps younger students begin that path to a
higher education. Dr. Scott Taylor, do you agree that investing
in these programs and the supports that they provide for
students are also an important strategy to get more students
connected to the Federal aid that will help them afford
college?
Dr. Scott Taylor. Absolutely. Programs like TRIO, GEAR UP,
and 21st Learning Community Centers Programs, which we do have
at College Now, provide earlier access, and what we are able to
do is have much deeper and earlier conversations about what it
takes to finance a college education. Waiting until students
are in high school or till adult learners come up against a
barrier is just simply too late.
Programs like TRIO, GEAR UP, and 21st Century Learning
Centers allow us to work with students, and not only the
students, their families, by providing exposure opportunities,
giving students and families college knowledge because it is
not just going to college and doing your school work, there is
a culture to higher education that most people do not talk
about. It is very invisible, and it is more often than not a
middle-class income culture. And so, if you are not from that
culture, it could be very difficult navigating the pathways to
successfully complete.
Programs like these, which we are very fortunate to have,
and I hope we continue funding them, do help students kind of
enter into that culture so that they can learn navigate, and be
successful, and persist to completion. So yes, absolutely.
These programs are essential, and I hope that you all will
continue to fund them because they are critical for low-income
students like myself and others.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Baldwin. I ask consent to
enter two statements in the record. The first from Mike Kraus,
Executive Director of the Tennessee Higher Education
Commission, key leader behind the Tennessee Promise initiative.
And the second is from the National Association of Student
Financial Aid Administrators. They will be entered into the
record.
The Chairman. Senator Braun.
Senator Braun. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Testimony makes it
patently clear that we need to do this. It is disappointing to
me as a main stream entrepreneur, School Board member for 10
years and coming from a state like Indiana, that this would
take this long to dispatch. So, thank you Mr. Chairman, for
moving it along.
I want to spend my time to talk about the bigger picture
affecting student loans in general, and that is the cost of
post-secondary education has gotten to where it is feeding into
a debt load that is unsustainable. The $1.4 trillion that we
have out there in Federal student loans is a bubble.
The next thing that is going to occur that even if the form
is a lot simpler to get access to, we got a much bigger
problem. I look to see what is happening in post-secondary
education and other than just a few spots, maybe like Mitch
Daniels at Purdue University, we do like we do here on many
things, stick our heads in the sand. Let it turn into a
calamity, and then we try to pick up the pieces. So, I think
that is the key issue that we need to get figured out, how to
bring cost down. It would take more than the time I have got
allotted to tell you some of the good ideas somebody like Mitch
Daniels has put into place.
Second, per the reference to four-year degrees, and access
to them, and their affordability, paramount, but it also begs
the question of what are the other alternatives. And I know in
my home state, we are exporting about half of our four year
degrees. We do not need them. We are filling those slots well,
and that is not to disparage at all that aspiration of trying
to reach for it, but again, it is the attainability and what do
you do with it. Many of them do not find a market. You know, my
own daughter got a journalism degree, and I wish somebody had
guided differently to were--that trajectory would have been
different. There would have been many other great options. CTE
degrees that are not four years in nature that require a lot
less money, I think, need to get a little higher profile if we
are going to turn around the trajectory that I see, where again
this thing is going to blow up with some type of major problem.
Brings me to the number three concern and something I hope
all Senators here address with more sobriety coming up, and
that is our budget. Because what I mentioned before CTE and the
affordability, that is specific to this Committee and
discussion. But we are looking at a Federal budget that even
from the President, we are looking trillion dollar deficits
over the next few years, and we are looking seven, eight, nine
years down the road where it is $1.5 trillion. All I can tell
you, all of the good discussions we have here, and I have been
a part of many of them, are kind of academic. If we do not get
the reality check that we cannot keep heading down the road to
were whatever we want to do for the good of the American
public, we are doing it in the context which is to me deceptive
that you are going to be good in anything. And it is going to
be there in the long run if we do not find a way to get this
institution to live like most others do. It should set the
example for everyone.
We should not be out here talking about student debt and,
it is interesting the form and the particularity of what we are
talking about here. That should have been solved a long time
ago. But if we do not start to make hard choices and quit
deluding the public that we can keep doing what we are doing
without bringing in not only our balance sheet to where it is
going to be sustainable, but especially our P&L 4.4 trillion,
and we only raise resources just to cover $3.3 trillion to $3.4
trillion of that, it is not going to end well.
I am going to keep harping on this whenever I can bring it
into the conversation because all of the good things that we
talk about in committees are not going to have any relevance
unless we take--especially this year, I am on the budget
committee, and I think there is a real need to put the sobriety
test to it and start to reign in this institution where it is
going to be there for people to depend upon it, if we
accomplished that, start the process, we have done a lot as
Senators. Thank you, and I yield my ten seconds.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Braun.
Senator Hassan.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you, Chairman Alexander, and I
am grateful to you and our Ranking Member for holding this
hearing. I am really grateful to our witnesses not only for
being here today, but for the work you do and for being willing
to share your expertise with this panel. And I am really happy
that my colleagues and I largely agree that students should be
able to more seamlessly apply for Federal financial aid through
a simplified application process. I was proud to co-sponsor the
FAFSA Act and I look forward to working with both the HELP and
Finance committees on how we can continue to improve data
sharing with the FSA and the IRS to make the student aid
application process easier for students.
That being said, higher education remains out of reach for
many not because they cannot fill out their FAFSA, but because
they do not have the resources to cover the full cost of
attendance. While we should continue to work together on
simplifying the student aid process, we also have to find ways
to ensure that students get the support they need without being
harnessed with untenable amounts of student debt. I was talking
to a young man in Salem, New Hampshire just a couple of weeks
ago. He is 32 years old carrying $102,000 worth of debt. You
know, there are ideas that members of the Senate have on, for
instance, allowing students to refinance their debt at a lower
rate just as a starting point, and I think we are going to need
to continue to think about ways of really addressing that
burden as well. But I did want to touch base with all of you on
some of the work you are doing.
Ms. Scott, in your testimony you outline ways that Congress
could simplify the FAFSA application process and in turn remove
barriers to students receiving the student aid that they are
eligible for. Do you think these barriers to financial aid
deter some students from pursuing higher education all
together, and what are some of the strategies that Alabama
Promise uses to ensure that students do not give up on that
process?
Ms. Scott. Thank you, Senator. I know that the process of
applying for financial aid deter students from going to
college. And some of the strategies that we use provide in
school workshops in the Birmingham area, which is where we are
located. We also work statewide, and so we are working closely
with our community college system and our local school system
to make sure that the community colleges that have a great
interest in increased FAFSA completion and really provide an
important proving ground for the workforce that Alabama needs,
that they have a relationship with the State Department of
Education and that the local community colleges have
relationships with the high schools.
We also do a lot of media. I go on the news all the time.
We do social media. We try to make the language very simple
because words like emancipated minor, trying to figure out who
your parent is, we really try to bring it down to a 7th grade
level and that is not always easy. And if we could get some
help from the Federal Government on that, and we have even had
to simplify the FSAs, who your parent chart is because we
realized there were plain points in it, so we made it even more
elegant and simple. And so, if we could reduce the number of
questions, use plain English, have data-sharing ability with
the IRS and means-testing, all of that would communicate the
message to students and parents that post-secondary education
is a possibility, and there is help to pay for it.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you. I appreciate that very
much. I know that you are also taking steps to alleviate
poverty on campus, and I know a number of you are doing that.
At the University of New Hampshire, one student who identified
food insecurity on-campus spearheaded a program that allows
students to donate their extra meal passes to a pool so that a
student in need can anonymously access food through the dining
service. I wanted to turn to you Dr. Scott Taylor in just the
minute I have left, because in addition to that kind of
creative community support for each other, one of my priorities
has been to ensure that students are aware of the services and
benefits that they are eligible for on and off campus.
Last Congress, I introduced the Gateway to Careers Act,
which would help fund wraparound services to students enrolled
in career pathway programs at community colleges, including
helping students navigate programs like SNAP, and affordable
housing. Dr. Scott Taylor, what are some of the barriers that
you see that students and their families face to connecting to
means-tested public benefits that they may be eligible for, and
how can the Federal Government states and institutions reduce
those barriers?
Dr. Scott Taylor. Thank you so much for the question. I
think one thing that we can do in a community and then with
help from the Federal Government is cross-training providers on
how to use the platform that access Government benefits. What
we did in Cleveland, Ohio some years ago is we trained our
college access advisors on how to use the platforms so if a
parent or student was accessing say SNAP or other Federal
benefits that they can also complete the FAFSA at the same
time, and where we can refer them and direct them. Kind of
giving them a smoother hand off because, again, they do not use
the Government services and silos, and the more that we can
show the connection to you can get this therefore you can get
that.
It is amazing how many times we have had parents who apply
for Government benefits realize that they are actually eligible
for financial aid and they can go back and get some education
so that they can improve their situation, which is what I think
is very important. And we would like to see more of that
happen.
Senator Hassan. Thank you very much. And thank you, Mr.
Chairman for your indulgence.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Hassan.
Senator Collins.
Senator Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Wiederspan,
according to the finance authority of Maine, about 91 percent
of Maine students who are selected for verification are
eligible for Pell Grants. In your testimony, you noted that
Pell eligible students selected for verification are less
likely to end up enrolling in college than those Pell eligible
students who are not selected for verification. The financial
aid professionals with whom we have talked called this
verification melt. In other words, many of these students
simply do not complete the process and they do not end up going
to school. What is your one biggest recommendation that you
would have for us to try to deal with the problem of
verification melt?
Dr. Wiederspan. One thing that I also did mention is that
there is other aspects of who gets selected for verification
amongst Pell eligible students, and one of them is that
students who use DRT are less likely to be selected for
verification. But in many cases, a lot of those students that
are Pell eligible and that use DRT are still getting flagged
for verification even though it is coming directly from the
IRS, and they still need to verify that what I reported to the
IRS on my FAFSA is correct. So that is just one example of
where we could definitely reduce the number of those Pell
eligible students that use the DRT that they do not necessarily
need to be verified as much as they are.
Senator Collins. Thank you. Ms. Scott, you mentioned in
your testimony a young woman who was in the care of her
grandparents who are not her legal guardians. This issue is
coming up more and more often in the State of Maine, sadly
because of the Opioid Crisis where grandparents have stepped in
to raise their grandchildren. So, then the grandchildren get to
senior year in high school, their grandparents are not their
legal guardians, their legal parents may be out of the picture,
however, and there is lots of confusion about whether the
grandparents' income counts toward the expected family
contribution. We are having more and more calls to our state
offices about this. What would you suggest that we could do to
better inform grandparents about the financial aid process?
Ms. Scott. Well I would simplify the system by allowing
students who are being raised by their grandparents but through
no legal obligation, really because the grandparents have
decided to take the grandchildren into their home because it is
the right thing to do. And most of the communities we work in,
there is no legal custody relationship. It is a small town.
Everyone knows each other. Alabama is a rural state like Maine,
and the student shows up to school and manages to get through
12 years of school without any issues with being abandoned or
neglected by their parents.
But I have heard from multiple students who faced
complicated parental situations that if they were allowed to
apply as provisionally independent and then their college was
able to work with them to get a letter from the school
counselor or school social worker, to simplify the process so
that these students are not held back because of their family
status. It is not--the student who wants to go to college
should not be impacted negatively because of their family
situation. Those are the students we should be lifting up and
easing through the process instead of making it more
complicated for them.
Senator Collins. Thank you. Dr. Scott Taylor, when I heard
you talk about your own experience, it reminded me of the
experience of so many families in Maine who simply do not have
experience with higher education. The administrators at the
university, they tell me that they see many errors on the
questions regarding grade level and degrees for which students
are applying.
For example, some students graduating from high school
mistakenly believe that they are graduate students and students
applying for different kinds of schools may not accurately
answer questions about whether they are working toward an
associate degree or a baccalaureate degree. This is a strange
new world for them if they have not gone through the TRIO
program or similar programs. But this raises the question in my
mind for these first-generation college students, if we are
merely calculating a family's estimated contribution toward the
degree for this student one year at a time, do we really need
those kinds of questions on the form?
Dr. Scott Taylor. Of course, I would agree with my
colleagues and say no, I think that the form can be simplified,
and questions can be reduced. If a student is deemed eligible
for Federal aid in their first year, chances are that does not
change often particularly for first generation college goers.
So, I think in the spirit of making the process easier and
uplifting students who need the most help, I think reducing the
number of questions that really do not assist in us determining
whether or not they are eligible for aid would be a tremendous
step in the right direction, particularly that question around
what type of degree are you pursuing. Most kids who we work
with do not even know the difference just yet between
associate's, bachelor's, etc.
Senator Collins. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Collins.
Senator Jones.
Senator Jones. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know and thank
you for the hearing and for the work your staff is doing with
mine on this important issue. I do find it, I will tell you, a
little ironic that we are talking about barriers to college
with primarily low-income folks and people that cannot do this,
is that I am sitting here, I get a Washington Post note that
says that the FBI chooses some 30 wealthy parents, including
celebrities, in a college entrance bribery scheme. I guess the
barriers to a really good college that you can afford are a lot
different than what we are doing. So, I appreciate your
testimony and trying to get folks into college that truly want
that education and need that.
Ms. Scott, again thank you in particular for all the work
you are doing in Alabama to help raise the number of FASFA
applications. My office has started doing some workshops, I
think, with you and others to try to get this process until we
can get this legislatively. One thing you mentioned in your
testimony, kind of piggy-back to some of what Senator Collins
and Ms. Scott were talking about a minute ago. You talk about
the focus on funds available rather we should focus on funds
available rather than what is the family expected to pay. Could
you elaborate on that just a little bit, the importance of
that?
Ms. Scott. For low-income families where students don't
think there is any money available for them to go to college,
and when we started this work almost 10 years ago, we thought
that the issue in Alabama and our low educational attainment
rate was because students did not want to go to college. But we
quickly learned that is not the case. It is that our students
did not know how to pay for college. And so, there was an idea
that I am not even going to think about going to college
because there is no way for me to pay for it.
College Promise programs like Tennessee's, like the
Kalamazoo Promise, have a very powerful message that says no
matter who you are, no matter who is in your family, no matter
what is going on, if you fill out a form, we are going to
ensure that you can go to college. And again, that the two year
or four year technical academic program, I do not care. I think
one of our issues is that we need to elevate technical
education so that parents are just as confident sending their
student to a community college to be a welder, as they are to
send them to Harvard do pre-med. But if we can simplify the
message that there are funds available and do it like
Washington has where instead you are on free and reduced lunch,
you can probably qualify for financial aid if you fill out this
form.
The form is still a barrier, but you are able to have the
message that there is a way available to pay to go to college.
And so that simplifying that message and making it clear and
making the process work for students instead of--I do not know
who the process works for right now because I am in a financial
aid administrators Facebook group and they complain about the
process all the time. And I know that as direct service
providers the process does not work for my folks and the
process is not working for students.
I really question if the process is itself a barrier to
that college going culture and that understanding that there is
a way available to pay for it. And the more that we can
communicate, you get SNAP if you are on free and reduced lunch,
this is what you will qualify for. Somebody suggested that
there be a chart. If you are in a family of four and your
adjusted gross income is less than, I am just going to make up
a number, $60,000 then you will qualify for a grant to go to
college. The simpler we can make it, the better. Our banks have
gotten good at this. TurboTax is good at this. We can do
better.
Senator Jones. Alright, thank you Ms. Scott. As we all
know, we talked about the student debt crisis and research
shows it impacts students of color harder than others. And in
early January I sent a letter to a number of stakeholders
asking how we can improve policies to deal with that. In the
short time we have got remaining, I know that Alabama Possible
and the College Now Greater Cleveland both answered those
questions. Could you give just briefly, talk about on a record
here, your responses of how we can do that? How we can be
better for people of color to pay their loans? Ms. Scott, real
quick.
Ms. Scott. In addition to streamlining the FAFSA, making
the language clear, tying the Pell Grant to the cost of college
so that it reflects today's cost of college, there is also a
very important issue for HBCUs which is that Title III
mandatory funding is set to expire, and that is critical for
students of color in order to be successful.
Dr. Scott Taylor. I would say simplify the language. Make
it much more accessible and start with families much earlier.
There is an intersection between students who are first gen,
low income, and race, as we talked about. So just aggregating
Federal data so that we can understand what those disparities
are so that we can really target our efforts and our
approaches. But making the message simpler, communicating it
earlier, so that students and families are aware of what it
takes to finance an education and have opportunities to start
the process much earlier than signing their promissory note not
even understanding what they are signing.
Senator Jones. Great. Well, thank you. Thanks again to all
the witnesses and thanks for responding to our letter. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Jones.
Senator Kaine.
Senator Kaine. Thank you to the witnesses. Great hearing.
And Ms. Scott, you were just talking about the need to elevate
career and technical education. Senator Braun talked about the
same thing. Senator Portman and I have a bill called the Jobs
Act, which is heavily supported especially by America's
community colleges that would allow Pell Grants to be used for
shorter-term, high-quality, validated, verified career and
technical programs, and we hope to have that as part of the
discussion as we are in the Higher Education Act
reauthorization. I want to ask about a question also related to
something Ms. Scott just mentioned.
I am all for the simplification efforts and I like the fact
that there is some good bipartisanship around this table on
those. I want to focus on a different form of simplification.
You can simplify the form for families, or you can essentially
say, if your family is on food stamps you should be able to
qualify for a Pell Grant without having to fill out and get a
whole lot of things verified because you have already been
verified for a means-tested program. If you are on free and
reduced lunch, there is a verification for that. That should
count when you are going to college. If you are in the foster
care system where there has been a court order that you need to
be placed with a different, set of adults because your family
is not capable of supporting you, an order like that should be
able to be a proxy for the elaborate FAFSA form.
I would just like each of you to address, simplification we
should do it, but how about accepting other verifications and
validations on means-tested programs as a proxy to enable
students who have already qualified for those programs to be
considered for financial aid, Pell Grant, or other kinds of
need-based financial aid?
Dr. Scott Taylor. We agree with everything you just said.
Senator Kaine. As part of doing this, we should definitely
explore those alternate validations.
Dr. Scott Taylor. Absolutely. And then find ways for us to
share the data so that we can, as service providers, help
families understand that if you are eligible for this, you are
eligible for that. So, kind of cross-pollinating the knowledge
about the opportunity.
Senator Kaine. Dr. Wiederspan?
Dr. Wiederspan. I agree. And also, if you just look at it
from a budgeting perspective that if you know there is this
share of many people, you would know. It would allow states
such as Iowa to at least know, well this is how much money we
are going to need to set aside for this particular program. I
think that would be very beneficial for that.
Senator Kaine. Mr. Meotti.
Mr. Meotti. Yes, absolutely Senator. I mean, I think first
of all we do it a little bit in Washington where we work with a
free and reduced price lunch population on one of our state
grant programs. But there is no question that there is probably
so much more gain not only for the students, but when you think
of all the time that Americans whether they are students or in
financial aid offices and others, they are putting into this
system right now to know really clear public policy benefit, to
be able to use these markers, as indicators of need, I think is
where there is tremendous opportunity.
Senator Kaine. This is sort of a pet peeve of mine, much
broader than this question, different agencies control their
own security clearance process. Why can't my security clearance
that I got for the Department of Defense, why is that not
sufficient to give me the security clearance when I apply for
the Department of Homeland Security? Does it have to done all
over again? And I think validation of family income and assets
for means-tested programs, that ought to be the kind of
information we share.
Ms. Scott.
Ms. Scott. I would also say there is an opportunity for
what is called intrusive advising which might be a different
way to call wraparound services, but for institutions to
communicate clearly with students and families about benefits
they are eligible for, and so that every student gets screened
to see if they might be eligible for SNAP benefits while they
are in college, particularly as we have more and more adult,
truly independent learners. What is the child care situation?
We have increased funding for childcare on college campuses but
what about other options for low-cost or no-cost child care?
That is a crisis on college campuses today. And I would also
like to ask you Senator to think about those quality guardrails
with short-term Pell Grants to ensure that students are not
going to institutions and getting a short-term certificate, but
actually may be going into it more debt than they need to and
not have the job outcomes that is really expected from a
Federal investment for a Pell Grant.
Senator Kaine. I think that is extremely important for
short-term, medium-term, long-term, when where the Federal
investor and students getting degrees, the degrees should be
high quality degrees. However long the course was or however
many classroom hours, there has got to be independent
validation. I completely agree with that.
Then finally I would just say to Dr. Scott Taylor, you
talked about the severe information deficit that a lot of low-
income families face. They are trying to grapple with the cost
question, and can I afford it. I talk to a lot of middle-class
families who also feel--and even if they have resources and
some savvy and they might have been to college themselves, it
is so complicated as they are now getting to this question of
their own children's education. The goal is simplification that
is this Committee's goal, is something that is going to help
families of all levels is really important.
Dr. Scott Taylor. Right. I worked with a lot of families
whose parents attended more selective institutions when they
were in undergrad, realizing now that their children cannot
afford to go to those same types of selective institutions. And
as you can imagine, it is very heartbreaking when you think
your child is going to go to your alma mater or school
comparable to the one you went to get a comparable education,
and they are finding that they cannot afford to send their
children there.
Senator Kaine. Right. Thank you. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Kaine.
Senator Baldwin, any other comments?
Senator Baldwin. I have another question and if we can----
The Chairman. Sure.
Senator Baldwin. I appreciate, Mr. Chairman. I am a strong
supporter of three campus-based programs in our Federal
financial aid system, including the Perkins Loan Program, which
has been allowed to lapse. I continue to hear from institutions
in my state of Wisconsin about the value of Perkins loans in
targeting small amounts of aids to students in need, including
Pell recipients. These students faced a shortfall that meant
the difference between staying enrolled and dropping out.
Unfortunately, there is simply nothing in the Federal financial
aid tool box that fills the same and critical role. While we
can and should look at ways to improve and better target aid
through Perkins and other campus-based programs, I believe
these unique programs should continue to be a part of a robust
Federal financial aid system.
I wonder, I would love to hear from you Mr. Meotti and
other witnesses, about the role that the Perkins Loan Program
played in helping particularly needy students meet the true
costs of college.
Mr. Meotti. I do think Senator you are speaking to a very
important point of the campus-based aid programs, as they are
called, have sort of not gotten the attention that I think they
should. They allow institutions to have a fair amount of
flexibility in how they meet the challenges on the ground that
they face. I think I would also include in that, the work-study
program. You know, we actually have a state work-study program
that supplements the Federal program and we are trying to do
much more creative work with that around aligning to not only
student pathways but workforce needs, targeting lower income
eligible populations. And it gives you the flexibility to do
things, and things like Perkins and work-study and others, that
is harder to do in a large-scale grant program that would be
Pell or state need grant.
Senator Baldwin. Any other comments?
[No response.]
Senator Baldwin. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Baldwin.
Senator Casey.
Senator Casey. Thanks very much, and thanks for the panel.
We are grateful for your testimony today. I am sorry I was not
here for the duration of the testimony. We are doing a little
hearing juggling today, so we are catching up, but I wanted to
focus on this issue of complication and the issue of students
not getting the aid that they would be entitled to because of
some of the impediments.
We heard testimony that 45 percent of low-income students
complete the FAFSA, missing out on something like $24 billion
in grants, and loans, and institutional aid each year. There
was also testimony about 50 percent of Pell eligible students
being flagged for verification, and that of those students
flagged for verification, an estimated 25 percent of students
abandon the financial aid process. We all want to ensure that
students get the need assistance and we also want to make sure
that forms are less complicated. We have got to do it the right
way and that is why I am particularly concerned that students
who do not apply or drop out of verification, concerned about
that in particular.
I guess the question I have is directed at Ms. Scott about
recommendations. Some of these I am sure you covered in one way
or another, but I wanted to reiterate them. Recommendations for
how we can better educate, counsel, and assist students,
particularly low-income students and first-generation students
as they apply for financial aid.
Ms. Scott. Simplification has a powerful impact, and as I
mentioned, Promise programs are really known for having that
clear message that has positive impacts not just on the college
access piece but also in the college success piece because we
do not want to see students just to start college, we need them
to finish their post-secondary program.
Another issue around simplification is only filing the form
once. As Dr. Scott Taylor mentioned, students' aid status does
not very that much from year to year. We create a tremendous
bureaucracy in having students renew their FAFSA every year,
and it would be a great relief to students and families if they
filed their FAFSA once when they started in an institution, and
then had the same award throughout their career at that
institution. I could see a situation if you started at a two-
year college, Lawson State Community College in Birmingham, and
then you are going to transfer to UAB or Auburn or Alabama,
that you would fill it out again. But as long as a student is
at the same institution, tuition does not change that much. The
family's financial situation does not change that much, but if
they had a guarantee, that would be very helpful.
Senator Casey. Anyone else have recommendations?
Dr. Scott Taylor. I would say in terms of advising and
counseling students and families, one thing that we try to do
is, because we know there is a disproportionate amount of
students from low-income backgrounds being pulled for
verification, we try to pull the information together even
before they get the flag. So, if we know that a student is at
risk for homelessness or is homeless or is a foster youth, we
try to get the appropriate legal documents because we have been
through this for a while now that we know what they are, that
we try to help students sooner prepare those materials so that
when the flag comes, they can more quickly get it to their
college institutions.
We also try to work with, or we do work with institutions
to ensure that the same documents we use for one college could
be used at our partner institutions or colleagues at other
colleges and universities. So, working a little bit in advance
and pulling the verification materials together beforehand
seems to have an impact on reducing the number of students who
melt during verification because nine times out of ten, or what
the percentage is, we know it is coming.
Senator Casey. Thanks, Doctor. The last question I have in
the time I have is for Ms. Scott again. I wanted to get back to
this question of simplification even when it is streamlined and
even when you have got reforms that lead to that, what are
the--if you could walk through again, what are some of the
limitations of FAFSA simplification?
Ms. Scott. It is a form you have to fill out. That is very
intimidating for low-income families, and not just reducing the
number of questions. So, reducing the number of questions from
more than 100 to 15 to 25 can have a huge impact. In addition
to that, means testing and IRS data sharing so that the
Government talks to each other, it works more efficiently, and
there is fewer prospects for errors, could all be very helpful
in making this process work for students, families, and our
workforce system.
Senator Casey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Kaine, do you have any other comment?
You know, I am thinking listening to this, I think each of us
probably has several hundred thousand families in each of our
states who would say to us, if the entire educational
community, counselors, and others have been telling you for
five years that you can simplify the FAFSA form and by doing so
make it easier for low-income students to have the kind of
college experience that the Pell Grant was set up to create,
then why don't you do it? I think that would be what most of
them would say to us and if any of the students who go through
this verification process--which is fundamentally seeing if the
Government can catch you giving one set of financial
information to the Education Department and another set of
answers to the same questions to the IRS, which is easy to make
a mistake on. You might leave an initial off. You might leave a
number wrong. And that is what Senator Casey was talking about,
the large number of low-income students that targets. Well, the
legislation Senator Murray and I introduced in the Senate
passed, eliminated most of that by eliminating most of the so
called verification because you do not have to compare those
two things. They give it back.
Then the expected family contribution. That is a mystifying
thing even for a college graduate, and if we can demystify that
and go to a table or set of simple calculations, all of those
things are things that we should be capable of doing this year.
I think it is probably a good idea that we took some time to
think this through. At first it seemed tantalizing we might be
able to do it down to two questions, but the more we got into
it, that was not really practical because that would just force
Washington, and Alabama, and the various states to then come up
with their own sets of questions for their state aid and their
institutional aid. So, I think we have benefited from listening
to the entire community, but we have pretty well got this done.
Senator Murray and I are doing our best over the next few
months working with Members on the Title VI legislation.
Senator Baldwin has a short-term Pell suggestion. Senator Kaine
has--we have got a number of good ideas. We have got a number
of good ideas on repaying student loans. The archaic nine
different ways to repay it, many Senators left and right,
Republican and Democrat, say let's get that down to two
different ways to do it, and we will make one of them income-
based in some form. There is broad agreement on that.
We are going to see what we can agree on and hopefully we
can agree on a lot. That is what we try to do in
reauthorization of higher education, but if we cannot agree on
this much but can only agree on this much, I hope we go ahead
and do it. And I hope one of those things is the simplification
of the FASFA and the Murray-Alexander legislation that deals
with saying to our constituents, you do not have to give the
Federal Government information twice. You can give it to us
once and we are smart enough to figure out what to do with it
once we have it.
Thanks to the witnesses. I would encourage each of you if
something has come up that you would like us to consider, that
you did not get to say, we welcome your written statement or
follow-up letter. We thank you for your time and preparation,
and for coming here.
The business record will remain open for 10 business days.
Members may submit additional information and questions to our
witnesses for the record within that time if they would like.
The Chairman. I would like to thank Senator Baldwin for
being Ranking Member today and for her contributions to our
higher education reauthorization effort and to the Committee.
The next hearing will be implementing the 21st Century Cures
Act, making electronic health information available to patients
and providers on Tuesday, March 26.
Thank you for being here.
The Committee will stand adjourned.
------
addendum to the testimony of kristina scott
Thank you, Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and Members
of the Committee for the opportunity to submit this addendum to my
testimony regarding reauthorization of the Higher Education Act
presented to the U.S. Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and
Pensions on March 12, 2019.
I seek to elaborate on two issues. First, I want to emphasize the
importance of supporting Historical Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) in order to reduce the disproportionate debt burden for student
borrowers of color. Second, I would like to submit Alabama's definition
of quality postsecondary credentials for your consideration as you
consider authorizing Pell Grants funding for short-term credentials.
Title III Funding, HBCUs, and College Affordability
HBCUs play an essential role in boosting access and success for
African American students. In fact, even though HBCUs represent just 3
percent of two-year and four-year public and private nonprofit
institutions eligible for Federal dollars, they award 17 percent of all
bachelor's degrees earned by African American students. \1\
Furthermore, HBCUs have conferred 24 percent of the bachelor's degrees
earned by black students in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics fields since the early 2000's. \2\ Thus, HBCUs' track
record with regards to postsecondary attainment warrants the allocation
of an increased amount of taxpayer dollars.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\
Williams, K. and Davis, B. (2019). Public and Private
Investments and Divestments in Historically Black Colleges and
Universities. American Council on Education and United Negro College
Fund. https://www.acenet.edu/news-room/Documents/public-and-private-
investments-and-divestments-in-hbcus.pdf.
\2\
Preston, DeShawn C. (2017). Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) Serving as a Community Cultural Wealth for African
Americans Who Enroll in STEM Doctoral Programs. Clemson University.
https://tigerprints.clemson.edu/all_dissertations/1931.
A critical means of supporting this extraordinary attainment at
HBCUs is the Empowering HBCU Grant Program in Title III-B, Section 323
of the Higher Education Act (HEA). These formula-based grant dollars
are authorized for--among other things--academic resources and
endowment capacity building, and the formula is weighted heavily toward
how well the institution enrolls and serves Pell students.
As noted below, this program faced decreases in appropriations from
fiscal year 2012 to fiscal year 2013, fiscal year 2013 to fiscal year
2014, fiscal year 2014 to fiscal year 2015, and fiscal year 2016 to
fiscal year 2017. Furthermore, the mandatory spending for this program
in Title III-F, Section 371 of HEA expired in fiscal year 2019 (FY19).
\3\ Thus, a significant source of funding for a demonstrably successful
program is set to disappear if Congress does not act before the 2020
appropriations have concluded. The figure below depicts the
appropriations negotiations outcomes for this program from fiscal year
2011 through the most recent omnibus.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\
United States Department of Education Budget Tables. https://
www2.ed.gov/about/overview/budget/tables.html.
Strengthening HBCU Grant Program Appropriations, fiscal year 2011-2019
(in millions) \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\
Ibid.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mandatory
Fiscal
Discretionary
Mandatory
Total
Approps.
Year
Appropriations
ppropriations
Appropriations
as % of
Total
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2019
$282,420
79,730
362,150
22
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018
279,624
79,390
359,014
22
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2017
244,694
79,135
323,829
24
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2016
244,694
79,220
323,914
25
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2015
227,524
78,795
306,319
26
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2014
223,783
78,880
302,663
26
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2013
216,056
80,665
296,721
27
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
227,980
85,000
312,980
27
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2011
236,991
85,000
321,991
26
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Absent a significant increase in discretionary spending in fiscal
year 2020 or an agreement reached outside appropriations negotiations,
the very foundation of this soon-to-be expired program will fracture. A
drastic decrease in funding for this program will inevitably force
HBCUs to turn to alternative revenue streams, potentially leaving
students with a higher bill for tuition and fees than anticipated.
Raising tuition and fees would be especially problematic for HBCU
students, who already borrow nearly twice as much as their peers
enrolled at non-HBCU institutions. \5\ To avoid that unacceptable
outcome, we ask that, once reauthorized, mandatory appropriations for
this program should be indexed to inflation to ensure at least moderate
year-over-year increases, unlike the cuts resulting from the majority
of the last eight budget cycles.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\
Saunders, K.M., Williams, K.L., & Smith, C. L. (2016). Fewer
Resources More Debt: Loan Debt Burdens Students at Historically Black
Colleges & Universities. United Negro College Fund Frederick D.
Patterson Research Institute. http://images.uncf.org/production/
reports/FINAL_HBCU_Loan_Debt_Burden_Report.pdf.
It is essential that the investments made in this program reflect
the outstanding nature of the outcomes to which it has contributed.
Thus, we urge you and your colleagues to earnestly prioritize this
truly pressing need during the forthcoming HEA and appropriations
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
negotiations.
The JOBS Act, Short-Term Pell Grants, and Quality Postsecondary
Credentials
Currently, low-income students can use Pell grants to pay for
bachelor's degrees, associate degrees, and certificate programs that
last more than 600 clock hours or at least 15 weeks. The Jumpstart Our
Businesses by Supporting Students (JOBS) Act would close the skills gap
in the labor market by expanding Pell Grant eligibility to cover high-
quality and rigorous short-term certificate programs so workers can
afford high-demand credentials.
However, the JOBS Act does not clearly define what constitutes
``high-quality and rigorous'' short-term certificate programs. As a
result, this legislation puts at risk both Federal investments in Pell
Grant dollars and student investments in time, money, and deferred
earnings.
The Alabama Workforce Council and its statewide Educational
Attainment Committee reflected on how to ensure better outcomes for
individuals, business and industry, and the overall economy as it wrote
its Success Plus strategic plan to add 500,000 highly skilled
individuals to the state's workforce by 2025. Success Plus relies on
the following indicia of quality credentials:
Valuable--Leads to increased wages that are at least
20 percent higher than those earned by an individual with a
high school diploma alone; provides for career advancement and
increased job security.
Portable--Transferable to multiple employers and
provides broad workforce opportunities; recognized as skills
necessary to be successful in the state's economy.
Stackable--Provides a base for additional,
continuous, or advanced training and/or education that can
expand expertise and create additional wage value.
Trackable--Can be quantifiably tracked by the state
to ensure that awarded certificates align with industry needs
and provide continued value to the bearer.
Skills-Based--Awarded by professional groups,
industry, vendors, and government agencies to individuals
demonstrating measurable technical or occupational skills.
In Demand--Responds to a demonstrated need by
employers in Alabama to meet current and future workforce needs
of the state's evolving economy. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\
Alabama Workforce Council Statewide Attainment Committee
(2018). Preparing Alabama's Workforce for Opportunity & Growth. http://
www.madeinalabama.com/assets/2018/05/Success-Plus.pdf.
Including a robust definition of ``high-quality and rigorous''
short-term certificates in the JOBS Act would enhance outcomes and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
return on investment for education and workforce stakeholders.
You have a significant opportunity to make postsecondary education
more accessible and affordable for today's students and families. Thank
you for considering practitioners' perspectives.
______
WASHINGTON STATE COLLEGE BOUND SIGN UP FORM EXAMPLE
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
------
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Response by Kristina Scott to Questions From Senator Warren, and
Senator Rosen
SENATOR ELIZABETH WARREN
Question 1. Almost half of today's students are financially
independent, but Congress built the Federal financial aid
system as if these students are the exception. How should
lawmakers consider financially independent students when
revising or simplifying the FAFSA?
Answer 1. Our recommendations to streamline the FAFSA,
focus the process on funds available to pay for postsecondary
education, and decrease the verification burden apply to both
dependent and independent students.
In addition, as I discussed in my written testimony,
allowing financially independent students under the age of 24
to file as ``provisionally independent'' would make it easier
for them to stay in or return to school.
For financially independent adults, enrolling in
postsecondary education is frequently proceeded by a change in
income and/or employment status. Congress could consider the
needs of financially independent students over the age of 24 by
permitting them to submit both prior-prior year and prior year
tax information. Congress could also work with the Department
of Education to provide clear, actionable guidance to financial
aid administrators regarding the use of professional judgment
to take into account more recent changes in economic
circumstances that might not be reflected on tax returns.
Question 2. Of the 1.8 million low-income high school
seniors, 968,000 will submit a FAFSA, and 50 percent of them
will be selected for income verification. In the 2015-2016
academic year, nationally, failure to complete the verification
process kept one in five Pell-eligible students from receiving
the Pell Grant. In your experience, has income verification
prevented low-income students from attending college or
increased college costs? How should lawmakers address this
problem?
Answer 2. We provide direct services to Birmingham City
Schools students, and 60 percent of the Birmingham City Schools
Class of 2018 filed their FAFSA. A shocking 59.2 percent of the
Birmingham City Schools Class of 2018 who filed a FAFSA were
selected for verification. \1\ Early analysis of our internal
data indicates that only 38 percent of Birmingham City Schools
Class of 2018 enrolled in college immediately after high
school. The numbers alone tell a story of melt.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\
FAFSA Completion. Alabama Commission on Higher Education.
fafsa.ache.edu.
This data comes to life during the summer months, when we
work with students to navigate the college enrollment process.
More than half the students we see have been selected for
verification and need extra assistance to meet the requirements
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
of their college's financial aid office.
As I discussed in my written testimony, increasing data-
sharing among Federal agencies, particularly the Internal
Revenue Service, would help repair the leaky FAFSA pipeline.
\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\
The Leaky FAFSA Pipeline (2017). National College Access
Network. collegeaccess.org/images/documents/leakyFAFSApipeline.jpg.
I would also be interested to hear financial aid
administrators' perspectives on how to change the verification
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
process to serve students and families better.
Question 3. If Congress were to lower the required
threshold of those selected for income verification (currently
at 30 percent) would you expect this reduction to address the
income verification issue?
Answer 3. Lowering the required threshold of those selected
for income verification would be preferable to the current
threshold. However, we question whether it would be enough to
solve the verification barrier for the roughly half of all
Pell-eligible filers who are flagged for verification. \3\ We
would prefer to see increased data-sharing among Federal
agencies so that students and their families are not required
to enter and re-enter confusing financial information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\
Warick, C. (2018) FAFSA Verification: Good Government or Red
Tape? National College Access Network. collegeaccess.org/images/
documents/Verification_White_Paper_2018.pdf.
Question 4. Does income verification have an impact on the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
student loan debt load of students?
Answer 4. In our experience, students who are selected for
verification, cannot timely resolve their verification status,
and actually enroll in college turn to private loans and/or
credit cards to close the gap between college expenses and
available financial aid. That in turn adds to their overall
debt load.
Question 5. Currently, the Expected Family Contribution
(EFC) may disadvantage today's students who have dependents
(including small children) or existing debt. Do you think the
current EFC formula rightly accounts for all of the costs that
today's students--especially those who are parents--face when
they are trying to afford college?
Answer 5. Our work is primarily with very low-income high
school students and returning adults who qualify for a full or
nearly fully Pell Grant. We would not be in favor of adding
questions to the FASFA regarding dependents and/or existing
debt for these FAFSA filers. The families we serve would
benefit the most from an expedited process which awarded Pell
Grants to families who already receive means-tested Federal
benefits, such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
and from a simplified FAFSA form.
SENATOR JACKY ROSEN
Question 1. Starting with the FAFSA for the 2015-2016
academic year, foster youth and former foster youth were able
to check a box identifying their background information when
they filled out their financial aid forms. The purpose of this
change was to simplify the process and help identify resources
available for youth who had spent time in the foster care
system, in order to increase the number who were both applying
to and attending college.
a. To all of the witnesses, can any of you provide the
Committee with data on how many foster youth or former
foster youth apply to college each year in your state
and how this compares with youth who have not spent
time in foster care.
b. What specific recommendations do you have to
increase the number of foster youth applying to
college? What specific barriers do you see and what
recommendations do you have for this Committee? I would
also be very interested in hearing what steps you are
each doing to reach foster youth and other vulnerable
populations to improve the current rates of application
and graduation.
Answer 1. Currently, 20,000-25,000 foster youth age out of
the foster care system each year. According to the most recent
studies, 20 percent of foster youth enroll in higher education
(so if the numbers stayed consistent to today, that would be
roughly 4,000-5,000 foster youth per year); about 60 percent of
other students enroll in higher education. Another study said
that if foster youth graduated high school and attended
institutions of higher education at the same rate as their
peers, there would be an additional 100,000 former foster youth
from the ages of 18-25 attending institutions of higher
education. Overall, 2-9 percent of former foster youth obtain a
bachelor's degree. \4\ The number of foster youth in the
country also continues to rise. \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\
Fostering Success in Education: National Factsheet on the
Educational Outcomes of Children in Foster Care. (2014) National
Working Group on Foster Care and Education. cdn.fc2success.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/05/National-Fact-Sheet-on-the-Educational-
Outcomes-of-Children-in-Foster-Care-Jan-2014.pdf.
\5\
The AFCARS Report. (2017) U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Administration for Children and Families, Administration on
Children, Youth and Families, Children's Bureau. https://
www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/cb/afcarsreport24.pdf.
In Alabama in recent years, 62-65 percent of graduating
high school years enroll in postsecondary education during the
year immediately after they graduate from high school. \6\
Alabama does not publish data on overall college-going rates
for foster youth or former foster youth, and Alabama Possible
does not specifically target its services and outreach to
foster youth or former foster youth.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\
Spencer, T. (2019) College-Going Rates for Alabama High
Schools. Public Affairs Research Council of Alabama. http://
parcalabama.org/college-going-rates-for-alabama-high-schools-2/.
Students who are in the foster care system when they earn a
high school diploma or GED and those adopted from Alabama
foster care after age 14 are eligible for Alabama's Fostering
Hope Scholarship, which covers tuition and fees for
postsecondary certificate or degree programs at 2-or 4-year
public colleges in Alabama. Students who register for the
scholarship are also teamed with a mentor to assist with
postsecondary planning. According to the Alabama Department of
Human Resources, there are approximately 6,000 foster youth of
all ages in the State of Alabama, 163 students are
participating in the Fostering Hope Scholarship program during
the Spring 2019 semester, and a total of 303 students have
participated since the program's launch during the 2016-2017
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
school year.
California, New York, Pennsylvania, and Michigan have
passed legislation to assist foster youth with transitioning to
postsecondary education.
------
Response by Mark Wiederspan to Questions From Senator Warren, and
Senator Rosen
SENATOR ELIZABETH WARREN
Question 1. Almost half of today's students are financially
independent, but Congress built the Federal financial aid
system as if these students are the exception. How should
lawmakers consider financially independent students when
revising or simplifying the FAFSA?
Answer 1. Previous research, such as my own, has
demonstrated that most of the financial information collected
on the FAFSA does little to determine aid eligibility. In fact,
EFC and financial aid eligibility can be approximated with a
high level of precision with only a handful of elements:
adjusted gross income, taxes paid, state of residence, family
size, marital status, type of income tax form filed, and the
number of family members in college. All of this information
could accurately estimate aid eligibility regardless of
dependency status. That said, there would be no need for
specialized questions tailored to independent students.
Question 2. Of the 1.8 million low-income high school
seniors, 968,000 will submit a FAFSA, and 50 percent of them
will be selected for income verification. In the 2015-2016
academic year, nationally, failure to complete the verification
process kept one in five Pell-eligible students from receiving
the Pell Grant. In your experience, has income verification
prevented low-income students from attending college or
increased college costs? How should lawmakers address this
problem?
Answer 2. My research provides evidence that income
verification does prevent low-income students from attending
college. Due to Iowa College Aid's management of state aid
programs, our agency receives Institutional Student Information
Records (ISIR) for all Iowans who file the Free Application for
Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). For my analysis, I used ISIR
records for first-time FAFSA filers from the 2012-13 to 2016-17
academic years. This dataset not only includes detailed
measures that are used to calculate filers' EFC, but also
variables identifying which filers were selected for
verification. This data was then matched to the student-level
data base maintained by the National Student Clearinghouse
(NSC), which allows for identification on filers' postsecondary
enrollment.
Through a series of logistic regressions, I estimated the
predicted probability of college enrollment between Pell-
eligible filers selected for verification and Pell-eligible
filers not selected for verification. Figure 1 below displays
the results for these two groups. Above each predicted
probability is the average marginal effect, which provides the
statistical difference in college enrollment.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Pell-eligible filers who were selected for verification
were roughly 2.3 percentage points less likely to enroll in
college than their counterparts who were not selected for
verification. The enrollment difference, however, changes when
examining across institutional sectors. Verification had the
biggest impact for Pell-eligible students who were intending to
attend a community college (public 2-year)--filers selected for
verification were significantly less likely to enroll by 3
percentage points.
The exact reason selected filers do not enroll is unknown--
the aforementioned analysis examines only the association
between verification selection and college enrollment. However,
enrollment decisions could be based on financial aid receipt.
Filers need to complete the verification process before
financial aid can be disbursed. If students do not have the
tools to complete the verification process, they will not be
able to receive financial aid. Thus, college prices will be
higher for those who do not complete the verification process,
and the inability to pay those prices could deter lower-income
students from attending college.
My written testimony has recommendations for how the
Committee can address this problem. But I would specifically
recommend that lawmakers (a) utilize the IRS Data Retrieval
Tool (DRT) not only to make the FAFSA more simple but also to
reduce the need for verification, and (b) make the selection
for verification more transparent by providing filers with more
information on why they were selected for verification and
making the criteria or formula determining selection known.
Question 3. If Congress were to lower the required
threshold of those selected for income verification (currently
at 30 percent) would you expect this reduction to address the
income verification issue?
Answer 3. While it is true that roughly 30 percent of
filers are selected for verification annually, institutions
that have a large share of Pell-eligible students carry a
heavier load in the verification process. Starting in 2012-13,
postsecondary institutions were no longer required to verify 30
percent of their FAFSA filers. Rather, institutions are now
required to complete the verification process for every
selected filer. This means that distribution of selected
students varies across institutions. Because verification is
highly associated with Pell eligibility, institutions with a
high share of Pell-eligible students carry a heavier
verification burden than institutions with a small share.
Because community colleges have a large share of Pell-eligible
students, this sector often has more filers to verify. Using
Iowa FAFSA filers during 2017-18 as an example, 47 percent of
filers intending to attend a community college were selected
for verification, compared to 17 percent at 4-year public and
25 percent at private non-profit colleges.
I would expect that any alleviation in the 30 percent that
are selected for verification annually would help improve
college enrollment rates, especially at postsecondary
institutions that have a large Pell-eligible population.
Question 4. Does income verification have an impact on the
student loan debt load of students?
I am not aware of any research or evidence that
demonstrates a direct impact of verification on student loan
debt. However, should filers not complete the verification
process, they would be ineligible to receive Federal Stafford
loans. In this instance, filers could potentially use non-
Federal loans, which may have higher interest rates.
Question 5. Currently, the Expected Family Contribution
(EFC) may disadvantage today's students who have dependents
(including small children) or existing debt. Do you think the
current EFC formula rightly accounts for all of the costs that
today's students--especially those who are parents--face when
they are trying to afford college?
By design of the current EFC calculation formula,
independent students who have dependents should have a smaller
EFC than similar students who do not have dependents.
Independent students with dependents are eligible to have their
EFC calculated through the simplified needs test and are
eligible for an automatic zero EFC, whereas independent
students without dependents are not.
Within the EFC formula, there is a financial offset that
accounts for the basic costs of maintaining family members in
the home while in college. This allowance is based on cost of
living estimates from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Independent students with dependents have a higher income
protection allowance than dependent students and independent
students without dependents. If there were a change in the EFC
to rightly account for the costs, it could be reflected in a
change to this income protection allowance. However, I am not
able to make a judgment on whether this current offset amount
accurately reflects costs that students are facing today.
Instead, I think that more inspection could be done on
colleges' cost of attendance measures. Previous research has
demonstrated that these cost of attendance measures may not
necessarily reflect the true costs of attending a postsecondary
institution, as some researchers have argued that the estimated
costs are smaller than the true costs.
SENATOR JACKY ROSEN
Question 1. Starting with the FAFSA for the 2015-2016
academic year, foster youth and former foster youth were able
to check a box identifying their background information when
they filled out their financial aid forms. The purpose of this
change was to simplify the process and help identify resources
available for youth who had spent time in the foster care
system, in order to increase the number who were both applying
to and attending college.
a. To all of the witnesses, can any of you provide the
committee with data on how many foster youth or former
foster youth apply to college each year in your state
and how this compares with youth who have not spent
time in foster care?
b. What specific recommendations do you have to
increase the number of foster youth applying to
college? What specific barriers do you see and what
recommendations do you have for this Committee? I would
also be very interested in hearing what steps you are
each doing to reach foster youth and other vulnerable
populations to improve the current rates of application
and graduation.
Answer 1. Unfortunately I do not have data on the college
enrollment rates for all foster youth in the state of Iowa. My
analysis is limited to Iowans who file the FAFSA. Internal
agency data does suggest that, on an annually basis, roughly 1
percent of Iowa FAFSA filers are orphans or wards of the state
in foster care. That equates to approximately 1,100 to 1,700
foster students filing the FAFSA annually. Among that 1
percent, roughly 51 percent enroll in college. In comparison to
youth not in foster care and who file the FAFSA, the enrollment
rate is closer to 75 percent.
As the agency in charge of administering the state of
Iowa's grants and scholarship programs, we do oversee Iowa's
Education Training Voucher (ETV), a federally funded aid
program through the John H. Chafee Foster Care Independent
Program. In recent years, there have been changes to the aid
program that have allowed for a larger share of foster students
to be ETV eligible. Specifically, the age restriction changed
from 23 to 26 years of age. However, there is still a 5 year
maximum lifetime eligibility for this aid program. We have
discovered that many foster students enroll part-time, which
can lead to these foster students extending their time to
degree beyond 5 years. One possible recommendation for the
Committee would be to modify this 5 year limit to a 5 full-time
equivalent year limit. This small adjustment would not only
take into account periods where foster students are enrolled
part-time, but would also allow for an extension in their aid
eligibility that could cover their time to degree.
------
Response by Michele Scott Taylor to Questions From Senator Warren, and
Senator Rosen
SENATOR ELIZABETH WARREN
Question 1. Almost half of today's students are financially
independent, but Congress built the Federal financial aid
system as if these students are the exception. How should
lawmakers consider financially independent students when
revising or simplifying the FAFSA?
Answer 1. College Now serves many students who lack any
financial support from their parents, but due to Federal rules,
are unable to qualify for independent status. This issue
becomes especially pronounced when students are trying to
complete the FAFSA. It is not uncommon for parents to withhold
his or her tax information from their child. The reasons are
varied, but often include lack of familiarity with the process
and/or concerns with turning over personal information to
school. This unfortunately can then prevent their child from
being able to access postsecondary.
Alex is a student from Cleveland who is currently enrolled
at Baldwin Wallace. She summed up her experience as a dependent
student:
``My parents do not provide any financial support in my
life whatsoever, and that's how it has been since I was 16. The
government does not take into consideration that there are
different circumstances in every person's life which can limit
their ability to afford college. My parents didn't give me the
luxury of helping me pay for school or surprising me with a
bank account with thousands of dollars when I turned 18. But
until I am 24, I am included on my parents' taxes, even if I
live on my own--and the only way I can become eligible is if I
have a child or get married.''
Alex's suggestion was to simply ``provide an option on the
FAFSA that allows you to check ``yes'' or ``no'' regarding
parental financial support through college.'' While we
recognize the process cannot be so simple, we do believe there
should be an easier path to proving independence and revising
the current formula that determines a family's EFC.
Question 2. Of the 1.8 million low-income high school
seniors, 968,000 will submit a FAFSA, and 50 percent of them
will be selected for income verification. In the 2015-2016
academic year, nationally, failure to complete the verification
process kept one in five Pell-eligible students from receiving
the Pell Grant. In your experience, has income verification
prevented low-income students from attending college or
increased college costs? How should lawmakers address this
problem?
Answer 2. Income verification ABSOLUTELY prevents low-
income students from attending college and it has increased
college costs. It is alarming that while 30 percent of all
FAFSA filers are selected for verification, 50 percent of Pell
eligible students are selected. Of those who are Pell-eligible
and selected for verification only 56 percent go on to receive
a Pell Grant compared to 81 percent of Pell-eligible students
not selected for verification. This represents a 25 percentage
point ``melt'' (Warick, 2018). There is little evidence to show
that the verification process actually has the desired results:
reducing improper payments and ensuring accountability within
the financial aid process. For example, Pell overpayment
accounts for 95 percent of improper payments. However,
according to the U.S. Department of Education, 63 percent of
those overpayments are due to administrative or process errors
while only 37 percent are due to failure to verify financial
data (2017). Further, there is evidence that families with
higher incomes (over $75,000), if selected for verification,
would be are more likely to receive a major change in their
financial aid package than those with zero EFC's (46 percent vs
7 percent, respectively) (Warick, 2017). It is clear that the
verification process unfairly targets those who are low-income.
At College Now, we work with 29,000 students annually
throughout financial aid process including financial aid
education, FAFSA completion assistance, verification support,
and loan repayment. We know from this direct service, that
verification is a major barrier to college enrollment for low-
income and first-generation students and work diligently to
help students selected for verification complete the
complicated process. However, there are times when these
efforts fail to prevent students from melting.
Verification can also contribute to a student delaying or
even losing his or her award, as the U.S. Department of
Education cannot disperse any Federal funds until the student
completes the process. The verification process can take
several months and force students to find alternative means of
funding to pay for academic or housing deposits, as they wait
for the funds to be awarded.
John was planning on attending Cleveland State University.
He is the first in his family to attend college and therefore
relied heavily on College Now advice and support. Neither of
his parents work, although they are married. Together, his
family and the College Now advisor completed the necessary
paperwork and requested a copy of proof for non-filing--the
4506 form for his mother. We mailed several copies of this form
before we eventually heard back.
Sadly, John started college in the Fall without his
financial aid being squared away. He was dropped from his
classes and required to re-register and he started the classes
without having the money to purchase his textbooks. After he
dropped the first semester classes he works at various fast-
food jobs and works at the Indians Stadium when they are in-
season and at first he talked about transferring to Tri-C, but
now he just wants to work.
To address the challenges of verification, and ensure that
future students like John are able to enroll without these
additional hurdles, we recommend that Congress:
a. simplify the FAFSA to reduce the number of
thresholds for verification,
b. use qualifying for means-tested benefits as evidence
of a student's financial situation (too often, we
require students and their families to prove over and
over that they are in fact poor. This can be
streamlined through stronger data sharing between
agencies and by giving FAFSA filers who receive means
tested benefits an auto zero EFC and exemption from
verification),
c. amend IRS Code Section 6103 be amended to allow for
direct sharing between the Department of Treasury and
Education; and
d. legislate the re-establishment of a verification
cap. Historically, institutes of higher education were
allowed to cap the number of students they verified at
30 percent. That cap was removed in 2012. While we'd
like to reinstate some sort of cap, we concur with the
National Association Financial Aid Administrators, that
a 30 percent verification rate is unnecessarily high to
ensure that the program is being implemented with
integrity. In contrast, the IRS verifies less than 1
percent of filers with adjusted gross incomes of $1 to
$500,000.
Another major verification challenge is that once a student
is selected for verification at one school, they are likely to
be selected for verification at multiple schools. The processes
are burdensome work for the student and their families.
e. We recommend that the verification process be
standardized or that the Department create a one-stop
verification clearinghouse so that students only need
to complete the process once.
In addition to these recommendations, we ask that Congress
take further action to ensure that verification achieves the
desired impact of reducing improper payments and that more be
done to prevent the burden of verification from falling on the
most vulnerable students.
To that end, Congress should consider the following two
questions as it considers HEA reauthorization. Is verification
having the desired results? Further, could verification be
structured in a way that targets fewer students and lowers the
burden on both families and institutions of higher education?
Question 3. If Congress were to lower the required
threshold of those selected for income verification (currently
at 30 percent) would you expect this reduction to address the
income verification issue?
We think that lowering the required threshold for income
verification is one of many steps needed to reduce the impact
of verification (see question 2). However, for this to be
equitable and effective, it would need to be implemented in
conjunction with the reinstatement of a verification cap at the
institutional level. In 2012, the Department removed the 30
percent verification cap for institutions of higher education.
This in turn, raised the verification burden for schools that
attract a high number of Pell eligible students, like our
partners Cuyahoga Community College, and Cleveland State
University. This has forced schools like these to redeploy
resources from supporting success and completion to
administrative tasks to meet the rising verification burden.
Lowering the caps at the Departmental level and for
institutions, would allow institutions of higher education, to
refocus their energy on more appropriately meeting the needs of
students, not administrative work.
Question 4. Does income verification have an impact on the
student loan debt load of students?
Answer 4. Income verification can have a negative impact on
the student loan debt loads of students. If a student is unable
to complete the verification process, they are then unable to
access Federal grants and scholarships and also state grants
like the Ohio College Opportunity Grant and private
scholarships like the College Now Scholarship. This in turn,
could lead a student to take out private student loans at a
higher rate than they would otherwise.
Question 5. Currently, the Expected Family Contribution
(EFC) may disadvantage today's students who have dependents
(including small children) or existing debt. Do you think the
current EFC formula rightly accounts for all of the costs that
today's students--especially those who are parents--face when
they are trying to afford college?
Answer 5. Absolutely Not! While the rationale for using a
formula to calculate the EFC is laudable--it standardizes the
use of Federal financial aid and it is a more systematic
approach to ensuring fairness and perhaps ``equality''--it is
not equitable, and there is a huge difference between equality
and equity. The ability to afford college is predicated on a
number of variables that are not currently accounted for or
believed to be necessary in helping students access higher
education. Existing debt is the most significant one!
SENATOR JACKY ROSEN
Question 1. Starting with the FAFSA for the 2015-2016
academic year, foster youth and former foster youth were able
to check a box identifying their background information when
they filled out their financial aid forms. The purpose of this
change was to simplify the process and help identify resources
available for youth who had spent time in the foster care
system, in order to increase the number who were both applying
to and attending college.
a. To all of the witnesses, can any of you provide the
Committee with data on how many foster youth or former
foster youth apply to college each year in your state
and how this compares with youth who have not spent
time in foster care?
Answer 1a. We do not specifically disaggregate our data
regarding foster youth and formerly foster youth seeking to
gain access to higher education. However, overall, the rate of
foster care placement is on the rise in Ohio. In 2018, 26,700
children were placed in foster care at some point--an increase
of 3,184--in just five years. \1\ In Cuyahoga County, where
College Now is headquartered and most of our services are
provided, there are 1,394 children in either a DCFS or a
Network Foster Home. In Ohio, 978 children aged out of out-of-
home care in 2015. \2\ Sadly, Ohio has long ranked last in the
Nation in state funding for Children Service agencies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\
https://www.dispatch.com/news/20190329/ohio-child-welfare-
system-in-crisis-advocates-say.
\2\
https://www.cwla.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Ohio.pdf.
There is a clear need to make sure that these students are
provided with access to postsecondary and the supports
necessary to accomplish their goals. According to the
nonprofit, Foster Care to Success, only 10 percent of formerly
foster youth graduate from college. Unfortunately, there is
little attention being brought at a state-wide level to this
gap, and we were unfortunately, unable to determine the college
application rates of these students compared to their peers in
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ohio.
Question 1b. What specific recommendations do you have
to increase the number of foster youth applying to
college?
Answer 1b. To increase the number of foster youth applying
to college, we recommend increasing Federal grant funding (i.e.
a larger maximum Pell Grant) for foster youth, as college costs
can be a major barrier to higher education. The average young
adult relies on their families for emotional support and some
financial assistance until they are 26 years old. Most foster
youth do not have this support network.
While we are grateful that Congress continues to increase
Pell, its purchasing power has declined tremendously since its
establishment. In 1980 the Pell Grant covered 68 percent of
college costs. In comparison, in 2016-17 it covered only 25
percent of costs. If Pell were to maintain its purchasing power
from 40 years ago, the maximum grant would be $15,471; for the
2018-19 school year maximum Pell was $6,095. Even with state
need-based aid and private scholarships, many formerly foster
youth will view postsecondary as out of reach.
We also suggest that Congress simplify the FAFSA and
resulting verification process which can serve as a major
barrier to college access for these youth. Congress should use
qualifying for means-tested benefits as evidence of a student's
financial situation. Too often, we require students and their
families to prove over and over that they are in fact poor or
in a difficult situation. This can be further streamlined
through stronger data sharing between agencies and by giving
FAFSA filers who receive means tested benefits an auto zero EFC
and exemption from verification. One College Now Advisors
shared this story about how the verification process can become
a major barrier to foster youth:
Foster kids are even more challenging. While they usually
have the documentation they need if they're verified--and I've
seen way fewer kids all the way through verification for foster
care--they're usually dealing with so many other things trying
to keep their lives stable as they age out that school isn't
super important and verification is usually enough to knock
them off track. Most foster kids I've seen in the Resource
Center spent the first few years after high school trying to
get their lives stable and miss out on critical scholarship
money.
We also recommend that private scholarship providers take
into the unique needs of these students. For example, college
advocated for the needs of foster youth as part of Cleveland's
Say Yes to Education Scholarship. There is a residency
requirement for Say Yes scholars, and College Now advocated to
eliminate this requirement for those who are in foster care or
are homeless.
Finally, we ask that our higher education partners provide
more support for these students once enrolled. For example,
Cleveland State University offers foster youth the Sullivan/
Deckard scholarship. The Sullivan/Deckard scholarship guides
youth who age out of the foster care system through the college
application process. Once enrolled, these scholars benefit from
a comprehensive support system and scholarship that covers
tuition, room and board, and on campus employment through
Federal-Work Study. This is a unique scholarship program with
support services that are not found on many campuses.
Question 1c. What specific barriers do you see and what
recommendations do you have for this Committee? I would also be
very interested in hearing what steps you are each doing to
reach foster youth and other vulnerable populations to improve
the current rates of application and graduation.
Answer 1c. College Now Greater Cleveland pays close
attention to the needs of foster youth serving them in the
schools and through our two Resource Centers which are open to
the public. Our advisors work with these students ensure they
have the support needed to complete college applications and
the FAFSA as well as relevant scholarships. We also, when
funding is available, work with area colleges to provide
scholarships and or waivers so that these students can live on
campus during the times when residence halls are closed for
most students (spring break, summer break, etc.). In addition,
we partner with local nonprofits who work with this population
to educate them on the issues and needs of these students
matriculating and persisting in college. This information helps
the broader community advocate for services to support these
students. This Committee could be helpful in developing
opportunities for cross collaboration among healthcare, social
service and educational providers who can work with students
holistically and mitigate the need for students to navigate
multiple systems essentially.
In our direct service work, we utilize a case-management
approach to ensure each student meets with a College Now
Advisor at least once a month. We recognize that before the
career and college readiness conversations can occur, these
students often have other needs that must be met like food,
health and secured housing. For this reason, our staff first
provide referrals to these services. Once those basic needs are
met, they will begin to have conversations with these students
about their postsecondary plans and financial concerns.
This Committee could be helpful in developing opportunities
for cross collaboration among healthcare, social service and
educational providers who can work with students holistically
and mitigate the need for students to navigate multiple systems
(essentially leveraging the resources to achieve greater
sustainable impact).
We believe that TRIO and GEAR UP provide best practices
because they utilize cohort models and because they provide
wrap around services including funding. We recommend continued
and increased funding for these programs. We also recommend
continue researched on best practices in higher education
access and completion. We also recommend continued researched
on best practices in higher education access and completion
using data disaggregated by vulnerable populations so that the
magnitude of this problem can be more easily demonstrated,
understood and acted upon.
[Whereupon, at 11:31 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
