- MORE THAN A NUCLEAR THREAT: NORTH KOREA'S CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL, AND CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
MORE THAN A NUCLEAR THREAT:
NORTH KOREA'S CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL,
AND CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS
=======================================================================
JOINT HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON TERRORISM, NONPROLIFERATION, AND TRADE
AND THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA AND THE PACIFIC
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JANUARY 17, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-104
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
28-334 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas
KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama
AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
Amy Porter, Chief of Staff
Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director
Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade
TED POE, Texas, Chairman
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
PAUL COOK, California
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
NORMA J. TORRES, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
------
Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific
TED S. YOHO, Florida, Chairman
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
AMI BERA, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
DINA TITUS, Nevada
MO BROOKS, Alabama
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
WITNESSES
Anthony Cordesman, Ph.D., Arleigh A. Burke Chair in Strategy,
Center for Strategic and International Studies.................
11
Mr. John Parachini, director, Intelligence Policy Center, RAND
Corporation....................................................
45
Mr. Anthony Ruggiero, senior fellow, Foundation for Defense of
Democracies....................................................
58
The Honorable Bonnie Jenkins, founder and president, Women of
Color Advancing Peace, Security and Conflict Transformation
(former Coordinator for Threat Reduction Programs, Bureau of
International Security and Nonproliferation, U.S. Department of
State).........................................................
72
LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING
Anthony Cordesman, Ph.D.: Prepared statement.....................
13
Mr. John Parachini: Prepared statement...........................
47
Mr. Anthony Ruggiero: Prepared statement.........................
60
The Honorable Bonnie Jenkins: Prepared statement.................
74
APPENDIX
Hearing notice...................................................
100
Hearing minutes..................................................
101
The Honorable Ted Poe, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, and chairman, Subcommittee on Terrorism,
Nonproliferation, and Trade: Prepared statement................
102
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........
104
MORE THAN A NUCLEAR THREAT:
NORTH KOREA'S CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL,
AND CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS
----------
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 17, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade and
Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:04 p.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ted Yoho
(chairman of the Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific)
presiding.
Mr. Yoho. The subcommittee will come to order. Chairman Poe
got detained because of the weather, and I guess Texas isn't
set up for equipment like that, deicing planes.
Members present will be permitted to submit written
statements to be included in the official hearing record.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for 5
calendar days to allow statements, questions and extraneous
material for the record, subject to length limitations in the
rules.
Good afternoon. I would like to thank Chairman Poe for
calling this hearing. It is such an important hearing to have
in today's climate. And Ranking Member Keating, Ranking Member
Sherman, and all other members of the subcommittee for
gathering today to continue working on one of the most urgent
security threats facing the United States.
As we will hear from our witnesses today, the danger North
Korea poses to the world is more than just its rogue nuclear
program and ballistic missile brinksmanship. Pyongyang develops
other weapons of mass destruction and backs them with
significant conventional military capabilities.
As his pursuit of chemical and biological weapons shows,
Kim Jong-un commands tools of indiscriminate mass murder beyond
nuclear weapons, and U.S. policy must be responsive to these
threats as well.
North Korea, one of only 6 countries that has not signed
the Chemical Weapons Convention, is believed to have stockpiles
of thousands of tons of chemical weapons, including sulfur,
mustard gas, chlorine, sarin, and VX, some of the worst
chemicals that mankind has devised. These agents could be
delivered by a variety of North Korean weapon systems, notably
the massed artillery deployed near the DMZ which would place
Seoul at extreme risk.
Experts believe North Korea would not hesitate to use such
tactics as a way to make up the deficiency in its aging
military and that such an attack could feasibly result in
millions of civilian casualties in South Korea.
Recent reports have also highlighted North Korea's
continuing work on another longstanding WMD program, the
production of biological weapons, including anthrax and
smallpox. It has been known for some time that North Korea
possesses the capability to produce anthrax for military
purposes, and just last month, a Japanese newspaper reported
that North Korea has begun experiments to load anthrax into
ICBMs. Tellingly, this assertion is reiterated in the
administration's recent national security strategy. The
frightening truth is that we already have at least one data
point to show that North Korea is ready and willing to use such
horrific weapons to accomplish its goal.
In early 2017, we all remember North Korean agents
assassinated Kim Jong-nam, the half brother of Kim Jong-un,
with VX nerve agent in Malaysia. This operation proved to the
world not only that North Korea has access to chemical lethal
weapons, but also the willingness and the expertise to
transport and apply them in a targeted and sophisticated
manner.
Partly in response to this killing, the White House in
November announced that it was redesignating North Korea as a
state sponsor of terrorism in a large part due to Judge Poe and
other members of this committee. An overdue step to remind the
world that Kim's unlawful regime is an international pariah.
But the threat remains.
To backstop its asymmetric capabilities, North Korea also
maintains the world's fourth largest standing army, with over 1
million personnel, accounting for almost 5 percent of its total
population. North Korea keeps its substantial conventional
forces in a forward-deployed posture, keeping Korea and also
Japan under constant threat.
For example, even conservative estimates place hundreds of
North Korean artillery tubes within range of Seoul, able to
rain thousands of shells per minute down on the metropolitan
area. These weapons could inflict enormous costs on South
Koreans and the 230,000 Americans living in South Korea.
Combined with chemical or biological payloads, the cost would
be unimaginable even in the absence of nuclear weapons.
North Korea's conventional, chemical, and biological
weapons raise a number of questions that are too often
overlooked in the congressional debate over our policies toward
North Korea. North Korea's investment in these weapons may
increase the cost of potential contingency and constrain U.S.
strategic planning. They may give Kim Jong-un additional
strategic options to escalate a conflict without using nuclear
weapons and provoking regime-ending war.
If North Korea truly wants to rejoin the international
community in a meaningful and lasting way, the Kim regime will
have to bring something to the negotiating table. Perhaps the
regime's chemical, biological, and other weapons aimed solely
at civilian populations might be a fitting place to start as we
work toward the goal of full denuclearization.
I look forward to working toward answers to these and other
questions, and I thank the panel for joining us today to
discuss this concerning topic.
And without objection, the witnesses' written statements
will be entered into the hearing record. And I now turn to the
ranking member on TNT for any remarks he may have.
Mr. Keating.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Yoho. Take it away.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
the hearing today. One of President Obama's outgoing warnings
to President Trump was about the threat posed by North Korea.
And here we are.
Today we are not talking about the nuclear threats. It is
axiomatic, almost, the question theoretically that was posed to
one of our first ladies once, saying, ``Other than that, Mrs.
Lincoln, how did you enjoy the theater?'' But there are,
indeed, other real threats posed by North Korea's non-nuclear
weapons. As tensions rise and the rhetoric heats up about
military options, we need to be having an honest, realistic
conversation about the types of threats that we are facing from
North Korea and the full range of options we must consider
given the very real risk we face.
Frankly, reports that the administration is considering
quote, unquote,
deg.``a bloody nose strategy in North
Korea'' is deeply concerning. War is not a matter of bloody
noses. It is human lives, constant uncertainty, long-term
challenges in our investments to achieve some amount of
security. And we know all too well that this investment can
easily take a generation because security is not just fighting
the battle and then going home. It is also everything that
comes afterwards. We know this because we are fast-approaching
20 years of military engagement in Afghanistan and Iraq. That
is because the instability produced by war is itself a threat.
The chemical, biological, conventional and other non-
nuclear threats posed by the North Korean regime are serious
indeed. And it is our duty to come together in Congress to best
ensure the safety of the American people. Whether we like it or
not, if the President launches an attack on North Korea, we
will need to make a decision on whether we will give him the
authority to continue that military engagement.
U.S. Pacific Commander Admiral Harris, who I had the
opportunity to meet with when I visited the Pacific and South
Korea roughly 1 year ago, was one of those voices we should
listen to closely when it comes to formulating U.S. strategy in
North Korea. So when Admiral Harris categorized diplomacy as
the most important starting point, we should be taking a hard
look in Congress at whether our diplomatic options truly are
being pursued as aggressively as we can. Because protecting the
American people does not automatically mean sending them to
war, or worse yet, all but inviting an attack from a hostile
regime.
Before jumping to the military options, we need to be clear
on what they look like and most importantly, the full range of
diplomatic options that we have available to us.
We need to be clear on our options because the options we
choose will matter tremendously to our women and men in uniform
and to their families and friends. It will matter to families
living across the United States wondering if they might live
within the blast radius where North Korea has the ability to
strike here at home, and it will matter to the generations
forced to clean up the mess left behind by what would
inevitably be a long and complicated conflict on the Korean
Peninsula.
North Korea is likely not to go its way and follow
international law on the use of chemical and biological
weapons. It was not so long ago that another brutal regime used
chemical weapons in the midst of a conflict. What does it mean
to operate on a battlefield where chemical and biological
weapons could be in play? What do the civilian casualties look
like? Can these weapons be secured in the midst of an armed
conflict, and if not, what types of the proliferation risks
should we consider?
All this, in addition to the concerns presented by North
Korea's conventional forces. What could such a conflict breed
in terms of the spillover effects into other countries. A
military option should only be used when necessary and once
there are no other effective options left on the table.
So I am looking forward to discussing our other options
today, our diplomatic options. And I thank the panel for being
here to help us in that endeavor.
Congress has already passed sanctions to deal with the
threats from North Korea, so where is the diplomatic follow
through? Where is our State Department? Where are our
Ambassadors? The United States still does not have an
Ambassador to South Korea in place. Our allies are not
reassured by this administration's actions, and we are not even
at the table as North and South Korea negotiate, even though
our own security is also very much at stake.
These are serious issues and we have very little
information to understand and properly counter these threats.
So we need to take stock of what we do have and what we have to
do. We have long had strong allies and partnerships in South
Korea, Japan and so many other countries that are similarly
concerned by the threats posed by North Korea. When we face
serious threats of this nature, such as nuclear threats from
Iran, what have we done in the past? We worked closely in a
coalition of partner nations.
The women and men of the State Department have long been
some of our strongest assets in representing the United States
at the table to negotiate peace and to make it possible for
Americans to sleep soundly at night. Under this administration,
they have weakened our State Department and confused our
allies. We should be concerned that once a leader, the United
States is rapidly becoming a pariah on the international stage,
and that does not make us safer.
So I appreciate the witnesses being here. I hope to hear
from you on what we could be doing, even in light of the
challenging circumstances and alarming threats that we face.
I yield back.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Keating. Words well spoken, well
meaning, and hopefully well taken as we go through this.
Being the chair of the Asia-Pacific Subcommittee, and Judge
Poe is not here, I am going to turn to the ranking member, good
friend, Mr. Brad Sherman from the State of California, who is
the ranking member of the Asia-Pacific Subcommittee. And it is
important that everybody knows that the two committees have
come together on this important topic.
Mr. Sherman, thank you.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. And for many years our policy on
North Korea has focused on its nuclear program. We have to make
sure that we don't stumble into war. And I am concerned about
the rhetoric that sounds like adolescent boys at a junior high
school. The idea that we could bloody the nose of our adversary
without risk to the Korean Peninsula and the world is absurd.
In today's hearing, I look forward to hearing from our
panel on chemical, biological and conventional weapons, but at
least in my opening statement, I am going to also focus on the
nuclear.
I have cosponsored five bills, many of us have, that
sanction and condemn North Korea. But I have also cosponsored
the No Unconstitutional Strike Against North Korea Act, because
we should not, by presidential fiat, be conducting military
strikes and going to war with North Korea.
We need a strong military to deter North Korean action, but
we also need diplomacy. And diplomacy starts with reasonable
objectives. I am old. I was here when North Korea had as one of
its objectives just getting a nonaggression pact with the
United States. We turned them down. Vice President Cheney
imagined that we could have a righteous invasion of North
Korea. Bad idea now. Bad idea then.
We might very well look at the freeze-for-freeze
initiative. We could suspend our military exercises in return
for a verifiable freeze on North Korea's nuclear and missile
testing and production--and I want to emphasize the word
``production'' because I don't think China has gone that far in
its proposal--of both nuclear material and missiles, but also
chemical and biological materials.
To reduce the biological threat, we can ask North Korea to
affirm that it will remain in the Biological Weapons
Convention. We should encourage it in public health and
agricultural dialogues to limit bioweapons. And as suggested by
one of our witnesses, push a no-first-use pledge and give one
ourselves with regard to chemical and biological weapons use.
We need to prepare for chemical, biological, and nuclear
weapons use in the Korean Peninsula because it may indeed
happen.
The idea that you can't reduce casualties from a nuclear
strike because a nuclear strike is beyond our imagination, in
its horror, is to say that there is no difference between
100,000 casualties, 1 million casualties, and 5 million
casualties. Likewise, when we look at the chemical threat from
North Korea, we estimate it to have 2,500 to 5,000 tons of
chemical agents. We see that the distribution, not only to our
troops, but to relevant Korean civilians, of gas masks and more
sophisticated countermeasures might well be the investment, not
because it would render us invulnerable or our allies
invulnerable to such an attack, but only because it would
reduce casualties.
Finally, two other points I want to make. One is, North
Korea may soon be interested in selling its nuclear weapons or
chemical or biological weapons. Roughly 10 years ago Israel
destroyed a Syrian nuclear facility which seemed to have
Iranian participation. That was all North Korean technology.
North Korea will not currently sell its nuclear weapons
because it needs a certain number of weapons to defend itself
from us in their mind. But they will quickly in 1 year, 2
years, 3 years, get to the point where they can afford to sell
one or more nuclear weapons. They won't sell for a cost that a
terrorist group can afford, but sovereign states can indeed
produce a billion or several billion dollars, if that is the
asking price.
We need to work with China to make sure there are no
nonstop flights between Iran and North Korea. I spoke to the
President about this, President Obama about this, and he
assured me that we were checking ships, but we have no way of
stopping planes. China, however, can require refueling of any
plane between those two countries.
Second, we have to be willing to risk our trade
relationship with China to get a level of cooperation from
China on this issue that goes beyond the foreign policy
decision that they have made. And if we are not willing to do
that, then we are putting the profits of entities of Wall
Street above the security of the American people. It is not
something we haven't done before, but we continue to do it when
it comes to the Korean issue.
And I yield back.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for your comments. Next, we will go to
Mr. Chabot, who used to chair the Asia-Pacific Subcommittee,
the previous chairman. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And you are doing a
fine job of it, maybe not as good as I did, but really good.
No, just kidding.
It was mentioned that we are not a part of the talks
between South Korea and North Korea, and that is true. But I
would argue that those talks are--it is blackmail, it is a
fraud, it is a sham, in my view. South Korea is concerned that
North Korea is going to screw up the Olympics for them and
North Korea is going to get everything they can out of this, as
they always do. We have had previous administrations, both
Republican and Democrat, who have been suckered by the North
Koreans time and time again.
They promise to give up their nuclear program. We give them
food, we give them oil. And it doesn't matter whether we are in
six-party talks or whoever, all of the countries that deal with
North Korea fall into line. We give them a bunch of stuff. They
promise to behave. They don't behave.
And now they have nuclear weapons which now can threaten us
right here in the continental United States. They have chemical
and biological weapons programs that they are proceeding for
their conventional weapons programs, whether it is tanks or the
artillery system that they have and how they can target Seoul,
and us for that matter. It is horrendous that we have, we being
the rest of the world, have allowed them to get to this point.
The key to solving this whole thing, in my view, was/is
continues to be China. China talks a good game. They act like
they are going to do things, they are going to cooperate and
rein in, and they get embarrassed by the regime, the North
Korean regime on occasion, but they are not going to rein them
in. They are helpful to them. They keep us and our allies off
balance. And so even though they act like they are very
disappointed, in general what North Korea does benefits China
as much as it keeps them off guard to some degree.
China is the key, and as long as China believes that we are
not going to be serious with them about cutting them off
basically, they benefit one heck of a lot more from trade and a
relationship with us than we do from them. And until we get
serious--previous administrations never got serious with China.
I think there is at least the chance for this administration.
I do believe this President, you know, went into it being
very tough with China. And he listened to the Chinese
leadership. And I think he has been too gullible, really, in
believing what they are saying, and they pump him up and how
great he is. And he listens, unfortunately. And that really is
unfortunate, because this administration either gets tough with
China who can lean on North Korea and get him to back down, or
they don't.
In which case, we have a nuclear North Korea now and one of
these days something will happen, which the world will regret.
So we are way past too late, but let's hope too late isn't
here yet. And I yield back.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for those comments.
Next we will go to Mr. Connolly from the State of Virginia.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I echo what Ben
said. I was in Korea last year and went to the DMZ. And what
really struck me was that the DMZ is to Seoul what Dulles
Airport is to Washington, DC. It is virtually that close.
Mr. Yoho. Yeah.
Mr. Connolly. And so we need to be careful when we saber
rattle, when we tweet, when we throw out threats, because it
unsettles that part of the world. We have to be careful about
how that is interpreted by the North Korean regime and how it
can sometimes inadvertently strengthen that regime and its
resolve to develop nuclear weapons. But most importantly, that
there are 25 million people who live in Seoul who will be the
first victims of a violent outbreak. The second victims will be
in Japan.
And so we need to be cognizant of that. That isn't to say
don't be strong. Is it to say, however, we need to look at
carrots as well as sticks, points of leverage to try to engage
North Korea, even at the 11th hour, to try to get them to
desist. And I think that ought to be the paramount goal of U.S.
policy and the region, stay strong, but be willing to be
engaged.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you. Next, we will go to Mr. Joe Wilson
from South Carolina.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The totalitarian
regime in North Korea continues to threaten the United States
and our allies by testing nuclear capabilities and intermediate
to long range intercontinental ballistic missiles. We will not
and should not tolerate the escalation by this rogue regime in
North Korea.
I am encouraged by the leadership of President Donald Trump
and Ambassador Nikki Haley, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson,
with Deputy Secretary of State, John Sullivan, for their
commitment to demonstrating peace through strength, clearly
expressing their commitment to keeping all options on the table
when it comes to addressing the threat from North Korea,
whether it be military, diplomatic or economic. We have a
responsibility to protect families across the globe, but
especially those of America, South Korea and Japan from this
existential threat.
As one of only two Members of Congress to have visited
Pyongyang, I saw firsthand North Korea's fragile economy.
Buildings without electricity, highways that were virtually
empty, inflammatory propaganda posters threatening death to
South Koreans and Americans, and an international airport that
was scarcely used. When contrasted with the vibrant capital of
South Korea, it is clear that the communist regime of North
Korea is fragile. This is why I believe the sanctions on North
Korea promoted by President Trump have been successful,
resulting in recent talks between North and South Korea and
North Korea agreeing to attend the Winter Olympics for the
first time since 2006.
I am grateful that President Trump is heeding the advice of
military leaders, led by Secretary of Defense James Mattis, in
taking the threat from North Korea seriously. The United States
is fully prepared to handle this threat. And with the
leadership of President Trump, Ambassador Nikki Haley, House
Republicans and Foreign Affairs Committee Chair Ed Royce, we
will be even more prepared in the future.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for those comments. Next we will go to
Mrs. Ann Wagner from Missouri.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank both
chairmen for hosting this important hearing today. Despite
international pressure and a host of new sanctions, North Korea
continues to develop nuclear weapons, but this should not be
our only focus. We know that North Korea is not only
miniaturizing a nuclear warhead for placement on a ballistic
missile that can reach the continental United States, but also
developing offensive chemical and biological weapons. These
weapons are agents of terror, and change how we approach
strategies to confront the North Korean regime.
Meanwhile, our partners in the west appear blind to the
chemical weapons attacks by enemies of freedom across our
globe. Just this past weekend, there were reports of a chemical
gas attack in Syria that injured civilians. The United States
must take a clear stand against the use of chemical and
biological weapons and find pathways to disrupt North Korea's
weapons of development. I look forward to your testimony and
the questions that will ensue.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you. I appreciate your comments. Next we
will go to Mr. Dan Donovan from New York.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With so much focus on
North Korea's growing nuclear weapons program, this hearing
brings to light an alarming aspect of North Korea's arsenal
that is ignored in the public discourse.
North Korea has a disquieting stockpile of conventional,
chemical, and biological weapons which could proliferate to
terror organizations and pose a threat to our homeland. I held
a hearing on this topic just last month as chairman of the
Homeland Security Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness
Response and Communications. So the information that we will
gather here today will be enormously helpful for our ongoing
Homeland Security activities.
According to public documents and the Congressional
Research Service, the U.S. may need to deploy up to 700,000
troops in the event of hostilities on the Korean Peninsula.
That is several times more than the troop levels we deployed in
Iraq and Afghanistan. Further, the Pentagon estimates that
20,000 civilians in South Korea alone could die each day of a
war all before the use of nuclear weapons by North Korea.
This is an incredibly dangerous situation, and that is why
I am eager to learn from today's hearing. What we hear today
will be useful to foreign policy, military preparedness and
homeland security. It is our role as Members of Congress to
apply this knowledge to strengthen America's defenses. And I
thank the witnesses today for sharing their expertise with this
panel and look forward to hearing your testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for your comments. Mr. Garrett from
Virginia.
Mr. Garrett. It is 2018, and we are shocked as a Nation to
learn that slavery is still practiced in areas of the world,
and yet, a player on the international stage and in the
spotlight, North Korea is in the business, as it were, of
literally selling its citizens into slavery. With this being
the case, can we have any doubt that North Korea would engage
and employ weapon systems that would wreak havoc upon civilian
populations? In fact, by my understanding, the population of
Seoul is roughly 8 million. The metro area is closer to 24
million.
And having spent time as a fire supporter and understanding
the proper employment of cannon rocket and missile fires, and
understanding history and the fact that two-thirds of all
combat casualties inflicted by the United States military since
the Civil War were inflicted with indirect fire, 20,000
civilian casualties a day seems mild.
And the question as to whether a regime that would sell its
own people into slavery to line its thinly-lined pockets would
use these weapons against foreign civilians seems not to be a
question at all. But I think these very people who we seek to
protect in the interest of humanity and human rights are the
key, and I would look forward to hearing from you how the
individuals who might employ these conventional weapon systems
might be targeted so that we might see a better humanitarian
circumstance and a safer world for all in Korea and beyond.
Thank you.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for your comments. Mr. Dana Rohrabacher
from California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I have been listening to everyone's
comments. I had to grab a sandwich. That is all I've had all
day. Let me just note just some reaction to some of my
colleagues.
With all due respect, we are talking about the worst, God-
awful dictatorship in the world. And we are finding our time,
however, our focus on attacking the President of the United
States. Now, I don't care. This guy is our President. Yeah, he
has got some eccentricities. You think you are going to make
war any less by attacking him instead of the enemy, instead of
this guy who has murdered his own family and murdered countless
people to maintain power in Korea? No.
These insults to our President, we should know when to make
them and when not to. This is not the hearing to make those,
especially considering the fact that what we have now is this
very same communist dictator in South Korea talking about how
to cooperate at least with the Olympics. Seems to me, the
President calling him ``rocket man'' and ``I have a bigger
button to push than he does,'' maybe had the positive impact,
because that is what happens with gangsters. If you deal with
them forcefully and you put them down, they will respond to
that.
Let me just note, the Democrat response when I first came
here, which was a long time ago, during the Clinton
administration, what was their response? Their response was to
give $4 billion in order to curry favors with that dictatorship
in North Korea. We gave them $4 billion worth of fuel. What do
you think they used that $4 billion for? That is where they got
the money to develop their nuclear weapon right now.
Yeah, of course, people attacking our President even after
the last President gave $150 billion to Iran. Oh, yeah. No, I
am sorry. This was not the place to attack the President of the
United States. And yes, we should be able to be critical of
policy. But everybody knows his eccentricities and personality.
You are not going to do any good for our country at the cause
of peace in a situation like this, that will make sure that the
dictatorship in North Korea knows that our President doesn't
have support.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Yoho. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. Given the fact that my friend from California
just went way over time, I would ask 30 seconds to respond?
Mr. Yoho. I would rather wait till the end. I would like to
get to the witnesses for the respect of them.
Mr. Connolly. Well, the gentleman has said----
Mr. Rohrabacher. I would request that he be given the extra
30 seconds to refute me. He always does.
Mr. Yoho. We will do 30 seconds.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend.
Mr. Yoho. We need to get on for the----
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend.
Mr. Yoho [continuing]. Benefit of the witnesses.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend. I find it ironic that in
the midst of criticizing people for criticizing Mr. Trump, my
colleague then goes on to criticize previous Presidents, all
Democrats.
I would simply assert that in a democracy, we get to
criticize an administration. And thank God for that. That is a
right not allowed in the North Korea regime. It is one still
allowed here. And I, and my colleagues on this side of the
aisle, intend to exercise it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for pointing that out because around
the world we see so many people don't have that voice of
dissension, and that is something we are blessed with in this
country.
Any other members seek recognition?
Hearing none, we will go to our witnesses. Starting with
the panel, Dr. Anthony Cordesman is the Arleigh A. Burke Chair
in Strategy at the Center for Strategic and International
Studies. He previously served in the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the State Department. And we thank you for your
long public service to this country.
Mr. John Parachini. He is the director of Intelligence
Policy Center at RAND Corporation. Previously, Mr. Parachini
served as executive director of the Washington Office of the
Monterey Institute of International Study Center for
Nonproliferation Studies. I look forward to hearing from you
and all the other ones.
Mr. Anthony Ruggiero is the senior fellow at the Foundation
of Defense for Democracies. Prior, Mr. Ruggiero was a foreign
policy fellow for Senator Marco Rubio, served in the Department
of Treasury and State.
And Ambassador Bonnie Jenkins is the founder and the
president of the Women of Color Advancing Peace, Security and
Conflict Transformation. Ambassador Jenkins previously served
as the Coordinator for Threat Reduction Programs in the Bureau
of International Security and Nonproliferation at the State
Department.
I want to thank all of you for being here, for taking your
time to educate us. And out of these meetings come policy
recommendations and ideas that we have seen implemented. And so
these are very important hearings.
And with that, you guys, I think, have been here enough to
know how the light system works. You got green, yellow and red.
Push your button before you speak so the microphone is on and
Dr. Cordesman, we will start with you.
Thank you.
STATEMENT OF ANTHONY CORDESMAN, PH.D., ARLEIGH A. BURKE CHAIR
IN STRATEGY, CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL STUDIES
Mr. Cordesman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, ranking members,
members of the committee. We are talking about a range of
threats which include two massive sets of conventional forces.
Each of which is equipped to fight unconventional wars in very
different ways and in unpredictable scenarios.
We have biological capabilities in North Korea. I would
caution the committee that almost all of the open-source data
on agents, quantities, manufacturer and delivery systems are
extremely unreliable. And that you should consult intelligence
sources because all of what you see is, shall we say,
inventive, in ways that are perhaps discouraging.
But certainly, North Korea is moving to the point where it
can get biological weapons with nuclear lethalities. It can use
infectious biological agents. The days in which you could
control biological agents, I think, quite frankly are over. The
Australia controls, which once were controls, are now more of a
shopping list in a cookbook in an international environment
where very small and dual facilities can be rapidly converted.
Chemical weapons lethality is perhaps much more
questionable than many people realize, but it is also something
you can easily manufacture and deliver. Within the other areas,
you have precision-guided ballistic weapons, unmanned aerial
vehicles, and cruise missiles. These can be used to destroy
critical infrastructure, critical movement capabilities and
communications capabilities. And in Korea, this presents very
special problems, both because Seoul and the greater Seoul area
is so close to the DMZ and because this is such a fragile
country in comparison with many other countries. There also is
cyber and that, too, presents a problem.
I think the point that I would make that the committee
needs to consider, casualties and direct casualties are not a
real measure of what war can be. What we have seen in Syria,
Afghanistan, Yemen, and Iraq shows that war fighting can have
massive human consequences without using weapons of mass
destruction.
In the case of Syria, you have seen it move something like
a third of the population, losing its home, its businesses,
casualties which we can't count because of the number of people
who have died. One of the members mentioned the population of
Seoul. It is actually over 25 million in the greater Seoul area
and over 10 million in the urban area. It is concentrated in
areas near a massive set of artillery emplacements. The models
I have seen generally only focus on two artillery.
I have no idea where the lethality data come from. Quite
frankly, they don't make any sense, because there are multiple
rocket launchers with far higher volumes of fire and they can,
at least in theory, use chemical and biological weapons. When
you fire into a city, remember people panic. They run and they
go outside the city. And Korea is a mountainous area with none
of the spread and surplus facilities to absorb people we are
used to.
There are five other urban cities which are critical
targets. You are talking about essentially three major
container ports. There are four major airports. Each of those
is absolutely critical to a country which is dependent on
imports, which cannot provide its own fuel and generate its own
electricity without sustained traffic. And which bears no
resemblance to the Korea of the Korean War.
Unconventional wars that move into these areas, disrupt the
economy, make people panic, create refugees and IDPs, are as
much a risk as weapons of mass destruction. Losing food, water
and power can have the same effect. This is a country with the
largest rocket and missile force in unconventional war that we
know of. And if those become precision-guided systems, its
lethality and war-fighting capability changes much as the use
of advanced biological weapons. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cordesman follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Yoho. Thank you. I appreciate those grave warnings. Mr.
Parachini.
STATEMENT OF MR. JOHN PARACHINI, DIRECTOR, INTELLIGENCE POLICY
CENTER, RAND CORPORATION
Mr. Parachini. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate
the committee holding this hearing on this topic.
Examining chemical and biological weapons in this theater
has not been done in an open hearing like this as much as it
should be. Given the danger they pose, how they might be a
catalyst to leading us to a nuclear precipice and indeed how
wrong assessments of those capabilities may trigger the wrong
response.
There are some distressing parallels with the situation in
Iraq. Old assessments get repeated about new information or
there is no new information, there is considerable input from
defectors, cooperating sources that are hard to validate. There
are allied governments that face imminent threats and have
reason to hedge against high consequence threats if
capabilities exists and if they might be used.
A key difference between the Iraq and North Korean case is
that the North Koreans have demonstrated they have nuclear
weapons and they are rapidly developing their ballistic missile
capabilities. Another difference, though, is that we knew a lot
about the past Iraqi capabilities, and then when we entered in
2003, we actually didn't know that much of their current
capabilities. With North Korea, we know little about their past
and we have a very incomplete understanding of their current
capabilities.
But because most states with an industrial capability to
produce pesticides have some capability probably to produce
chemical weapons, we can be reasonably confident that North
Korea has these capabilities and has tested and produced
chemical weapons and has a stockpile. However, as Dr. Cordesman
mentioned, the repeated assessments suggests that there is an
arsenal of a range of agents and delivery systems. But these
are the same numbers that get repeated over the last decade and
a half. Means of delivery included artillery, rockets,
missiles, aircraft and drones. But it begs the question that
these same citations of capabilities have not been updated in
the last decade and it makes you wonder about their currency.
However, there is a new development, and that is the recent
assassination of Kim Jong-nam. Other countries have used poison
to assassinate regime enemies, but I think we can assess that
this also could be a signal by this regime that we have nerve
agent and we are willing to use it.
Biological weapons capabilities in North Korea, the
assessments range from a list of agents that might number in a
dozen or more to a limited program within existing industrial
infrastructure to mere research. The potential of these weapons
is great. And so it bears paying very close attention to them,
but, again, the evidence we have is indirect, circumstantial,
based on third-party observations and South Korean Government
information and some unclassified U.S. Government statements.
I think the best we can say at this time is they have the
industrial infrastructure for a biological weapons program.
They probably have the know-how and they probably have done
some basic R&D. The more disconcerting part that I think one of
the members has mentioned is North Korea's history as a
proliferator. It helped with the construction of a reactor in
Syria. It shipped chemical weapons defensive gear to Syria, and
indeed, it has helped with their missile program with some
reported allegations that they have helped Syria configure
ballistic missiles to carry chemical agent. They have also been
a supplier of conventional weaponry to Hamas and Hezbollah over
the years.
There is no information that they have transferred
unconventional capabilities to terrorist groups, and indeed the
empirical record does not show that any nation state has done
so. However, this remains an enduring danger that we have to
pay attention to.
So what can be done? Well, there are four things. We can
expand the dual-use biosurveillance in Korea that would be
useful for catching things like SARS and MERS as well as an
intentional biological attack. We can help other states enforce
the robust set of sanctions that are out there. Many states
don't have the capabilities to enforce these sanctions. We can
help them do that. We can expand defensive measures. Dr.
Cordesman mentioned that.
And finally, we can reinforce the taboo against chemical
weapons and biological weapons by asking for a pledge from the
North Koreans for no-first-use of these weapons.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Parachini follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Yoho. And I appreciate your comments. Mr. Ruggiero.
STATEMENT OF MR. ANTHONY RUGGIERO, SENIOR FELLOW, FOUNDATION
FOR DEFENSE OF DEMOCRACIES
Mr. Ruggiero. Thank you. Chairman Yoho, Ranking Members
Sherman and Keating, and distinguished members of these
subcommittees, thank you for the opportunity to address you
today on this important issue.
Before proceeding, it is important to state plainly, North
Korean leader Kim Jong-un's overarching long-term goal, namely
the reunification of the Korean Peninsula under Kim family
rule, while Pyongyang attempts to distract Washington and the
Seoul from this hostile intention, Kim always has his eyes on
dominating the peninsula.
North Korea's weapons, both nuclear and non-nuclear, are a
means to an end, extorting concessions from Seoul and using
nuclear weapons to limit Washington's ability to defend South
Korea from North Korea's military provocations for fear of
escalating the situation.
Washington's goal is and should remain the denuclearization
of the Korean Peninsula. And the good news is that the United
States can still act to counter Pyongyang's weapons programs. A
combination of deterrence and coercion should be used against
North Korea. The strategy would acknowledge the limits of each
of these options using them in combination to secure a
denuclearization agreement or, failing that, to weaken
Pyongyang in order to diminish the threat it poses.
Deterrence is essential to an effective North Korea policy.
Yet, American strength has not deterred North Korea from
sharing its missile and WMD knowledge with other rogue states.
Nor has it prevented Pyongyang's race to expand illegal
programs or engage in countless other provocations.
The premise of the Trump administration's maximum pressure
policy is that coercion must complement deterrence to limit
provocations and create leverage. That coercion should take the
form of an aggressive and comprehensive sanctions campaign. The
good news is U.S. sanctions have more than doubled since
February 2016, but the real test of a renewed and effective
sanctions program is whether new sanctions are targeting
Pyongyang's overseas business network and the non-North Koreans
that facilitate that sanctions of ASEAN.
There is good news here, too. The Trump administration has
sanctioned 103 persons since March 31st. Of whom 74 percent
operate outside of North Korea and 25 percent are non-North
Koreans who facilitate North Korea's sanctions of ASEAN, namely
Chinese and Russian nationals. As the maximum pressure campaign
has begun to show results, Kim Jong-un went back to a well-worn
tactic of trying to drive a wedge between Seoul and Washington.
In 2017, the only thing the United States and North Korea
agreed on was that China's freeze-for-freeze proposal where
Pyongyang would freeze its nuclear and missile tests in
exchange for a freeze of U.S.-South Korea military exercises
was a nonstarter.
In fact, Washington clarified that military exercises were
defensive. So there was no reason to freeze them, whereas
Pyongyang's programs entailed violations of numerous U.N.
Security Council resolutions.
But with one new year's address, preying on South Korean
President Moon Jae-in's desire for an illusion of peace during
the Olympics, Kim changed the narrative from freeze-to-freeze
to delay-for-nothing. For a mere promise of talks, Pyongyang
received a delay of the aforementioned defensive military
exercises.
As Seoul moves into a period of negotiation with North
Korea on its Olympics participation, Washington's policy should
ensure that South Korean engagement in no way undermines the
maximum pressure campaign. If there are signs that North Korea
is only playing for time, the U.S. should urge an end to talks.
Pyongyang and Beijing should not be allowed to violate U.N.
and U.S. sanctions during inter-Korean talks. If at some point
in 2018, a substantial improvement in Pyongyang's behavior
leads to the prospect of U.S.-North Korea negotiations,
Washington should learn from its past mistakes and insist that
Kim Jong-un commit to denuclearize before talks begin.
The United States must not allow Moon's desire for a deal
and Washington's inherent need to move beyond this crisis to
get us into another set of flawed negotiations resulting in a
dangerous deal that locks in North Korea's weapons program.
Thank you for inviting me to testify. And I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ruggiero follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for your comments.
Ambassador Jenkins.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE BONNIE JENKINS, FOUNDER AND
PRESIDENT, WOMEN OF COLOR ADVANCING PEACE, SECURITY AND
CONFLICT TRANSFORMATION (FORMER COORDINATOR FOR THREAT
REDUCTION PROGRAMS, BUREAU OF INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND
NONPROLIFERATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE)
Ms. Jenkins. Mr. Chairman, ranking members, ladies and
gentlemen, I want to thank you for inviting me here today to
speak about North Korea's DPRKs threats outside those of
nuclear weapons. It is understandable that with the exchanges
between the U.S. and North Korea in the past few months that
nuclear weapons are the focus of attention regarding the North
Koreans military capabilities.
However, one should not lose sight of the fact that there
are other significant military threats from North Korea. Today
you are hearing about some of these other threats. And they
consist of North Korea's chemical weapons, intentional
biological weapons pursuits and the overwhelming conventional
weapons. And we have on this panel today experts on the various
non-nuclear threats emanating from North Korea, so I will move
on to discussing some potential diplomatic mechanisms to meet
those threats.
Addressing the DPRKs threat is not a challenge that
Washington should tackle alone. North Korean involvement in
chemical and biological weapons programs are not in line with
the international norms against development and use of those
weapons and should be part of a global effort to address those
programs.
Few countries have any contact with the DPRK, which limits
opportunities for diplomatic exchange. Working with countries
that do have that type of relationship, for example, Sweden,
can be part of a planned diplomatic effort to engage North
Korea. Of course, the key to any negotiations on North Korea's
weapons will require North Korea to come to the table, which is
a significant challenge.
All of the following ideas had that caveat in mind. On
chemical weapons, the general goal of the international
community should be that the DPRK destroy any such weapons
regardless of the fact that the DPRK is not a party to the CWC.
Any discussions with the DPRK on such weapons would require the
engagement of the organization for the prohibition of chemical
weapons in regional states at a minimum. The DPRK should join
the CWC as a state party and agree to destroy any potential
weapons with verification.
We have witnessed with the destruction of Syrian chemical
weapons that the international community can come together to
assist in that process. Regarding conventional weapons, the
primary concern is the overwhelming number of such weapons
possessed by North Korea.
There should be a reduction in the conventional forces and
more equality in the numbers and types of weapons with South
Korea as a way to reduce tensions.
In this respect, the two sides may negotiate an agreement
similar to the Conventional Armed Forces in Europe treaty, and
both sides can reduce their conventional weapons to an equal
amount and types. Such an agreement would require a permanent
and verifiable means of destruction. The CFE can provide some
thoughts on a way forward.
North Korea is already a party to the Biological Weapons
Convention, and as a result, it should not be developing
biological weapons. Any activities regarding a biological
weapons program should stop. Since there is no verification
regime of the BWC, a small number of the countries including
those in the region may agree to a verification scheme. The
Biological Weapons Convention Implementation Support Unit
should be a part of any engagement with additional staff and
funding for this particular purpose.
These options lean heavy on the diplomatic effort and
negotiations to address the North Korean military threats. Some
rely on existing norms that reflect the agreement by a global
community by just the possession and use of such weapons.
South Hem conventions are initiatives that can serve as
examples for engaging the North Koreans. However, any
negotiation needs an element of trust amongst the parties.
There must be some belief that the party on the other side
wants to discuss the issues and has something to gain by doing
so.
If you want North Korea to come to the table, we must
temper our threats with real possibilities for diplomacy. In
this respect it would be extremely challenging to convince
North Korea to relinquish the weapons it believes it needs for
its defenses or its domestic purposes. Moving the DPRK to join
the international community that has already moved away from
the development and use of chemical and biological weapons, for
example, will take time and it will need a continuous process.
It is also essential that the international community walk
the walk and talk the talk of actions that we want other
countries to do, including North Korea. We also need to find a
way to make any successful negotiation sustainable. We have
seen in the case of negotiations with North Korea's nuclear
program through the years that what is considered an agreement
continually fails.
How do we make sure that North Korea does not go back to
business as usual? In each situation there needs to be a
mechanism to continue discussions and help verify that the
North Koreans are living up to their agreements. In this
respect, the North Koreans would need to be part of existing
implementing bodies, treaty implementing bodies. There may be
other options that we can do with North Korea assuming we can
move them from being an adversary to essentially being a party.
This will all take time and a lot of real diplomacy.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Jenkins follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Yoho. I would like to thank the panel for your expert
testimony. I look forward to answering the questions.
Dr. Cordesman, you pointed out the number that we know is
exactly that. It is what we know. It is what we don't know that
really scares us. The unknown. And I guess that is part of--I
don't want to say terrorism, but that is part of a hand they
play. You know, it is what you don't know.
Are there other techniques that we can do to get other
countries to come on board? When I look at what is going on,
you know, I have got information in here, that is out there, in
August, shipments of 30,000, 30,000 North Korean produced
rocket-propelled grenades were intercepted on their way to
Egypt. How concerned should we be about Egypt's secret
arrangement to procure $23 million worth of weapons, number
one, that is funding North Korea while they are an ally of
ours. This is not a U.S. problem with what North Korea is
doing. It is not a South Korean problem. It is a world problem.
And if we have allies, especially ones that we are giving
foreign aid to, to get them to the table, how do we find out
more information and get everybody on the same page? Like we
have to get a resolution to this peacefully and ideally.
Do you have any thoughts on that?
Mr. Cordesman. Mr. Chairman, I wish I had more optimistic
conclusions, but a little over a month ago, I was in the Middle
East at a time there was a supposed 40-country alliance of Arab
states that was supposed to be cooperating and dealing with
security issues. And quite frankly, I have never seen more
hypocrisy at a given meeting than I saw there. I don't think
you have any choice unless you are willing to embarrass allies
and put pressure on countries, unless you can threaten, not
simply sanctions, but actually intercepting known shipments of
arms and weapons.
North Korea is going to do anything it can to find ways to
export, to obtain technology, import, to do, if it can, simply
exchanging the techniques of producing systems with other
countries like Iran. Locking that is something we can sometimes
do in detail, but it requires an extremely aggressive approach.
And, yes, there are European allies, there are Asian allies
that will work with us, but those are not the countries North
Korea deals with. And I simply would not be optimistic about
the prospects.
Mr. Yoho. Okay. And I would like to get some response on
this. The agreement to destroy the chemical weapons in Syria
was supposedly carried out and certified 100 percent by the
world community. We realize that is not true. You know, there
was still some left over. In fact, we just heard reports that
the Assad regime may have used chemical weapons, including VX
gas.
Does anybody have any information on--is that true? And to
think they came out--is there any proof that--is there any
information out there that they could have come out from North
Korea--anybody want to comment on that?
Mr. Parachini.
Mr. Parachini. So we are better off that chemical weapons
were eliminated from Syria with the understanding that they had
the possibility to both hide and make even after their
stockpile was removed, because that meant fewer weapons that
they could use against----
Mr. Yoho. Do we know that they are making them, or are they
getting them from North Korea?
Mr. Parachini. So we don't know--even if there are--if they
are getting chemicals from North Korea, they are more in the
precursor nature, and they could be making new agents. But,
remember, a lot of what we have seen in Syria are attacks using
chlorine.
Mr. Yoho. Right, but just recently they said that could
have been laced with VX gas. I don't know how you do that or--
--
Mr. Parachini. So Syria--in the Syrian complex, VX has not
appeared yet as an agent that has been used. Sarin----
Mr. Yoho. Sarin. I am sorry.
Mr. Parachini. Sarin has been the nerve agent that has been
used. But look at how they have used chlorine----
Mr. Yoho. Right.
Mr. Parachini. Even after they agreed to eliminate their
stockpile, they have used a widely available industrial
chemical as a weapon of war.
Mr. Yoho. And that is a terrible chemical. Just one more
question. If North Korea is serious about earnest dialogue and
coming to the table, would you recommend signing on to the CWC,
the Chemical Weapons Convention?
Mr. Parachini. So I will offer a comment and then
Ambassador Jenkins may have some thoughts here.
Mr. Yoho. Sure.
Mr. Parachini. North Korea is the only member of the five-
party talks--or the six-party talks that is not a member.
Mr. Yoho. Right.
Mr. Parachini. So it stands out. So it is to our advantage
to press them on this issue, number one. And, number two, the
global taboo on the use of these weapons has degraded since the
Syrians have used chemical weapons. There is an opportunity to
bolster that norm by pushing the North Koreans.
Mr. Yoho. I think that is a good point. Ambassador Jenkins,
do you have a comment?
Ms. Jenkins. Yes, I would just agree and say that I think
it would be good to have them part of the convention because
then they can be part of the multilateral and international
negotiations that go on on a regular basis. There are yearly
meetings with the OPCW. There are activities that go on, and
one way to help make sure that they are doing what they should
be doing is have some kind of transparency and some kind of
engagement. So I think that would be very helpful.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for your comments.
We will go to the ranking member, Mr. Keating.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is clear that one thing we should do is maximize our
soft power, that we could, and sometimes things appear, from
the administration, to be disjointed. Let me give you an
example. We had a new President--President Moon came to power.
And one of the strengths we have, at least when I was there
just a year ago, was the coalition we have with Japan, South
Korea, and the U.S. It is at unprecedented levels. The
cohesiveness was stronger than it ever has been. However, with
a new President--our President threatened to pull apart the
trade agreement with South Korea during that period. Now, how
could that possibly do anything but hinder our ability and
cohesiveness as a coalition together, as a fundamental
coalition? And how damaging were those comments and the timing
of those comments? Does anyone want to address that?
Ms. Jenkins. I guess I would start with that. I would agree
with you in what you are saying in terms of how those comments
were probably received. I think one of the things that we seem
to be lacking now is a much more coordinated approach in the
way in which the U.S. Government is really handling a lot of
these issues. There seems to be not as much attention for force
coming from the Department of State and engagement of the
Department of State and engagement of the expertise in
discussing some issues before they are actually made and the
policies before they are actually made and told to other
countries.
So I think that has created a bit of confusion with some of
our countries out there, some of our allies out there.
I know I often get questions regarding the way in which the
U.S. Government is perceived regarding the State Department and
what is coming out of the White House. And I think that we
don't have the coordinated message. That would be helpful. It
is good to have soft and hard power, but I think you have to
have a way in which it is coordinated and it is seen as a
whole.
So I think that when you have these kind of statements that
are made in the middle of a situation where relationships are
going very well, it does cause countries to take a step back
and wonder what is going on.
Mr. Keating. Do any members of the panel think that was
helpful, the timing and the effect of that? Thank you.
Dr. Cordesman brought up a couple of important points, I
think, takeaways that I had myself. We are focused on the
nuclear issue and the missile capability. But every day on the
border, there are scuffles, and there are potential conflicts
that can escalate at any time. In fact, our own military
leadership there has said that they spend an inordinate amount
of their time just trying to tamp those down because of that
fear. That is one point.
The other point that might come along with those lines is,
again, an important point looking down the road, and that is
potential refugee problems, should they occur.
So, Dr. Cordesman, do you want to just extend your comments
on your perception of how really threatening those border
issues are on a day-to-day basis? How they could escalate? And
then, secondly, an interesting point that you did bring up in
regards to if there is a conflict and there are refugee
problems, that will affect China, and you know, are they
factoring that in? Because generally China is not taking these
issues as seriously as they should be, from our perspective,
and that is one thing they should look at, at what happens to
the peninsula. Doctor?
Mr. Cordesman. I think we have--first, we need to be
careful about the term ``border.'' We are talking about the
DMZ, and the problem we have is it isn't just the hardened
artillery sides near the DMZ, which go all along the DMZ. They
are not simply near the center of Seoul. They are near an area
with about 25 percent of the population or more of Korea just
in the area around Seoul.
So this is something where longer range rocket systems can
have a major effect. And we are talking about depths of perhaps
50 to 100 to 200 kilometers when we throw in unmanned aerial
vehicles and cruise missiles, which are actually far better
systems for delivering biological and chemical weapons than
artillery is because they are slow fires and they disseminate
in much more controllable ways.
We also have some 25 tunnels. All of these things could
produce a massive refugee population. And looking at Seoul and
the greater Seoul area, there simply isn't surplus capacity,
and it is remarkably hard for them to even move south, not in
the numbers that exist today.
Mr. Keating. Yeah. Thank you.
And I yield back, but I will be following up with a written
question, Chairman, you know, just dealing with a common thread
of how we have to improve our intelligence in that region and
how maybe working with the coalitions, that is something we
should work on as well.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Keating. I appreciate your
respecting people's time, and if we have time for a second
round, if you are still here, we will let you do that.
I will next go to Mr. Joe Wilson, South Carolina.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was grateful in September to lead a delegation to South
Korea. Of course, we visited the DMZ. We were there in Seoul.
We visited, in particular, Camp Humphreys. And it was really
incredible for me to know the strong relationship we have with
the Republic of Korea and their investments--the American
people need to know the hundreds of millions of dollars which
have been spent to build a world class facility there at Camp
Humphreys, truly indicating the bond that we have between the
people of the United States and the people of Korea.
Another issue to me, and I would be really interested in
finding out from each of you what your view is, has there been
any collaboration on nuclear weapon or missile development with
the rogue regime in Iran, between--cooperation between
Pyongyang and Tehran?
Mr. Cordesman. There is very good evidence of cooperation
on missile development. There are questions among experts as to
how much cooperation there is in specific areas, how much they
are sharing, but it has been clear for years that there is an
exchange of technology. It is also clear that some of the
technology that is coming from Russia and from China has spread
into both North Korea and Iran and is affecting the engines and
capabilities for missile development there.
I don't know of any evidence of cooperation in the
development of nuclear weapons. There are reports of
delegations being present from Iran at the test of North Korean
nuclear weapons. Whether they are accurate or not, to be
honest, one of the problems we have is a lot of media reporting
sometimes claiming it is coming from North Korean--I am sorry--
South Korean military sources that is very unreliable. But to
be honest, I am not sure you would detect cooperation in
nuclear weapons design. It is not something where you would
have to be public or there would be easily observable signals.
Mr. Ruggiero. I would say, on ballistic missiles, it is
important to remember that, on the implementation day 2 years
ago of the Iran nuclear deal, that the Obama administration
issued sanctions against Iranians for their cooperation--or
their missile cooperation with North Korea. It just shows you
the sort of level that that cooperation was at.
On the nuclear side, I think the concern here that I have
always had is that what each side has fits really well in the
sense that they both use very similar enrichment programs,
enrichment centrifuges. And Iran, likely, has a desire for both
the design and some of the testing information that North Korea
has gotten from nuclear tests, and Iran, of course, could pay
for that. So that is always the main concern between Iran and
North Korea nuclear cooperation.
Mr. Wilson. And wasn't it proven that there was a direct
relationship of North Korea with the nuclear development in
Syria? But, fortunately, Israel took care of that and may have
even dispatched some North Korean scientists on the side. So
this is such a danger, the collaboration of totalitarian
regimes.
Another question I have for each of you, and it is really
frustrating to me that China has benefited so much from trade
with South Korea, tourism, investments by South Korea in
developing business and industry and opportunity for the people
of China. On the other hand, DPRK, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, is simply a dependency of the People's
Republic. Why would they maintain such a dependency when they
can see the benefits of working with the Republic of Korea?
Mr. Ruggiero. Well, I think, you know, I think the
relationship in that region is interesting. I would also add
that the Chinese always criticize unilateral sanctions until
they use them. And, of course, they used them against South
Korea, really to their own detriment I think. I think that the
Chinese did not win in that. I think the Chinese are realizing
that. I think the record on sanctions is mixed. The Chinese are
willing to go after North Koreans inside of China, but they
still remain unwilling to go after their own nationals that are
aiding North Korea. And that is really--and Russia does that,
and it is the same thing with Russia as well on North Korea
sanctions. So that is really the critical area that we need to
get the Chinese to move toward.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much. My time is up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Yoho. All right. Next, we have Mr. Gerald Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Isn't my timing
perfect? Yeah, perfect. And I have been watching and listening
upstairs, so thank you.
Ambassador Jenkins, you talked about using hard power and
soft power. I was making the same point in my opening remarks.
Could you elaborate a little bit? I mean, what is the soft
power available to us that could be efficacious?
Ms. Jenkins. Well, it is interesting you use the word
``power'' in the situation of North Korea because we are still
limited in what we can do in terms of soft power. But I think
there is a lot that we have not yet explored. I think, for the
most part, the situation with North Korea in that region has
been very much a bilateral relationship with the U.S. working
directly with each country, and we have worked very much
regionally in trying to resolve the issues there.
I think there are other options or other possibilities for
working with more countries to try to see if there are ways in
which we could address some of these issues. All of the things
we are talking about today, whether it is chemical weapons or
biological weapons particularly, are issues that are of a
concern to the international community. They are issues that,
as we have said already--there is international norm against
the use of those weapons and the development of those weapons.
So I think that there are options to try to see how
countries can start to work together to see how they can
address the issues with North Korea. Of course, trying to make
sure first of what they actually have, but also trying to see
if there is a way that countries can work together on that
issue.
Mr. Connolly. So one soft power would be sanctions,
correct?
Ms. Jenkins. Yeah.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Ruggiero, Governor John Kasich wrote a--
Governor John Kasich wrote an op-ed piece in which he said we
haven't used all the soft power with respect to sanctions that
we could have. And he cited things like, you know, more indepth
banking, ties and relationships getting really tough on that.
He talked about insurance for Merchant Marine fleets, so that
shipping suddenly becomes vulnerable because we are denying
them insurance, if they are going back and forth to North Korea
and the like.
Do you believe we still have leverage that is meaningful
that could persuade the North Koreans it is worth pausing, if
not rolling back, their nuclear development program, because
that is really the object here?
Mr. Ruggiero. Right, I do. I think this administration has
gone after China, whether it is firms or banks or individuals,
seven times last year, but they are still pulling back. They
are pulling their punches. And I think part of that is because
they likely fear Chinese retaliation. When it comes to North
Korea, you know, I take your question as, you know, how can you
affect the revenue flows? And the good news here is that it
looks like, from the examples we have more recently, a lot of
this revenue is inside of China, so you can start to affect
that. And then North Korea uses that for what I like to call
three purposes, military, and obviously the security sources,
the weapons programs, and their elites. And right now they get
to rank those one A, B, and C. From my perspective what we have
to do is rank them 1, 2, and 3 because all of them are key to
Kim's survival. And we are not talking about regime change, but
we are talking about changing the calculus here.
Mr. Connolly. Right.
Mr. Ruggiero. And I think, you know, going after Chinese
banks, not cutting them off from the U.S. financial system or
sanctioning--or freezing their assets, but using regulatory
fines, like we did against European banks in the Iran sanctions
context.
Mr. Connolly. Which is a model. I mean, that worked.
Mr. Ruggiero. Right.
Mr. Connolly. Apparently that worked. Mr. Cordesman and Mr.
Parachini, and I have got a limited amount of time, but what is
your take on how much leverage we really have with respect to
Chinese behavior? Can we really bring the Chinese to cooperate
with us in a meaningful way? I mean, we talked about soft
power, but for example, there are North Korean restaurants and
businesses, that is to say, businesses and restaurants run by
North Koreans who remit profits back to China, I mean, back to
North Korea from China. They open--they are operating with
impunity; it is not like it is a secret. So is there more room,
and what is the point of leverage we have over the Chinese to
cooperate?
Mr. Cordesman. I think there is more room, but I think we
need to be very careful. They will not take steps which
threaten the existence of the regime in North Korea or its
status as a buffer. They do not have the same strategic
interests we do. And the cooperation can never be enough to by
itself probably force North Korea to change.
Mr. Yoho. Go ahead. I will let you finish up.
Mr. Parachini. So I would add that the Chinese are very
concerned about refugee flow from North Korea to them. And I
have met with Chinese from right over the border, and they are
very concerned about that. And that may be an area of
collaboration between the United States and China, but we have
to be very careful about how we manage that because, should
there be a collapse of the regime, China is going to be very
eager to move first and make sure that we and South Korea do
not move very far north.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you.
Next, we will go to Mr. Tom Marino from Pennsylvania.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Parachini, am I pronouncing that correctly? That is
Italian?
Mr. Parachini. Parachini.
Mr. Marino. Parachini.
Mr. Parachini. Rhymes with zucchini, which is a good
vegetable.
Mr. Marino. Okay. You answered my first question that I
wanted to ask, and let's expand on that a little bit. My
question was--it is going to be, and I believe this is so
because I am of member of NATO Parliamentary Assembly, and we
discuss these issues--that China is very concerned about the
North Koreans flowing into China because they do not want to
have to take care of them. And North Korea is a buffer between
the democracy of South Korea and the United States and China.
Is that a fairly good assumption to make?
Mr. Parachini. I think it is. And there is a longstanding
relationship between China and North Korea and between China
and Myanmar. And there is a special relationship there between
those three countries that is hard to overcome given historical
ties.
Mr. Marino. Do you think at any point--and I don't believe
this, but if anyone on the panel believes that North Korea
would get into serious discussions with the U.S., do you think
that is possible? Anyone?
Mr. Parachini. So I would add, we need to think about this
as a long-term game.
Mr. Marino. It has been a long term game.
Mr. Parachini. NATO was in place until the Soviet Union
fell for a long time. And I think, unfortunately, on the Korean
Peninsula, we are in the same type of game. So the question is
how to make sure it doesn't come unraveled; we don't have a hot
conflict. As we have seen, the North Korean leaders do pass on.
So we have to hope for moderated change.
Mr. Marino. No.
Mr. Parachini. I don't think we should be thinking that
they are going to negotiate and change. That leopard is not
going to change its spots.
Mr. Marino. No.
Mr. Parachini. So we have got to figure out some way to
navigate with them over a long term.
Mr. Ruggiero. I mean, I would just say I guess I am the
optimist here, which is kind of surprising for someone who
supports sanctions. But the optimist here that, you know, when
it came to Iran, we could have conversations about the nuclear
deal, but I think even critics and supporters of the deal agree
that sanctions brought them to the table.
Mr. Marino. Yeah, but nobody was there protecting Iran per
se. Iran--the sanctions--the economic sanctions were doing well
until we gave them $150 billion.
Mr. Ruggiero. Right.
Mr. Marino. Aside from that, I don't think anyone else
would have been coming to Iran's aid concerning sanctions.
Mr. Ruggiero. Well, I mean, I would say--I also worked on
Iran's sanctions when I was in the government, and I remember
conversations about we couldn't go after their oil revenue, and
of course, that is what happened. So I think we are talking
about the Iran sanctions model with North Korea. North Korea--
and, frankly, China--has never really faced what the Treasury
Department could do with North Korea sanctions, you know, back
to the prior question.
So I think it is, from my perspective, too, we also have to
have a conversation of what would those negotiations look like,
because my main concern is that those who support diplomacy
fall back to the--well, we could get a freeze, and then we
could go through extended negotiations, and North Korea will
eventually denuclearize. I think you have to flip that on its
head and insist that North Korea be committed to denuclearize
upfront, not denuclearize, but be committed to do that upfront.
Mr. Marino. Okay. Doctor.
Mr. Cordesman. I think the committee should ask where North
Korea will be in 5 to 10 years in its nuclear programs, its
precision strike programs, and its biological capabilities. You
mentioned a long-term game, in each case, they can edge around
an awful lot of negotiating constraints and agreements. And
instead of just looking at what you can do that might work, I
think you need to take a harder look at what will happen with
the existing way that North Korea is proliferating and
developing its weapons and technology.
Mr. Marino. I happen to agree with you. I think that is the
first issue that we should tackle in any situation like this.
Ambassador, did you have anything--comment?
Ms. Jenkins. No, I would just--just thinking that we heard
a little bit about some of the uncertainties about what North
Korea really does have in terms of chemical and biological. I
think it is a good time to think about what we can do now to
try to get ahead of what we may or may not know about what they
have. If in fact they are not at the point of having a
biological weapon, for example, what can we do to try to work
through that problem and that situation now?
Mr. Marino. Quickly, in 2 seconds, do any of you believe
that China will take out the ruling family in North Korea?
Let the record reflect that no one responded to that they
think they will take out the ruling family.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for your questions.
Next, we will go to ranking member of the Asia and the
Pacific Subcommittee, Mr. Brad Sherman from California.
Mr. Sherman. Public sources have estimated that North Korea
has between 2,500 and 5,000 tons of chemical agents. Does
anyone on the panel think that a different number has more
credibility?
Mr. Cordesman. I think that number does not have
credibility----
Mr. Sherman. Because it is too low, it is too high, or you
just have----
Mr. Cordesman. Because it is simply a set of round numbers
that somebody thought up at a point of time some years back.
Mr. Sherman. Does anybody on the panel have any different
estimate?
Mr. Cordesman. Would you like 12?
Mr. Sherman. Any guesstimate that it is an estimate rather
than--okay.
If China were to end all banking and all trade, except food
and medicine, that is to say, exporting food and medicine to
North Korea, how big of an effect would that have on the
regime?
Mr. Ruggiero.
Mr. Ruggiero. Well, I mean, the issue here is that they
seem to be willing to do that for North Koreans, but if they
are not willing to do that for their own nationals, aiding
North Korea's sanctions evasion, then it will not have the
impact----
Mr. Sherman. I am saying that if China used all of its
devices to make sure that there wasn't a single dollar's worth
of goods exported from North Korea to China, no coal, no
whatever, no labor services, and actually enforced it, what
effect would that have on the North Korean regime?
Mr. Ruggiero. I think it would have a substantial impact. I
mean, the point I made earlier is that some of these examples
we are seeing is a ledger system between China and North Korea
where the money resides in China. And so what you are going to
have is North Korea not have the ability to even go to another
country for those items that they need.
Mr. Sherman. Should we be more strong in our statements to
Poland and others that have accepted North Korean workers, to
use a euphemism?
Mr. Parachini.
Mr. Parachini. So I think getting China to change on this
is going to be an enduring challenge, but----
Mr. Sherman. It is not an enduring challenge. You just put
a 50-percent tariff on all their exports to the United States,
and you will get their attention. But the enduring challenge is
summoning the political will to do that in a system in which
there--obviously, that would have an effect, but if you
threaten to do it, they would concede. The reason we haven't
threatened to do it is because of the tremendous power of
corporations that--on issues of national security. But, please
continue.
Mr. Parachini. I think there are costs and benefits of that
type of economic pressure.
Mr. Sherman. There are only benefits if China blinks.
Mr. Parachini. But I think there is the opportunity to help
other countries enforce the sanction network that is out there
that can be--and Poland----
Mr. Sherman. Trim around the edges, yes. But Poland
continues to have North Korean workers and insists upon doing
that for another year and says that is a local rather than a
national decision. Whether that is a violation of section 5 of
the NATO agreement in spirit, I don't know; probably,
technically, it is a violation of section 5 de jure.
We have sanctioned one small bank, Bank of Dandong. We
haven't sanctioned any of the major Chinese banks because the
economic powers in this country say we shouldn't do it. Last
September, Chairman Royce identified several Chinese banks,
including the China Merchants Bank and a state-owned bank, the
Agricultural Bank of China, as doing sanctionable business with
North Korea. Chairman Yoho and I wrote to the Treasury
Department deriding several Chinese banks, including the
Industrial Commercial Bank of China, the largest bank in the
world, and the Bank of Communications, one of the largest banks
in the world. The executive branch has failed to pull the
trigger.
How--the question is, why have we put preserving the $500
billion or $400 billion trade deficit with China and all the
profits that generates above our national security? How do we
get the administration to get serious with the big banks? Does
someone have a--yes.
Mr. Ruggiero. Right. I mean, I would say, you know, there
was a narrative that North Korean financial activity was going
through small Chinese banks and that these medium and large
banks were just a conduit. But FinCEN, an element of the
Treasury Department, put out an advisory last year, and said
some of these accounts are actually at major Chinese financial
institutions. So how do you do it? You do it with the
regulatory fines. You know, I would also piggyback on the
answer----
Mr. Sherman. You can do it, but how do you summon the
political will to do it?
Mr. Ruggiero. That is the thing. I mean, these are
mandatory sanctions passed by Congress, the same as with----
Mr. Sherman. Nothing is illegal if 50 major businesses all
decide it is the right policy. And just because we pass laws
doesn't mean that the executive branch will follow them.
Mr. Ruggiero. Right. I think this is stuck in a narrative--
not this narrative--but a narrative about whether to do it
between doing nothing and freezing their access to New York
when there is this interim--what we talked about in terms of
Iran sanctions, using fines.
Mr. Sherman. I don't think--if you only do the level of
economic effect that we had with Iran, this is a much more
closed society, and a regime that cares even less about its own
people. I think you are going to have to have much tougher
sanctions if you are going to get even a freeze of their
nuclear program, let alone the unrealistic goals that we at
least claim that we are trying to achieve.
I yield back.
Mr. Yoho. Thank for your comments. That is why tomorrow we
are going to do the special order on China to draw out some
these things, these inequities that they are doing, so that the
American people know this and Members of Congress.
Next, we will go to Adam Kinzinger from Illinois.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thanks for your
leadership on this issue.
Thank you all for being here for this very important
subject. I think back, and I don't know if it is a good
comparison--I think it is--to Neville Chamberlain coming back
from his negotiations with Chancellor Hitler in a very
difficult time, frankly, in Europe, understanding that they
just came out of a major war, chewed up a generation with this
prospect of another. They were understandably excited to talk
about peace in our time. But I think, looking back at that
moment, it is not Neville Chamberlain that we celebrated as the
hero of that era. It is a guy like Churchill, who saw the
gathering storm clouds. My hope is this does not turn into a
kinetic exercise between the United States and North Korea.
There is no doubt we would win, but nobody wants to go there.
But I think what is important to note in all of this is
that this is a real threat. In 1994, I think it was around then
when President Clinton was actually looking at options to bomb
North Korea because of this. Jimmy Carter pops up in Pyongyang
and says he has an agreement, and we are all excited. We take a
nice sigh of relief, and we fixed the problem. And here we are
today in 2018 looking down the barrel, frankly, of a gun.
And I actually give the President a lot of props for having
really brought this to the forefront. I know it makes people
nervous. North Korea should make people nervous. This is a
regime that is dead set on destabilizing our allies in the
region, all in the goal of maintaining power. But I think it
is--we are going to have some very tough decisions to make
here.
I think if we go to a posture of saying we are going to
just simply accept a nuclear North Korea, which is what some
people, frankly, have advocated for, especially in the prior
administration, and said we just need to build interceptors
that can exceed their ability to launch nuclear weapons, I
think that spells, in effect, the end of the Nuclear Non-
Proliferation Treaty for the world. How are you ever going to
confront Iran's nuclear ambitions if we just allowed North
Korea? What is going to happen to every other rogue regime that
decides they want nuclear weapons? We don't have the moral
ability to confront them in this, simply because we didn't with
North Korea.
So I think we have to take this extremely seriously. I
think people that say the military option is absolutely off the
table are doing very major damage to our diplomatic effort. As
we all understand instruments of power, the diplomatic
instrument of power against an adversary does not work without
the military instrument of power there to back it up.
Otherwise, we can do all the sanctions we want, but if they
don't think there is a stick, the carrot has no effect.
Let me ask Mr. Parachini, I hope I said your name right.
Given this threat, I think we are all clear-eyed to the fact
that North Korea has the potential to sell WMDs to the highest
bidder. That could be a rogue regime like Syria--obviously,
Assad has shown his desire to kill his own people--or even a
terrorist group like al-Qaeda or ISIS. And it is no secret that
North Korea provided assistance to Syria in building their
nuclear reactor, which was destroyed in 2007. Given the
situation in Syria now, I can't fathom how much worse it would
be if Syria was a nuclear weapons state. Just because we
haven't heard much about North Korea proliferation of other
countries doesn't mean they still aren't interested in it. Can
you speak to the level of interaction and potential WMD
assistance that the Kim regime currently provides or is willing
to provide to rogue regimes and non-state actors? What is their
moral driver to prevent them from doing it, if in fact that is
the answer? And which countries or groups seeking WMD
assistance from North Korea should concern us the most?
Mr. Parachini. Congressman, I think there has been a
special relationship between North Korea and Syria for quite
some time, which I think in part explains that relationship.
Since the fall of the Soviet Union, which provided a lot of
financing for Syrian purchases of conventional weapons and
other capabilities, Iran has stepped in to kind of be that bank
account. And the close relationship between Iran, Syria, and
North Korea I think does explain some of the Assad regime's
weapons purchases over the last decade and, indeed, some of the
collaboration on either its missile program, the reactor that
you referred to that was destroyed, as well as chemical
defenses.
On non-state actors, there again, North Korea is in the
trenches with Iran and Syria. That is, they see themselves as
aligned to support Hamas and Hezbollah, but there is not
evidence that they have actually transferred unconventional
capabilities to non-state actors. Conventional weapons, yes.
Assistance and guidance on tunneling, yes. But in terms of
jumping the taboo that is on about states not transferring
that, we have not seen that yet.
Mr. Kinzinger. Do you have a fear that it could happen
potentially?
Mr. Parachini. There is always that possibility. Given the
power of these weapons, states are very reluctant to let them
get out of control in that way. We feared that with Saddam
Hussein, and in the end, it proved not to be the case. Is there
a zero possibility? No. There is some possibility, but I think
it is very low.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you. Since my time is up, I will just
say this without asking it. I think it is important that we
look at utilizing the potential of boost phase intercept as
well. I know this is something that has been discussed. It is
inexpensive. Boost phase is the slowest launch phase of an
ICBM, and I think it is imperative on the administration to
also explore the idea of boost phase intercept as well.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your hospitality
and thank you for being here, and I yield back.
Mr. Yoho. I appreciate your line of questioning. That has
brought up some great points.
Next, we will go to Ms. Dina Titus of Nevada.
Ms. Titus. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, ranking
members, for holding this hearing today. With all due respect
to my colleagues across the aisle, I think we do have to be
concerned about the President's conflicting messages. One
minute he is talking and bragging about having a bigger button
than North Korea, and the next minute he is trying to take
credit for bringing North Korea and South Korea together to
talk about the Olympics. We just don't know what is coming out
of the White House.
He just now, a little while ago, gave an interview to
Reuters in respect to the preemptive strike or the preemptive
attack on North Korea, and this was his quote: ``We are playing
a very, very hard game of poker, and you don't want to reveal
your hand.''
Well, this isn't a game. And I am from Nevada. We know
something about playing poker. There is also a tell when you
play poker, and his tell is some of this braggadocio that he is
always talking about when he is going to back down or not.
I think most of the questions and the attention has been on
the nuclear threat, but I am glad that we are talking about the
non-nuclear threat as well. This is especially important in
light of the Vancouver meeting and the false ballistic missile
warning that kind of terrorized Hawaii just recently.
So let me ask you, Ambassador Jenkins, during your time at
the State Department when you were the Coordinator for Threat
Reduction Programs, what were your office's greatest assets?
What were you able to do to prevent some of the terrorism that
we are talking about that is non-nuclear? And would you go on
to say and tell us, now that that position is vacant--even
though North Korea is such a big threat, they haven't bothered
to fill that position--how are we going to address this?
Ms. Jenkins. Thank you for your question. The work that I
was doing at the Department of State was really focusing on how
to prevent WMD terrorism, and I worked closely with colleagues
who were working on the nuclear issues. But my portfolio really
did cover CBRN, chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear
Issues. And most of the focus was on working amongst countries
on how to deal with this issue. Putting funds into all types of
programs that would prevent WMD terrorism, whether it was
nuclear security, whether it was biological security, whether
it was border security issues, whether it was security culture
issues with the scientists. So we really worked hard on those
issues.
The thing that is important is that the type of programs
that I worked on, you would have to be working with a country
that is open to those type of activities. So the type of
activities that I was working on would not be useful for, let's
say, for North Korea right now because they are not a country
that would be open to those kind of things. It is something
that would happen later.
But we were able to do quite a bit to reduce the chances of
WMD terrorism around the world because it is a global issue. It
is a global problem, and we have quite a few countries that are
working on it.
Ms. Titus. I think you also mentioned the cyber threat that
North Korea poses. Maybe you could address that. I think there
was a bulletin from DHS in June 2017 that North Korea was
targeting the U.S., targeting media, aerospace, financial. We
don't know the level of sophistication. Do you think there is
any possibility they could, like the Russians, target
elections?
Ms. Jenkins. Well, I am not an expert in cyber, so I can't
really say with any authority whether they could do it or not,
but apparently North Korea does have some capabilities when it
comes to cyber. So whether they could actually do what we are
finding out the Russians have done, I am not sure, but they
obviously are in the process of trying to strengthen their
cyber capabilities.
Ms. Titus. Can anybody else address that?
Mr. Cordesman. I think that to have anything as broad as a
major election would be beyond their current capabilities. But
they have used cyber, at least in one case, to attack part of
the power grid, or tried to, in South Korea. They have
conducted offensive cyber operations, and their capabilities
are improving. But whether they would take on anything as broad
as the U.S., I think that certainly is beyond their current
capabilities.
Mr. Ruggiero. I mean, I would just say that we shouldn't
underestimate North Korea's cyber capabilities. It was only 4
years ago that they attacked Sony Pictures. And I think it is
also easy to forget that when certain theaters said they were
going to show the movie anyway, then North Korea threatened a
9/11 style attack against the United States.
So North Korea has advanced its cyber capabilities. Now,
whether they would want to impact an election, I think is more
of a--that is not what they are going for. I think they are
going for the ability to use cyber in a pre- and wartime
environment. And you look at some of their activities in South
Korea, and that is clear, but also to steal money to blunt the
sanctions impact.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for your questions.
Next, we will go to Mrs. Ann Wagner from Missouri.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for being witnesses today. I appreciate
your testimony.
Mr. Cordesman, I really appreciated your thorough review of
North Korea's weapon activities. It was very useful to the
committee. Do you know to what extent U.S. bases in Northeast
Asia have security measures in place to combat infectious or
lethal agents?
Mr. Cordesman. I think you would have to get a briefing on
detection at a different level because it is really, more than
anything else now, the ability to characterize an attack that
becomes the most critical issue. Your other problem is that
when it comes down to what is the attack, there are so many
different agents and so many different ways you can attack,
that there are at least some agents which, in an island
context, an infectious agent or so on, where it would be
extremely difficult for anyone to conduct a defensive measure
other than treatment. And in that case, detecting the way in
which the weapon was developed would be critical, because if it
is altered to have a slow gestation period, which is now
possible, it becomes a very difficult problem. I am sure this
issue is one that is being examined as part of a broader
effort, but I think you are touching on some very sensitive
issues.
Mrs. Wagner. Mr. Ruggiero, I appreciated your summary of
how President Trump's diplomatic pressure has caused other
countries to end relationships with North Korea. Are there
countries partnering with North Korea that stand out to you as
needing special attention from the administration?
Mr. Ruggiero. Well, beyond China and Russia, and, you know,
it was mentioned earlier, Poland, there are certainly still
countries in Africa I am concerned about. Even though Singapore
has said that it will cut off its trade relationship with North
Korea, I am still concerned about the actual implementation of
that. Malaysia has been an issue in the past. I think the
question here is whether the administration is willing to use
sanctions authorities to go after companies in friendly
countries to show an impact. I think if they did that perhaps
once or twice, that it could have an exponential impact.
Mrs. Wagner. I agree. Ambassador Jenkins, can you speak
about the outcomes of yesterday's U.S./Canada meeting in
Vancouver on North Korea's illicit transfer of materials and
equipment?
Ms. Jenkins. The one thing that I was able to pick up, but
I need to get more information, is that there was an agreement
by Canada to provide some funding to the U.S. to help with
sanctions against North Korea. There was a pledge of $325
million--$3.25 million to help the U.S. with the sanctions, to
help other countries with strengthening sanctions.
So I don't think there was a lot of--I don't know how much
success there was in terms of bringing North Korea to the
table, which is one of the things they wanted to do and,
obviously, there is--thinking that by continuing the pressure
on North Korea, that will bring them to the table and this is
another way to try to do that. But there was a lot of
discussion on the sanctions and how to enforce the sanctions.
Mrs. Wagner. Great. Thank you. It seems that U.S. policy
prioritizes the challenge of the nuclear threat over the
challenge of the chemical and biological weapons threat. Mr.
Parachini, do you believe the U.S. Government should work to
change its what I will call cost-benefit analysis and better
prioritize the chemical and biological threats? And how do you
think we begin to do that, sir?
Mr. Parachini. So I think a focus on the nuclear threat is
appropriate. It is a demonstrated capability that they have now
also demonstrated a ballistic missile capability. So it is
generally--it is in a category in and of itself where their
chemical and biological weapons capabilities are at different
thresholds. We don't have a good sense of what those thresholds
may be. They are a greater threat, I think, in both South Korea
and the Asian theater than they are to the homeland, but I
think that naturally leads you to prioritize nuclear first.
Their chemical capabilities are probably more robust based
on what we know and based on the ease of producing those types
of weapons. And their biological weapons are probably least
available for use, and we know less about them, so I think I
would prioritize those less. I would say if there are ways to
do dual-use things for detection and addressing any infectious
diseases, that is desirable to deal with I think the least
probable of these threats.
Mrs. Wagner. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, my time has expired. I thank you.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you.
Next, we will go to Ms. Tulsi Gabbard from the State of
Hawaii.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, at this point, I think no one more viscerally
appreciates the seriousness of the threat that we face at this
moment than the people of Hawaii who just went through a
terrifying experience on Saturday morning, receiving this alert
on their cell phone that a ballistic missile was incoming, take
shelter immediately, this is not a drill. Now, obviously, we
know now this turned out to be colossal error on the part of
the State officials responsible for this. But it really served
as a wake-up call to the country and to the people in
Washington about the imminent nature of the threat that we face
and the need for urgent and effective action to ultimately
remove this threat from our country.
So, Mr. Ruggiero, you were talking about sanctions and
through a lot of the different questions, I think you gave
responses coming at different angles. It is clear, though, that
none of the sanctions that have been put in place over the last
few decades against North Korea have proven effective, which is
why we are sitting in this position, nor are they anywhere
near--nor have they reached anywhere near the effectiveness of
the sanctions in Iran that caused the nuclear deal to occur.
Can you label maybe the top most effective changes to
current sanctions that would actually prove this sanctions
regime to be effective to create this leverage?
Mr. Ruggiero. Well, I can give you three. We talked about
the China financial, so we don't have to go into much detail
about that. We talked about the fines, and that would be
useful. I would say the other benefit of the Vancouver meeting
is something that I testified before this committee last year
about, which is the public nature of a like-minded group. And
we had that on Iran, and it looks like we now have that with
Vancouver. And I think that one of the things in the statement
was that they are going to meet more often, so that is the
second thing. And the third, which is related to that, is
shipping. You know, our research indicates that there are at
least double, if not triple, of the number of North Korean
linked vessels that can be and really should be sanctioned. And
then also we have already seen the South Korean stop two--or
excuse me--freeze or impound two vessels with regard to ship-
to-ship transfers. That is an area that is going to need more
work, and I think a lot of people don't want to interdict
vessels, but we need to remember the value of just doing
training exercises with regard to interdicting vessels as well.
Doing those in a more public way to increase the costs for some
of these vessels that may not know they are involved with North
Korea.
Ms. Gabbard. Anyone else? With regard to--there has been
some conversation, especially lately, about the possibility of
a, quote/unquote, deg. ``preventative or preemptive
strike,'' and I am wondering what actual defense treaties are
in place between China and North Korea, and Russia and North
Korea, respectively, and what you believe their responses would
be from the spectrum of a surgical strike that some are
advocating for all the way to an overwhelming military strike
coming from the United States? How would China and Russia react
to that?
Mr. Cordesman. There is no automatic treaty relationship
between China and North Korea, but there is a broad security
relationship and treaty or agreement. I think that when you
talk about how China would react, any kind of bolt from the
blue, just preemptive attack without a cause, would almost
force China to react, at least diplomatically, and take a very
strong political stand. I doubt very much if it would lead to
immediate military action, but it would be extremely hard to
predict. I think----
Ms. Gabbard. Would you agree that North Korea would respond
with military action in that instance?
Mr. Cordesman. I think that certainly it would respond with
some kind of military action, but whether that action would be
something that would offset the impact of a really well-
targeted preventative strike, a lot would depend on how well we
can actually target preventively and locate and destroy their
nuclear capabilities, and how many other things we would do to
restrict their retaliatory capability. There is a very wide
range between simply trying to strike their nuclear weapons and
what could be a major conflict.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you.
Mr. Parachini. I might add that it is very dangerous to
think about decapitation because you don't know whether or not
this is a regime that has the dead-hand doctrine; that is, when
the leadership goes out, some other parts of the military know
that it is time for them to go in. And indeed that was a Soviet
doctrine. It is a reasonable worry that North Korea may have a
similar one. So any type of decapitation attempt, successful or
not, might launch something that we really would not like to
have occur.
Ms. Gabbard. Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Yoho. I thank you for your questioning.
Next, we will go to Mr. Tom Garrett from Virginia.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to start with Ambassador Jenkins, Mr. Chairman,
because I don't know if you are aware but Ambassador Jenkins
went to our Nation's premiere flagship public university, the
University of Virginia, for one of her degrees, so I know she
is going to have a good answer here.
To your knowledge, Ambassador Jenkins, is there any other
nation on the face of the planet circa 2018 that literally
sells workers to do work in foreign countries and then has
their salaries remitted to the government of that nation?
Ms. Jenkins. I am taking my time with this one just to
think. I don't think so.
Mr. Garrett. I don't either. And I just--I point that out,
not because it is directly on point, but because I think it is
relevant for those who are trying to understand the nature of
this regime. In my opening statement, Mr. Chair, I tried to
illustrate that any regime that would sell its very own people
into slavery might be willing to utilize weapons of any
variety, be they conventional, nuclear, biological or chemical
against not only foreigners, but their own citizens. And I also
think it is worthy of note that the history in the region
indicates hostilities inherent over intergenerational periods
between not just the north and the south but also the Japanese
and the Koreans, the Chinese and the Koreans, et cetera, and I
think most Americans fail to understand that.
Moving somewhat, Dr. Cordesman, dual-purpose improved
conventional munitions, submunitions, bomblets, do we know
whether or not the North Korean regime employs artillery,
canon, rocket, or missile systems that might employ
submunitions? I mean, I know the answer, but----
Mr. Cordesman. I have not heard that they have extensive
stocks of advanced submunitions, but I think that from some of
the literature I have seen from Jane's and others, there are
indications they have at least some capabilities in these
areas.
Mr. Garrett. And unclassified documentation indicates that
a launcher loader worth of dual-purpose improved conventional
munitions on the proper mathematical firing solutions would be
able to essentially impact every single unprotected target in a
single square kilometer. So, again, these references to 20,000
dead in 1 day, I would submit, rhetorically, are probably low,
particularly when you consider populations not hardened,
densely compacted in civilian areas.
Now, does the United States employ Dual-Purpose Improved
Conventional Munitions by doctrine?
Mr. Cordesman. We have a range of advanced artillery
rounds, yes.
Mr. Garrett. But did we not remove ourselves voluntarily
from the----
Mr. Cordesman. Yes.
Mr. Garrett. And that would have been circa 2015?
Mr. Cordesman. Right.
Mr. Garrett. And so also we have made reference to, and you
made reference to hardened artillery emplacements, essentially,
in theory, these artillery emplacements might roll out from
underneath a protective overhead cover, et cetera, fire and
then move back in. Does that accurately characterize some of
our understanding in the North Korean indirect fire capability?
Mr. Cordesman. They vary sharply according to the terrain.
Some do that. Some can fire and do fire from fixed positions.
Mr. Garrett. And so we voluntarily stop using scatterable
submunitions that might counter these in a counter battery
scenario. How about area-denial munitions, RAMS and ADAMS,
artillery-fired area-denial munitions? Do we have those in our
capability? And do we have those in our inventory in the United
States?
Mr. Cordesman. I know we have them in our capability and
had them in our capability. Quite frankly, I do not know the
inventories involved.
Mr. Garrett. In fact, we voluntarily removed ourselves from
the realm of nations that would employ scatterable area-denial
munitions. Have the North Koreans done this?
Mr. Cordesman. No.
Mr. Garrett. And so might these withdrawals of the United
States from the arena of cutting-edge weaponry put us at a
competitive disadvantage with the regime that hasn't honored
the same commitments that we have made?
Mr. Cordesman. If I may make two points. First, we have
basically gone to using the equivalent of Earth penetrators
rather than submunitions because of the blast doors on the
hearts. That is a very restricted capability, but it requires
you to penetrate a much more serious barrier than the artillery
rounds we then had.
Mr. Garrett. So, specifically, in a case of a hardened
target, the Earth penetrator might be a preferred method.
However, if you are trying to deny a roll-in roll-out artillery
system, the scatterable mines might be something that would
work best.
Let me continue, because I have about 20 seconds remaining.
It strikes me that the people who entered this country into
these agreements probably never did comprehensive fire-risk
planning for offensive or defensive operations. And it strikes
me, and I apologize again, with all due respect, sir, and I
have an immense amount for yourself and other members of this
panel, that we endanger the very lives of the young women and
men who have signed on a dotted line to potentially sacrifice
everything that they have or ever will have for the freedom of
this Nation and defense of the innocent people, not only of
South Korea, but the world.
And so I take this opportunity, Mr. Chairman, and I will
conclude shortly, to submit that we might relook some of the
treaties into which we entered and some of the actions we
unilaterally engaged in in light of the very real circumstances
in which we find ourselves 24 years post a North Korean nuclear
deal that was to, in the words of the President who shouted
from the mountaintops of success, ``rid the Korean Peninsula of
a nuclear threat.''
It is indeed existential to the young men and women in our
uniforms and to the people, not only of the region, but of the
world. Thank you.
Mr. Yoho. Well spoken. I appreciate your words.
Next, Ms. Norma Torres from California.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing.
Mr. Ruggiero--I hoped I pronounced your name correctly--
last year, I introduced H.R. 3261, the North Korea Follow the
Money Act. It is a simple bipartisan bill that requires a
national intelligence estimate on North Korea's revenue
sources.
How much do we know about how North Korea is funding its
chemical weapons programs?
Mr. Ruggiero. I would just say that a lot of our
understanding of North Korea's finances is very anecdotal
partially because North Korea does not report its own trade
statistics, partially because some trade statistics that are
reported as North Korea are actually South Korea, and then also
because the Chinese report what they want to report.
And to perhaps the question of, you know, whether having an
assessment of that type, of the budget and the usefulness of
that, I would say, you know, sanctions are now being used more
and more often, especially when it comes to North Korea. And I
think it would be valuable, at least internally within the U.S.
Government, to have a common understanding of where North Korea
is now and what are the levers that can be used to affect
different revenue streams.
Mrs. Torres. Specifically, if we want to be very specific
and target certain people versus an entire country, correct?
Mr. Ruggiero. Well, the issue here, there has always been
this narrative of leadership assets overseas. That is certainly
something that I know that the government has focused on
before. And as I noted earlier, the North Koreans' use their
revenue really in three ways, military, weapons, and for the
elites. And I think if we had an understanding of what the
budget is like, but it will always be imprecise, but a way to
target the sanctions to go in certain areas and to not harm the
people, I think is the first order there.
Mrs. Torres. Absolutely. That is why I think it is critical
for us to, at the very least, Mr. Chairman, try to get a
hearing on this bill, once again, H.R. 3261.
I am also very concerned about an incident that occurred
June 2017, a cyber attack that shut down our Nation's ports.
The Port of Los Angeles was impacted. That is a concern to me
because the livelihood of my constituents is dependent on the
activities at the ports.
Do you think that North Korea has the capability to carry
out cyber attacks against our ports and other critical
infrastructure?
Mr. Ruggiero. Well, I would say that if they don't have the
capability now, they are going to certainly work toward getting
it. I think what we see in South Korea over the last 5 to 6
years where North Korea used cyber to attack U.S. Forces,
Korea, and our South Korean counterparts in a wide approach,
and then learned from that and was more specific. In other
words, going after 20 Web sites the first time, and then the
second time, going after only 2.
So I think that is part of it. The wartime environment,
using it in a wartime environment, but then using it--what we
like to call cyber-enabled economic warfare, to try and harm
the United States as these sanctions increase. And then the
third way is to make money to blunt the impact of those
sanctions.
Mrs. Torres. Go ahead, Ms. Jenkins.
Ms. Jenkins. Yes, I would just add that I think the more
effective the international community is in terms of sanctions,
in terms of interdiction, illicit trafficking of materials and
equipment, the more likely North Korea will rely on cyber to
raise the funds that they need to do what they need to do. And
in doing that, they will develop a capability to use it for
other things.
So there is a connection between the effectiveness of
activities to prevent them from doing what they are doing and
to prevent them from raising the money that they want to raise
and their use of this other tool to raise that money.
Mrs. Torres. So either stealing from us, directly from us,
or shutting down our commerce.
What can we do to protect ourselves? Yes, sir.
Mr. Cordesman. I think that really is a key question. An
awful lot of the problem we face is the failure basically to
provide basic defenses, reduce cyber vulnerability, set
standards that do not allow ease of attack. When countries like
North Korea can attack a critical infrastructure function, the
question is, why is it vulnerable in the first place?
Mrs. Torres. Thank you. I ran out of time.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Yoho. I appreciate your participation and your
questions. And the panel, I thank you for your endurance, your
information that you have given us.
What I see is the continuing evolution of the North Korean
saga, going from the Korean War to where we are at today. And
we have seen past administrations, both Republican and
Democrats use the carrot and stick. And at each point, the
Koreans got stronger as far as their development.
I have a hard time believing they did this on their own. I
feel there was a lot of help, whether it was from Pakistan in
the beginning, to Russia, to China, to other actors. And they
are used as a proxy state in a lot of these ventures, but now
they are at a point where they are today. And I think you just
brought up a point about defensive mechanisms. And I look at
the THAAD system South Korea put in that was so warranted at
the time, but I saw China retaliate against South Korea. South
Korea was doing that just for their protection. And I think
they were very warranted to bring in the other ones. And again,
at the dismay and dissatisfaction of China. But I think it is
very important.
And I think we, as a Nation, should make sure that that
offer stands on the table as something that South Korea can use
to make sure that they have the defensive mechanisms. But this
is, of course, up to the South Koreans. And we are at a
different point now with the talks that are going on between
the two Koreas. We can just hope that with the efforts of the
world community coming together, putting pressure on all
partners that are trading with North Korea, that this will come
to a peaceful resolution.
I can't thank you enough for being here. Do you have any
further comments you want to say or you feel pretty confident
with what has gone on?
Hearing no other comments, I want to thank the witnesses. I
want to thank the members, and I want to thank Judge Poe for
calling this important meeting jointly together with the Asia-
Pacific Subcommittee. In his absence, I would like to end it
with, ``and that is the way it is.''
This meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:09 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
Material Submitted for the Record
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]