- WASTE AND INEFFICIENCY IN THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT: GAO'S 2018 DUPLICATION REPORT
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
WASTE AND INEFFICIENCY IN THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT: GAO'S 2018
DUPLICATION REPORT
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
APRIL 26, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-81
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://oversight.house.gov
_________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
31-120 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
Trey Gowdy, South Carolina, Chairman
John J. Duncan, Jr., Tennessee
Elijah E. Cummings, Maryland,
Darrell E. Issa, California
Ranking Minority Member
Jim Jordan, Ohio
Carolyn B. Maloney, New York
Mark Sanford, South Carolina
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Justin Amash, Michigan
Columbia
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Scott DesJarlais, Tennessee
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Jim Cooper, Tennessee
Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Mark Meadows, North Carolina
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Ron DeSantis, Florida
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Dennis A. Ross, Florida
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Rod Blum, Iowa
Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Jimmy Gomez, Maryland
Steve Russell, Oklahoma
Peter Welch, Vermont
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Matt Cartwright, Pennsylvania
Will Hurd, Texas
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Gary J. Palmer, Alabama
Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
James Comer, Kentucky
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland
Paul Mitchell, Michigan
Greg Gianforte, Montana
Sheria Clarke, Staff Director
Robert Borden, Deputy Staff Director
William McKenna, General Counsel
Richard Burkard, Senior Counsel
Kiley Bidelman, Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on April 26, 2018...................................
1
WITNESS
The Honorable Gene Dodaro, Comptroller General of the United
States, U.S. Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................
5
Written Statement............................................
6
WASTE AND INEFFICIENCY IN THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT: GAO'S 2018
DUPLICATION REPORT
----------
Thursday, April 26, 2018
House of Representatives
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
Washington, DC
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in Room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Steve Russell
presiding.
Present: Representatives Russell, Duncan, Jordan, Sanford,
Amash, Massie, Meadows, DeSantis, Ross, Walker, Blum, Grothman,
Palmer, Comer, Mitchell, Norton, Maloney, Lynch, Cooper,
Connolly, Kelly, Lawrence, Krishnamoorthi, Welch, and
DeSaulnier.
Mr. Russell. The Committee on Oversight and Government
Operations will come to order.
Without objection, the presiding member is authorized to
declare a recess at any time.
This morning the Government Accountability Office released
its eighth annual report on opportunities for the Federal
Government to reduce duplication, overlap, and fragmentation,
and to achieve other financial benefits.
Over the course of eight years, the GAO has highlighted
more than 300 areas of such waste and inefficiency in the
Federal Government and recommended nearly 800 corrective
actions.
I first want to thank you, Mr. Dodaro, as well as your
entire staff, for the excellent work that they do. This report
provides the opportunity to highlight duplication and
inefficiency throughout the government. Many of the issues that
we will discuss today will lay the groundwork for future
hearings and legislative action.
The Federal Government will save an estimated $125 billion
by 2025 based on implementation of GAO recommendations to date.
Through congressional action and actions by executive agencies,
52 percent of GAO's recommended corrective actions have been
fully addressed and closed, but that does leave 48.
The GAO's annual report shows us persistent effort to
address inefficiencies and resolve wasteful spending can
collectively provide a significant benefit to the public.
Fifty-two percent of actions addressed is a good start, but the
other 48 percent need to be done.
We could save billions more by taking action at just three
agencies: the Department of Defense, the Internal Revenue
Service, and the Department of Health and Human Services.
Through GAO's annual reports, more than half of all corrective
actions have been directed at these three agencies. Yet, all
three have more than 40 percent of recommended actions still
open.
For example, GAO estimates the Department of Defense could
save more than $9 billion by identifying opportunities for
consolidating or reducing the size of headquarters
organizations.
GAO also found that the IRS could save billions in
fraudulent refunds by improving efforts to prevent fraud
associated with identity theft.
GAO has recommended the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services take steps to improve the accuracy and diagnostic
coding practices for Medicare Advantage payments, which could
result in savings of billions of dollars.
GAO does find in this year's report that the IRS has had
some success in reducing millions of dollars of fraud by simply
delaying the date for sending refunds while it verifies
critical information. The committee would be interested in
hearing more about this particular effort.
The Federal Government has an obligation to taxpayers to
avoid fragmentation and ensure effective program coordination
across agencies. Disagreements over policy might lead to
disagreements over appropriate spending, but wasting tax
dollars because of a failure to coordinate is simply
unacceptable.
For example, GAO's newly released report shows that the
Department of Agriculture has an entire seafood inspection
program to ensure the safety of domestic and imported catfish,
while the Food and Drug Administration is responsible for the
safety of all other seafood. Having a separate inspection
program for one species of fish is an example of inefficiency
we hope is an outlier.
But if we are going to have this type of fragmented seafood
inspection system, we expect close coordination, at a minimum,
between the two agencies involved. Unfortunately, the GAO has
found the two agencies are not coordinating well; in fact, do
not even have common standards for public safety of the fish
they inspect.
All Federal workers must embrace their role as fiduciaries
for the American public. Everyone should consider it part of
their job description to avoid waste and ensure tax dollars are
being used effectively. GAO's annual report provides an
important road map to tackling known waste and inefficiency. We
know there is only so much GAO can do. It is up to agencies to
take your recommendations to heart and to act on them, and it
is up to us in Congress to act in many cases.
But as we will hear, agencies need to take action more
rapidly. In some cases, the solution to reducing overlap may be
evident, but practical or political challenges may be an
impediment. In other cases, an agency or Congress may lack
basic information about whether a program is functioning as
intended, and simply obtaining better data is a critical first
step.
We look forward to discussing why recommendations remain
open for so long and what this committee can do to help the
agencies gain greater efficiencies and avoid wasting tax
dollars. I look forward to hearing from the Comptroller General
today on ways to reduce wasteful spending where it has been
identified, as well as areas where agencies can take steps to
avoid spending and duplicative waste in the future.
I now recognize the Ranking Member of the committee, Ms.
Eleanor Holmes Norton, for her opening statement.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to begin by indicating my appreciation for this very
critical hearing, and I certainly want to thank you, Mr.
Dodaro, for being here yet again to testify about what is now
your eighth annual report on this very important issue.
We sit here every year in the committee as the committee
holds this hearing outlining the programs and the progress and
the challenges we have. There have been, interestingly,
different Chairs, and I suppose you haven't seen Mr. Russell
and me, since we are imposters for the moment, sitting in for
the Chair and the Ranking Member, but you get the point that
there have been with each of your reports different Chairs--Mr.
Issa, Mr. Chaffetz. Mr. Gowdy is now the Chair, and there may
be someone new. In fact, Mr. Gowdy is leaving the Congress, so
there will be yet another Chair. But isn't it important to note
that we are always partners in these hearings.
One constant we have noticed over these years is that the
executive branch can certainly do better. I say this regardless
of who is in the White House, regardless of who is President,
and regardless of which political party she belongs to. I am
sure my Republican colleagues would agree.
However, in order to truly address these recommendations,
we not only need a sustained commitment by the agencies
involved, we also need sustained oversight from our own
committee. Congress needs to follow up on these recommendations
to ensure that the reforms are made. That is why today's
hearing is so important.
For example, the Department of Defense is the largest
agency in the Federal Government by far. It is probably the
largest agency in the history of the world. We need it to be
successful because it defends the country, our people, and our
freedom. But the Department of Defense wastes a phenomenal
amount of money. Every dollar that is squandered is a dollar
that could be gone to help protect our troops, our service
members who risk life and limb to protect us every single day.
To be clear, there has been progress. In 2011, when GAO
issued its first duplication report, it recommended several
steps to improve the way the Department of Defense develops and
acquires weapon systems. The Pentagon implemented several of
these recommendations and, according to the GAO, saved
approximately $16 billion from 2011 to 2015. That is a terrific
example of how the process is supposed to work.
Unfortunately, there are dozens of areas in which the
Department of Defense could do much better. This year, GAO's
report says the Department of Defense still has 74
recommendations that remain open, some of them dating back to
2011.
For example, the GAO made several recommendations for the
Department of Defense to manage its commissaries more
efficiently and reduce the size and staffing at various
headquarters. Now, I understand that these may not be the most
exciting issues, and they may not get headlines, but GAO
reports that if the Department of Defense fully implemented
these recommendations, they could save the American taxpayers
$11 billion. To me, if our committee played even a small role
in achieving these savings, that could be something we could be
proud of, because $11 billion is a lot of money.
For these reasons, I would like to make a modest proposal,
Mr. Chairman. After today's hearing, I propose that our
committee hold a follow-up hearing with the Department of
Defense. Let's work with the Department officials to determine
what they are, in fact, doing to address these issues and what
more can be done to allow them to operate more efficiently and
save more like that $11 billion I just spoke of.
This really is the core of our committee's jurisdiction,
and I hope we can make this happen.
Mr. Dodaro, every year you and your talented staff provide
us and the American people with a crucial service to make sure
our tax dollars are spent wisely. So I want to, once again,
thank you for your report and look forward to your testimony
today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Russell. I thank the gentle lady.
I am pleased to introduce our witness, the Honorable Gene
Dodaro, Comptroller General of the United States. Mr. Dodaro is
accompanied by the following people from the GAO, from my left
to my right, who will also be sworn in: Ms. Cathleen Berrick,
Managing Director for the Defense Capabilities and Management
Team; Ms. Barbara Bovbjerg, Managing Director of the Education,
Workforce, and Income Security Team; Ms. Angela Nikki Clowers,
Managing Director for the Health Care Team; Ms. Edda Emmanuelli
Perez, Deputy General Counsel; Mr. Mark Gaffigan, Managing
Director of the Natural Resources and Environment Team; Ms.
Jessica Lucas-Judy, Director of the Strategic Issues Team; Ms.
Michelle Mackin, Managing Director for the Contracting and
National Security Acquisitions Team; Mr. J. Christopher Mihm,
Managing Director for the Strategic Issues Team; Mr. Dave
Powner, Director of the Information Technology Team; and Mr.
George Scott, Managing Director of the Homeland Security and
Justice Team.
Welcome to you all.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be sworn in
before they testify. So I would ask that you please stand and
raise your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Russell. The Chair will reflect that the witnesses
answered in the affirmative, and please be seated.
In order to allow time for discussion, please limit your
testimony to 5 minutes. Your entire written statement will be
made part of the record.
As a reminder, the clock in front of you shows the
remaining time during your opening statement. The light will
turn yellow when you have 30 seconds left, and red when your
time is up.
Please also remember to press the button to turn on your
microphone before speaking.
It is now my pleasure to recognize the witness. Mr. Dodaro,
please, we welcome your testimony.
WITNESS STATEMENT
STATEMENT OF HON. GENE DODARO
Mr. Dodaro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Good morning
to you, Ranking Member, Ms. Norton, members of the committee. I
am very pleased to be here today to present our eighth annual
report.
I am also very pleased to report that, based on the first
seven years that we issued this report, we issued about 724
recommendations, 52 percent have been implemented, 24 percent
have been partially implemented, and as a result of these
actions there are financial benefits that have accrued or will
accrue to the Federal Government of $178 billion.
Now, most of these actions were due to the Congress taking
action to pass legislation to deal with a number of issues that
we had raised, and given Congress' critical role, in the
appendix to our testimony today are 58 open recommendations to
the Congress that we have made that could result in savings of
tens of billions of dollars in additional money. So I commend
those to your attention, be happy to talk about them today.
In the new report that we are issuing today, we have
additional tens of actions, 68 new actions, that can be
implemented. For example, overlap and duplication in the U.S.
Defense Department distribution centers could be made that
could save, by DOD's estimate, $527 million over five years.
There are tens of billions of dollars potentially that could be
saved by treating low-level waste at the Hanford Repository
with cheaper methods, and it could actually get the job done
faster. Also at the Veterans' Administration, there could be
tens of millions of dollars in additional savings by
consolidating their medical and surgical supplies purchasing
program. Also at the Coast Guard, they have identified
themselves a number of stations that could be closed that
overlap with other stations within the same timeframe that
could respond to search and rescue, and that could save them
millions of dollars and improve their operations as well.
So these are a few examples that we have.
Now, we also, from our prior work, in addition to these new
examples, have a number of outstanding examples that still need
to be fully implemented, and they range from taking actions at
the IRS and some other revenue options that could increase the
revenue coming into the Federal Government through more
efficient practices, and also save a lot of money, particularly
in the Medicare area and in the Medicaid program, which is the
fastest growing part of the Federal Government's budget from a
spending standpoint.
So we are very pleased that you are holding this hearing.
We appreciate the attention given to our work. My colleagues
and I would be very pleased to respond to all questions. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Dodaro follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Russell. Thank you for that. We do appreciate all of
the hard work.
I will be holding my questions to the end, but it is my
pleasure to now recognize the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Meadows, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to the whole team. Let me just say, each and
every hearing, not just this annual hearing, but each and every
oversight hearing where we have input from GAO, it improves the
quality of the hearing, but it also improves the quality of the
information. So to you, Mr. Dodaro, and your entire team that
is here today, a heartfelt thank you from members of Congress
for handling government accountability in a non-partisan way. I
have wanted you to be partisan, and you have pushed back. You
won't let me do that, and that is good because I think that
gives confidence to both sides of the aisle. So I just want to
say thank you.
You mention a number of unimplemented requests, 58. Was
that your testimony?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, 58 open matters for congressional
consideration. We have 324 recommendations to the executive
branch.
Mr. Meadows. And so in doing that, we are talking about
billions of dollars, not millions of dollars. Is that correct?
Mr. Dodaro. Tens of billions.
Mr. Meadows. Okay, tens of billions. So can you find any
reasons, other than complacency, why Congress and the
Administration shouldn't implement at least 10 percent of those
recommendations?
Mr. Dodaro. If I didn't think all of them shouldn't be
implemented, I wouldn't make them, Congressman.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So you would say even a higher
threshold than 10 to 20 percent of those should be implemented.
You would suggest all of them.
Mr. Dodaro. Over time, over three-quarters of our
recommendations are implemented in a four-year period of time.
So the recommendations in this area are a little lagging behind
the overall rate that we have for our recommendations. My goal
and aspiration was that we could get at least to 75 percent, if
not 100 percent.
Mr. Meadows. All right. Well, you know well that what I
will do is I will take a few of your things, and then we will
start working on those and applying pressure. What would be
helpful to me, and I want to drill down on the IRS for a second
because it seems like, according to some of the testimony, that
there are a number of really high-profile dollars that can
potentially be saved, and I see that you are getting a new
witness to the table. So let me ask what is the IRS doing right
and wrong? I think there is also the suggestion that if they
just delayed refunds for a while, they could save dollars. So I
would ask you to help us understand that a little bit better.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, sure. Let me give you a broad picture, and
then I will ask Jessica to give a little bit more details.
First of all, we think the IRS, they need better
information technology systems, no question about that.
Mr. Meadows. So for the record, I am on my side of the
aisle willing to give them additional appropriations to do
exactly that. I think we have a bipartisan agreement on that,
but go ahead.
Mr. Dodaro. But it has to be managed properly, and we have
made a number of recommendations, because they have wasted
investments in the past in IT, years ago.
Mr. Meadows. Right.
Mr. Dodaro. Secondly, they need a customer service
strategy. They really don't have a comprehensive strategy. They
need a strategy for online services that could improve
voluntary compliance, as well. Congress could help IRS by
lowering the threshold for electronic filing for partnerships
and corporations, also allowing more W-2 information to be
submitted electronically from employers. They would help them
match faster. They wouldn't have to delay the timeframe, as
well. So we have a number of specific recommendations in those
areas.
The number of our recommendations are actually incorporated
in the package of bills that the House has just passed on IRS
reform, but there are others that weren't included that should
be included in those areas.
I will ask Jessica to--the operative word for calling
another witness up here is drill down.
Mr. Meadows. Okay, and we have 30 seconds for you to drill
down before I get gaveled down, but go ahead.
Ms. Lucas-Judy. I will talk just about the tax fraud and
non-compliance that we have said the IRS should assess the
benefits and the costs of holding all taxpayer refunds, not
just the ones that are claiming the Earned Income Tax Credit
and the ACTC. So later in the filing season, IRS' own analysis
found that they could have potentially prevented an additional
$35 to $350 million in fraudulent payments due to identity
theft refund fraud just by adjusting the holding period for
about two weeks.
Mr. Meadows. Wow. All right.
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your leadership.
Mr. Russell. The gentleman yields back.
It is my privilege now to recognize the gentle lady from
the District of Columbia, Ms. Norton, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dodaro, thank you again for being here. My questions
are going to relate to your report on the warfighting
equipment, the transfer to military depots and shipyards, and
your view that they are not being run as efficiently as they
could be.
Under BRAC, which is the Base Realignment and Closure round
in 2005, all of the services were required to transfer to the
Defense Logistics Agency a function that we don't usually
associate with the military, retail supply and storage and
distribution functions as their depots by 2011.
First, would you explain why this transfer was considered
to be efficient for the government?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. The Defense Logistics Agency, DLA, has an
up-to-date information technology system that can allow real-
time information in terms of the inventory drawdowns to trigger
the orderings, so it is a much more efficient process. And the
Air Force and the Navy, except for one exception, did transfer
their responsibilities. But the Army and the Marines have not,
and that is what ----
Ms. Norton. And that is where I am going to focus. So these
are light functions in the Defense Logistics Agency rather than
spreading these functions among various parts of the military,
as I understand it. It is kind of classic efficiency. But your
report states that the Army and the Marine Corps have not yet
transferred these functions to the Defense Logistics Agency,
and neither have the Navy shipyards. The initial efforts to
transfer these programs at the Air Force Logistics Centers and
the Navy Fleet and Readiness Centers related, we are told, to
personnel reluctance to trust the DLA.
So first, let me know what kinds of personnel we are
talking about. For example, are we talking about uniformed
personnel being reluctant to transfer a function?
Mr. Dodaro. I am going to ask Ms. Berrick, our Defense
expert, to answer that question.
Ms. Berrick. Thank you for your question. The reluctance is
coming primarily from the civilians who manage this process at
the maintenance depots within the Army and the Marine Corps.
Now, the actual BRAC recommendation was that the services
transfer the storage distribution and supply operations to DLA
to achieve efficiencies. The Army and the Marine Corps did
transfer storage and distribution. They have not transferred
supply. They have raised concerns that retail supply operations
are very interwoven with maintenance operations. The Army also
raised the point that they recently developed a new information
system that provided greater visibility to their supply
operations. They were reluctant ----
Ms. Norton. Do you regard their pushback for the reasons
you named as worthy of your consideration? Or do you think they
should continue, as the other agencies have done?
Ms. Berrick. I think they should continue. Some of these
same concerns were raised by the Navy and the Air Force Air
Logistics Centers and maintenance facilities, that they
overcome. For example, they were concerned that they wouldn't
have visibility over supply operations. DLA actually gave them
access to their information system that enabled that
visibility. They saw savings of $710 million as a result of
that consolidation.
Ms. Norton. These are non-uniformed personnel. Would they
too be transferred? I mean, I am trying to get at their
reluctance and what you can do about their reluctance.
Ms. Berrick. It does require transferring individuals from
the services to the Defense Logistics Agency. That is part of
what the transfer would entail. It also requires using DLA's
business processes for managing the supply operations, versus
the services.
Ms. Norton. We have some of these outstanding since 2011.
What can you do to--since you still stand behind the efficiency
of these transfers, what can be done to speed these transfers?
Mr. Dodaro. There are two things. One is to try to prevail
upon the Defense Department themselves, which for the last
three years, every year I send each head of a major department
agency in the Federal Government a list of open GAO
recommendations, and I prioritize which ones that I believe
still should be implemented. So number one is working directly
with the Defense Department.
Number two, an alternative route, is when we go to the
Congress and there are requirements put in the Defense
authorization bill or the Defense appropriations bill that
requires them to implement GAO's recommendations. Both of those
bills this year included GAO recommendations that needed to be
implemented, and that is how some of the savings that I
reported, the $178 billion--the services, for example, were
duplicating combat uniforms, which complicated even joint
operations. It had an operational effect, as well as DAR
effects. But the Defense authorization bill required them to
deal with that issue. So we are trying both avenues, working
with the agencies and working with the appropriate committees
in the Congress.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much. We might even have a
follow-up hearing to press this, since they are making some
progress and may need a little more of a nudge.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Russell. I thank the gentle lady.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Blum,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Blum. Thank you, Chairman Russell.
Mr. Dodaro, good to see you again. Thank you for being
here.
Shortly after I was elected three years ago, I held a town
hall back in Iowa, and I was explaining what committees I was
on, and I mentioned I was on the Oversight Committee and that
our job was to investigate and bring some daylight to waste,
fraud, and abuse. An elderly farmer raised his hand and he
said, ``Waste, fraud, and abuse. Aren't those the three
branches of government?''
[Laughter.]
Mr. Blum. True story, but not because of your department,
that is for sure. There is a lot of cynicism out there is my
point, and for the most part it is well deserved.
I come from the private sector, and in the private sector
failure is penalized. However, in Washington, D.C., in the
swamp here, there is no penalty for failure. Would you agree
with that?
Mr. Dodaro. Not completely. I do think a number of people
are removed or lose their job over time, perhaps not as many as
should, and some agencies are forced to take action when they
need to. But by and large, the incentives are not aligned
properly to reinforce proper behavior and penalize
inappropriate behavior or inefficiencies or waste. So I agree
with you, with some exceptions.
Mr. Blum. That was one of my comments, that the incentives
in this town seem to be perverse to me. For example, what
incentive is there for a government employee or an agency to
save taxpayers money? What incentive is there? Is there any
today?
Mr. Dodaro. What we do is prevail upon people's commitment
to public service and to be good stewards, and the reward
system, like, for example, at GAO, I reward our people based
upon what we are able to do to save people money, save
taxpayers money. So there has to be a good reward system in
place to do that. It doesn't exist throughout the Federal
Government, though.
Mr. Blum. In the private sector, if you save the company a
million dollars, you probably get a percentage of that. You get
some large bonus, and well worth it. I don't think we have that
in the Federal Government, but what if we did? Is that an idea
worth exploring?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, definitely. I think there should be
positive reward systems in place, and theoretically the
performance management systems in agencies should do that.
Mr. Blum. Should, they should.
Mr. Dodaro. They should.
Mr. Blum. Do they?
Mr. Dodaro. I am not positive in all cases it is at the
level which you would expect. I am most familiar with our own,
and I know at GAO it works that way. But I am not sure I could
say that about the rest of the Federal agencies and
departments. We have said that some of the performance
management approaches in the Federal Government, the civil
service system, are outdated. It is not aligned properly with
modern compensation systems, modern classification systems. It
needs revamped, and that could certainly be part of that
revamping.
Mr. Blum. Let's go to 60,000 feet, if we could, for the
last minute and fifty seconds that I have. Let me ask you this
question: Do you feel that our agencies are being held
accountable? Do you feel that the management in those agencies
are being held accountable, and that the employees in those
agencies are being held accountable? And if you are going to
say somewhat, give me a grade. Where are we at? Is it getting
better, or is it getting worse? Because the Federal Government
is getting so big, seriously, I question if it can be managed
anymore.
Mr. Dodaro. I definitely think it can be managed. Some
agencies are better than others, okay? But by and large, I
think that much more could be done to hold agencies
accountable. I think this is Congress' responsibility. I think
there needs to be more oversight hearings. I have said this a
number of times. Where we see positive change, we see the
Congress' hand has to be in this area, and that, to me, is very
important.
Now, we work also with OMB to try to create change within
the executive branch, and I meet with the heads of departments
and agencies as well to try to institute change. But really,
the best incentives I have seen to hold people accountable over
the years is good, rigorous congressional oversight. That will
produce change, with or without legislation I might add.
Mr. Blum. Some folks back in Iowa comment that, oh, you
hold some great hearings, really good stuff, tough questions.
What happens after that? What happens after the tough
questions?
Mr. Dodaro. There is not enough follow-up.
Mr. Blum. How do we change that?
Mr. Dodaro. I think you have to be clear. I have been
involved in some things over the years where there is a series
of hearings, you know? I remember in the Senate when initially
we were having questions about the personnel security
clearances that were not being done timely. They held hearings
either every quarter or every six months. So there was a
series. People knew from the agencies that it wasn't like, gee,
I just have to get through this hearing and it is going to be
over with, they will forget about it. You had follow-up
hearings. You had follow-up meetings with the agency officials.
GAO can help in the follow-up activities as well.
So there has to be a commitment to follow through until you
know that the problem is solved. It is not just bringing----
Mr. Blum. That is where we come in.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, I agree. Congress does a good job at
shining a light, but then as soon as the light goes away, the
problem doesn't get much better.
Mr. Blum. My time has expired, but hats off to you as a
lone voice from the private sector. I think you are doing an
amazing job. Your agency does an amazing job, and I, for one,
am so glad that you are here today.
Mr. Dodaro. Thank you very much.
Mr. Blum. I yield back the time I do not have.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Russell. The gentleman yields back.
It is my privilege now to recognize the gentleman from
Tennessee, Mr. Cooper, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Dodaro, for being here today. This
report is so important.
I would like to ask two Defense questions, so you may want
to get your Defense person up here.
Mr. Dodaro. All right.
Mr. Cooper. First, in your appendix, you mention an unmet
recommendation from 2013 about joint basing. I am on the Armed
Services Committee, and I may need some help from my colleagues
on both sides of the aisle on this. The Armed Services
Committee has banned the Pentagon from even thinking about
another BRAC round, even though the Air Force has testified to
us that as much as 25 percent of their facilities are surplus,
unneeded, a burden for the taxpayers, but they are unable to do
anything to adjust that.
So, I wasn't sure if your recommendation from 2013 on joint
basing was specifically on that topic. You mentioned the Base
Realignment and Closure Commission, but you don't quite nail
the fact that Congress has stopped the Pentagon from trying to
be efficient. We don't even allow them to think about that.
Mr. Dodaro. There are two things that we have, and I will
ask Cathy to explain in more detail. One is the excess
infrastructure that they have. That is actually on the high-
risk list that we keep as far as the Federal Government. So we
believe they need to do a better job in that area. We have also
had many recommendations, and most of them have not been
implemented yet, as to how the BRAC process could be improved,
because they really didn't realize all the benefits that they
promised in the initial activities in those areas.
So if Congress decides that the next BRAC round, to go
forward with that, I would suggest that that be conditional on
implementing GAO's recommendation so you get better cost
estimates and you get fewer changes along the way between the
recommendations from BRAC and actually what gets implemented by
the Defense Department, because you have a several-year
timeframe in there.
Secondly, on joint basing, this was an initiative by the
Department, and what we found there was that it was to get
common standards among the services. So instead of getting a
common standard, they took the highest standard that any
service had and raised everything up to that level in order to
get buy-in. So they weren't really able to get, in any
discernible way, cost savings.
Cathy?
Ms. Berrick. With respect to the joint basing
recommendations, our overall position was that DOD didn't
embrace that 2005 BRAC recommendation to try to achieve
efficiencies with joint basing. A key objective of that
initiative was to achieve some significant savings. But with
the way they developed the common standards, as Gene mentioned,
with the way they approached the effort, they really weren't
designing it to achieve the savings that were possible.
So we made a series of recommendations to DOD to re-look at
their strategy for joint basing and take advantage of some
opportunities for additional savings. DOD had concurred with
that recommendation routinely. So we ended up recommending to
the Congress that they direct DOD to take that action.
With respect to BRAC generally, DOD has, I think, over the
last seven years, requested a BRAC round. They, in fact, did
not request it in their most recent budget estimate. But
setting BRAC aside, a point that we have routinely made with
the Defense Department is they do have some existing
authorities to realign and close facilities under Title X,
separate from BRAC. It does require a congressional
notification if it exceeds certain thresholds. But DOD has
never gone through the process to take any significant action
that would actually require congressional notification.
One of the new areas we mention in this year's report is
the proliferation of distribution centers within the
Department. There are 256 of them. DOD itself identified it can
achieve significant savings, in the hundreds of millions of
dollars, closing those, but they are not taking action on that.
They are saying in the absence of a BRAC, they are not willing
to use their existing authorities to do that.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you. In my short time remaining, you
mentioned that the transition to the new M-code GPS system will
involve retrofitting 716 weapon systems with cards, and the
Pentagon has no plan right now in place to unify the design and
implementation of those cards, and most are not even funded. So
this is a pretty crucial function, and we can't let any of
these weapon systems be down because of a lack of communication
with the satellite, and yet the Pentagon isn't planning
sensibly to meet the needs. So what do we do?
Mr. Dodaro. I think that the Congress should require them
to have a unified approach to this area. I mean, even replacing
a small amount of these receiver cards--in the receiver card,
the M-code is to be a stronger code, to be encrypted, and it
makes sense to do this. But what we have seen is there hasn't
been a good coordination between actually putting the satellite
up and having the ground system that could receive the signals
and then transmit them to these receiver cards in the weapon
systems.
This report this year focuses on those receiver cards, and
you are right, it has to get to so many weapon systems. They
don't have a way to share lessons learned, to get common
requirements. And what will happen, as we have seen in the
past, without proactive leadership, the costs will proliferate,
and then the Congress will be put in a box to say, well, either
you give us the money or this investment is not going to work.
I think Congress requiring them to have a better coordinated,
better management approach on this could forestall a lot of
problems down the road and certainly contain costs in a much
better way.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you very much.
I see my time has expired, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Russell. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Walker, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dodaro, we thank you for your continued service to our
country and appreciate your willingness to serve in this
capacity.
It is my belief that improved coordination between the Food
and Drug Administration and the Food Safety and Inspection
Service on the oversight of imported seafood would help the
agencies better manage fragmentation and more consistently
protect consumers from unsafe drug residues. So I have a couple
of questions here.
In your opinion, does it make sense to have a separate
program at USDA responsible for the food safety of one species
of imported fish when FDA is responsible for regulating safety
for all other types of fish and seafood?
Mr. Dodaro. We initially recommended that that not be
funded, but Congress overrode us and decided that it needed to
be implemented. So our approach now is Congress made that
decision; at least we can make sure that they are coordinating
effectively and operating together, and that is the focus of
our recommendation at this point in time.
Mr. Walker. I thank you. I believe you found an example of
the USDA setting a safety standard for a drug residue at a
level that was 20 times higher than FDA's standard. Should we
be concerned about the safety of imported catfish with these
kinds of numbers?
Mr. Gaffigan. I think that we saw a lot of inconsistency
between the FDA and FSIS. You give the example of the 20 times
number. That is the genesis of our recommendation, and we are
concerned that there is a discrepancy between the two agencies.
Mr. Walker. Mr. Dodaro, you touched on this a little bit
earlier in your comments. GAO has recommended better
coordination. What are the current methods for sharing
information between the agencies, and what change does GAO
think needs to be implemented moving forward?
Mr. Dodaro. They definitely need to have a Memorandum of
Understanding to reach agreement on what drugs are tested. We
also point out in the report that one of the agencies is
testing 76 different drugs, another one only 27 different
drugs. So they need to come to some agreement on this, and
typically the mechanism for that agreement is a Memorandum of
Understanding with written roles and responsibilities, written
agreement to come to a common testing approach and sharing of
information to make sure that it is consistent with the
industry and also an efficient use of Federal resources and
that they have the proper people to do that. So that is what we
are recommending that they do.
Mr. Walker. Anything that you ----
Mr. Gaffigan. Just the commitment to do what they have
talked about doing through some of these MOUs.
Mr. Walker. Do you believe there are steps Congress should
take to ensure the effective coordination that has some teeth
to this? Is there something that you would recommend?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, yes. I mean, there should be reporting
requirements that Congress puts on the agencies to report their
progress in implementing GAO's recommendations. I would very
much support that and would think it would be needed. A number
of times agencies will tell us that they are going to implement
the recommendation, but we don't close it until they are
actually finished and have something in place, and sometimes
these things get implemented and sometimes they don't because
of bureaucratic resistance to change in a lot of cases, to be
honest. So I think Congress' oversight and have them to report
their progress until it is fully implemented would be
warranted.
Mr. Walker. Was there something else?
Mr. Gaffigan. And you could keep asking us to look at it,
and we will come up with those examples to put the light on it.
Mr. Walker. As long as there are people like Mr. Meadows
and others, I imagine those questions will continue to come
forward.
Once again, thank you. I have notes in front of me for my
four questions. You have no notes in front of you but continue
to answer the questions. Thank you for being so well informed.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Russell. The gentleman yields back.
It is now my privilege to recognize the gentle lady from
Illinois, Ms. Kelly, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, Mr. Dodaro, for your exceptional efforts in
GAO to compile the 2018 duplication report.
Back in 2014, Congress passed the Veterans Access, Choice,
and Accountability Act to help the Department of Veterans'
Affairs address serious problems with appointment scheduling,
unreliable data on wait times, and inadequate coordination of
veteran care between VA and non-VA medical providers. The
Choice Act established the Commission on Care, which concluded
in June 2016 that the care by the Veterans' Health
Administration is inconsistent from facility to facility.
Several of the Commission's recommendations focused on the VA's
workforce. GAO's latest report found that, ironically, the
Veterans' Health Administration's overall workforce problems
could be traced to its own HR staff decreasing in size, not
being adequately overseen, and lacking any assessment of skill
gaps and training. Do you agree?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Ms. Kelly. In turn, the GAO report said the attrition in HR
offices has led to difficulties in hiring for clinical
positions in medical centers and increases in administrative
errors. Is that also your understanding?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, that is what we reported and made
recommendations to address that issue.
Ms. Kelly. On a positive note, the GAO report states that
as of January 2018, staff at the Department of Veterans'
Affairs had developed and began using an online competency tool
to identify competency gaps in the Human Resource offices at
the medical centers. The Department has also established clear
lines of authority to require HR staff to complete a competency
assessment. However, the Department still must use this data to
address competency gaps in Human Resource offices. Is that also
your understanding?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, it is. I am pleased they are taking some
action, but they need to follow through, just as we talked
about in the prior exchange with the Congressman.
Ms. Kelly. As of a year ago, the Department of Veterans'
Affairs said it was in the early stages of revising its
performance management system. This revision included effective
use of both monetary and non-monetary awards to promote
employee performance. It also explored the use of the e-
performance information technology system to appraise employee
performance.
Can you give us an update as to the Department's efforts
since then?
Mr. Dodaro. They really haven't taken much action since
then according to our team. They have not in that area. They
moved in the other area that you mentioned, but they haven't
moved in that area.
I think it is very important. The exchange I had with
Congressman Blum talked about the incentives and disincentives,
and really you need to have a good performance management
system that is up to date in the Veterans' Health
Administration. So I will urge them when I meet with the new
Secretary. I met with Secretary Shinseki, Secretary McDonald,
Secretary Shulkin multiple times to try to urge them to
implement GAO's recommendations. I will continue to press in
this area. We designated veteran health care a high-risk area
in 2015, so I and our team are dedicated to follow up.
Ms. Kelly. So, just their lack of follow-up is what you
think will improve performance ----
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, and right now they need leadership. I
mean, they need leadership. I am very worried about the
Veterans' Administration. They have some of the most entrenched
management problems in the Federal Government. That is why we
put them on the high-risk list. They are making efforts to come
up with a plan now, but it has been three years since we put
them on the list. They really haven't finalized a good plan to
come off the list. We are working with them. They are making
progress. I don't want to say that they are not. But there
needs to be more urgency to deal with their problems over
there, and there are key vacancies not only now at the
Secretary level but also some of the Undersecretary positions.
The CIO is open.
So I think Congress should be very concerned and focused on
getting proper leadership over there, and then make sure that
there is effective follow-up to resolve their problems. I think
our veterans deserve no less.
Ms. Kelly. I definitely agree, and I guess that was my next
question, what more can Congress do ----
Mr. Dodaro. A lot, a lot, and I would be happy to work and
have our team work with the Congress in doing this. We have a
great deal of knowledge. Nikki Clowers is here. She is our
expert in the Veterans' Administration. We have been working
with the VA committees as well. But I think Congress' role in
this whole area is very pivotal.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you for your honesty, and we need to take
you up on your offer.
I yield back.
Mr. Russell. The gentle lady yields back.
It is my privilege to recognize the gentleman from Alabama,
Mr. Palmer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Dodaro, first of all, let me thank you and
your staff for the outstanding work and cooperation on some
critical issues that you have brought to this committee's
attention on numerous occasions that is dealing with improper
payments, and also the tax gap. In that regard, I would like to
ask you what is the last year that the IRS reported on tax gap?
Mr. Dodaro. I think it was based on 2008. Yes, 2008
information, and that estimate was a net tax gap of a little
over $400 billion as an annual.
Mr. Palmer. It is $406 billion.
Mr. Dodaro. Right.
Mr. Palmer. They don't report annually. It is on a periodic
basis. Is there any rhyme or reason that determines when they
report that?
Mr. Dodaro. No. You know, initially, years ago, they didn't
report an estimate. It was a GAO recommendation that required
them that they finally implemented to come up with it. In all
fairness, it requires a lot of effort and time, and they
certainly haven't had excess resources lately to do it. But I
think it could be done on a more regular basis. Right now, it
is just dependent on them. I mean, Congress could set a
reasonable interval for them to update that information,
particularly given the changes that have been made in the tax
law recently. I would hope after a period of time and some
experience, they update it.
Mr. Palmer. I would appreciate it if you would add some
recommendations on what that timetable ought to be, and if you
would provide them to my office. In that regard, that is one of
the points that I have been raising about the tax reform, that
one of the main objectives was to reduce the complexity of the
tax code in order to reduce the uncollected taxes, to reduce
the tax gap. You have made numerous recommendations that I
think we need to implement, the IRS needs to implement, and
Congress needs to exercise oversight over it, because it is one
of these things where I tell people we have moments here when I
think my head will explode, and when we talk about $800 billion
deficits, and half of that could have been erased by collecting
all the taxes, plus the interest on that that we are having to
borrow, that drives me nuts, along with my next topic, which
you are well familiar with, and that is improper payments. We
are, again, very fortunate to have the expertise of the GAO
available to try to work out a reasonable solution.
I want to talk a little bit about some specifics on the
improper payments. The premium tax credit improper payments, we
don't really talk about that a lot. You have a number in your
report of $35 billion. Is that savings, or is that the net
cost?
Mr. Dodaro. That is the total cost.
Mr. Palmer. Okay. Do you have any idea of what we might
expect in savings?
Mr. Dodaro. No, not really, yet. They really haven't done a
lot of the proper assessments and have much experience in that
area yet to come up with any estimates. I think it would be
good to press them to move forward in that area, and then
congressional encouragement would be helpful.
Mr. Palmer. When we talk about encouragement, people
generally interpret that to mean negative. I think we ought to
take a more positive approach to this on the whole spectrum of
improper payments, and you touched on this earlier with the IRS
with their outdated IT systems. That is a problem throughout
the Federal Government.
If you look at the improper payments, and this is the work
that your staff has done, over 20 percent of the problem is
antiquated data systems. I think that lends itself to other
errors on the administrative side, which is another 30-
something percent. So if we could deal with this in a more
positive way, and one of the things that I am thinking about
doing is that the savings that we get by eliminating improper
payments might go back into replacing antiquated IT systems,
then I think it needs to be done Federal Government-wide so
that you have the interfaces that are necessary. It is one of
the problems with Social Security. What do you think of that?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, I think that is a very good idea. The
systems are a key part of this, particularly if you wanted to
prevent things from happening up front. But there also has to
be good data sharing to go along with that. You can have great
systems, but if they are not allowed to share data--like, for
example, one of our recommendations is that the Congress direct
the Social Security Administration to give the full death
master file to the Treasury Department. I mean, it doesn't make
any sense to me that we have a ``Do Not Pay'' list, and we have
one department that has the most comprehensive list of deceased
people that won't give it to the Treasury Department because
they believe it can't be shared. Another example is in our
Railroad Retirement Board. They are using earnings data that is
two or three years old from IRS, and they need access to the
new hire database.
So I think a combination of proper incentives, and I am
glad to see the Administration set a goal for reducing improper
payments, and they have IT modernization on the President's
management agenda, but there has to be sharing of information
to go along with it to really, I think, have a comprehensive
package.
Mr. Palmer. Well, my goal for reducing improper payments is
considerably higher than the Administration's. I have had this
conversation with OMB Director Mulvaney, who is a dear friend.
But again, I commend you. I am one of these odd birds that
looks forward to the GAO reports. There are some people who
look forward to the next great novel. I look forward to the
next great GAO report.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Russell. The gentleman yields back.
It is my privilege now to recognize the gentle lady from
Michigan, Ms. Lawrence, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lawrence. Thank you.
I just want to say publicly, Mr. Dodaro, thank you and your
staff for putting together this report. As my colleagues have
mentioned, it is impressive that your recommendations have led
to $178 billion in taxpayer savings over the past years.
One example that I really want on the record is one of the
past recommendations that has helped to make a difference to
the people in my state. In 2016, the GAO recommended that the
Treasury relocate up to $2 billion from an underused program
and move it toward the hardest hit fund. As a result of that,
it went a long way for cities like Detroit to remove blight and
to take care of the neighborhoods. So I want you to really have
that sense of what you do is making a difference, and I just
want to say thank you to your staff.
One of the areas, Mr. Dodaro, is IRS for me, as well. Major
changes to the tax laws will hit everyone in 2019, and I want
to know if the IRS is helping families understand the impact,
and especially low-income families. There are needed taxpayer
assistance and outreach, and there is a proposed $23 million
cut to IRS. Can you describe GAO's current efforts to monitor
the IRS and what it plans to do over the next years to ensure
that the community has the support that they need in low-income
areas?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. For a number of years we have had an
outstanding recommendation that IRS needed to improve their
customer service strategy. We are looking at their efforts to
do that now and the implementation of the new tax law. Ms.
Jessica Lucas-Judy here is our expert in the IRS, and I will
ask her to elaborate on what we are doing.
Ms. Lawrence. Okay. Thank you.
Ms. Lucas-Judy. For customer service, we have said that
they need to have a comprehensive strategy, and they have put
together a draft. So we are looking at the extent to which it
lays out specific, realistic targets for phone service and
correspondence and, more importantly even, that it lays out a
road map for them of what resources are needed to get them
there.
In addition, as Mr. Dodaro said, we are also looking at
their implementation of the changes to the tax law. As you
know, there are quite a few things that the IRS has to do.
Ms. Lawrence. Quite a few.
Ms. Lucas-Judy. And so we are looking at how they are
communicating those changes, how they are making decisions
about prioritizing.
Ms. Lawrence. So, with all the vacancies that you outlined
and the challenges that we see, if the cuts are made to IRS,
when do you alert Congress that we are getting ready to step
into a crisis? I understand the yearly report, and you even
stated that our response rate is that Congress has addressed
about 42 percent of your recommendations. How do you bring to
our attention are the committees looking at the
recommendations? And specifically, what is the impact if we
don't act on these recommendations? You give your report, but
we are only looking at 42 percent of them.
Mr. Dodaro. I think, first of all, we try to alert the
Congress through our reports. We testify before a wide range of
congressional committees every year. We brief congressional
staff every day.
Ms. Lawrence. Every day.
Mr. Dodaro. Every day on our work. I mean, we have close
working relationships with virtually all the committees and the
Congress, about half of the subcommittees that we do work for.
We do about 800 requests a year from the Congress. So we are
constantly trying to alert the Congress to emerging problems
and challenges and encouraging them to implement our
recommendations.
Ms. Lawrence. How do you alert Congress?
Mr. Dodaro. Pardon me?
Ms. Lawrence. What format do you use to alert Congress?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, we have two formats. We have this annual
report. We have regular reports that we issue virtually every
day on specific topics. Last year we issued about 700 reports
to the Congress, with over 1,400 recommendations. And then
every two years we issue a high-risk list of the highest risk
in the Federal Government.
Ms. Lawrence. That is what I wanted to hear.
Mr. Dodaro. And if there is something that I think rises to
that level out of the interim two-year period, we do a special
announcement. We just did one in January on personnel security
clearances across the government. I am very concerned. There
are 700,000 backlog of clearances that are not being made. It
is not clear how the transfer is going to work between OPM and
DOD on a number of issues. They don't have quality standards
yet in place, metrics for the security clearances. The timing
is still not good in terms of them getting it done in a timely
manner. So I think this is a big national security issue, and I
put it on the high-risk list on the cycle.
The last high-risk list I raised the 2020 Census. I am very
concerned ----
Ms. Lawrence. I am very concerned.
Mr. Dodaro.--about the 2020 Census. So we do regular
hearings on that, as well.
At GAO, we try to keep the Congress very informed about our
views on risk and what needs to be done to address the risk.
Now, the recommendations that have not been implemented, quite
frankly, we are leaving tens of billions of dollars on the
table in savings that could be made. I think the Congress could
be more aggressive in their oversight of the agencies to ensure
effective implementation of our recommendations, and I would
encourage that, and GAO will support you.
Ms. Lawrence. Thank you. My time is up. I just want to say
to the Chairman that the high-risk list should be something
that is a priority for us to bring forward in our hearings, as
well. Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Dodaro. You are welcome.
Mr. Russell. The gentle lady yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Comer, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If time permits, I have questions pertaining to two vastly
different subjects. The first would be the Social Security
disability appeals process. Then second would be about STEM. I
don't think you can get further apart than those two issues,
but I am going to try in my 5 minutes to address those two
issues with questions.
First of all, in Kentucky, to say that the Social Security
disability program is abused would be an understatement. We
have certain counties in Kentucky where you drive down the road
and every billboard is a disability insurance law firm. Some of
those counties have as many as one in four adults between the
ages of 18 and 63 that are drawing full disability, and then we
have counties in Kentucky where that number is smaller than 1
out of 20. So it just kind of depends on the location in the
state and the number of people that are involved in that
industry in Kentucky.
But one of the things that we deal with in my congressional
office is, obviously, case work. We have people that are truly
disabled that we are trying to get through the process, and the
appeals process sometimes takes a long time, and these are
legitimate people who really are disabled who have paid into
the Social Security system that are trying to get their
disability insurance. They get frustrated because they know
people that have probably abused the system in the past. It is
just one of the things that we spend a lot of time with my
caseworkers dealing with.
I know that the Social Security Administration has reviewed
this, and in 2017 the GAO recommended that SSA systematically
evaluate its quality assurance reviews and take steps to reduce
or better manage unnecessary overlap among them.
My first question is, there are five separate quality
review processes. Why does SSA have five separate quality
assurance review processes?
Mr. Dodaro. That is the question we asked and asked them to
take a look at. We don't think they need all of them.
Barbara Bovbjerg is our expert in this area, and actually
she is our expert in STEM too. So while you have two different
topics, we have one expert to cover it for you.
Mr. Comer. That is great.
Mr. Dodaro. Barbara?
Ms. Bovbjerg. We were surprised that they had five
different processes across a couple of different components at
SSA. They all have the same overall goal, which is to make the
appeals result more accurate and to help the administrative law
judges do a better job. They look at the cases a little
differently, but they sample in roughly the same way. So they
can actually be looking at the same case in more than one
quality assurance review.
So we thought they should really look at that. It is not a
lot of money in the context where we are talking about Defense
and VA health. It is $11 million. But we thought that they
could coordinate and potentially improve the quality assurance
process as they do that. They have taken some steps. They have
created another component in which four of these five are in
that component.
Mr. Comer. So are they currently taking steps to review the
process?
Ms. Bovbjerg. They are taking steps. They are not there,
but they have just begun.
Mr. Comer. How else could the Social Security
Administration resources better utilize in terms of processing
disability claims?
Ms. Bovbjerg. They have put a lot of emphasis at the
appeals level because what you are seeing is it can take more
than 600 days now that people are kept waiting for an appeals
decision, and that is a long time when you are not working and
waiting.
Mr. Comer. And legal fees are piling up, as well.
Ms. Bovbjerg. Yes, and they have done things--for example,
they are taking cases--they may take a case from Kentucky, and
if the Kentucky administrative law judge group is really,
really backlogged, they will send that case to another ALJ
group to try to move things along. We actually have a report
coming out on that in the next couple of months.
They are doing a number of things. But what happens is they
focus on appeals, and they take their eye off the initial
decision-making ball, and then people start waiting longer for
an initial decision. So we are trying to get them to look at it
holistically.
Mr. Dodaro. And, Congressman, we would be happy to give you
a comprehensive list of every recommendation we have for the
Social Security disability process, including appeals and
initial claims. This has been on our high-risk list--I just
mentioned that--for well over a decade. So I think this could
be an important issue. And it is not only Social Security, it
is VA as well. That is on our high-risk list, too. I just
testified at their appeals reform hearing that we had. So we
will give you a comprehensive list.
Mr. Comer. Okay. Thank you.
My time has expired, so I didn't get to ask the questions
about STEM, but I appreciate your interest and look forward to
getting that report, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dodaro. I would be happy to give the answers to the
STEM for the record, or meet with you separately, Congressman.
Mr. Comer. Sure.
Mr. Russell. The gentleman yields back. We may have some
time for follow-on questions, if you would like.
I now recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, General Dodaro. Good to see you again. Let me say,
I think the high-risk list is one of the most important things
you all do in terms of giving us guidance and throwing down red
flags in areas of concern, and we want to try to redouble our
efforts to work with GAO and your team to address those issues.
One of the issues, of course, that was on that list that I
took seriously when I came to Congress, among many, was the
whole issue of how the Federal Government manages and procures
information technology. I am just wondering, in terms of
duplicative cost--and I see you have been joined by Mr. Powner,
who has worked diligently with us on implementation of
legislative vehicles designed to address that concern you have
highlighted, and we are going to do more. We are drafting a
bill right now that we will be working with you on, and we want
to make sure that scorecard captures progress, or lack thereof.
But could you talk a little bit about the role of IT in
terms of duplication, duplicative cost? Because we look at
legacy systems, people look and say, my God, we are spending
$96 billion a year on IT in the Federal Government, but so much
of that is designed to simply keep Band-Aids and wire together
to keep legacy systems running, but also there are duplicative
costs. You have multiple email systems, some of which don't
talk to each other. You have all kinds of software, some of
which is outdated and so forth.
So I just wondered if you could, either one of you or both
of you, talk about that, because that is something we can do
something about tomorrow, in theory. We are trying our best to
create a legislative framework to push that along, but I would
like to hear your thoughts on that.
Mr. Dodaro. That is definitely a potential area for
billions of dollars in savings. Data center consolidations--
there were over 12,000 data centers when we started this
initiative in OMB and working with the Congress before. Several
thousand have been closed. By the end of this year, hopefully
over 7,000 will be closed. That is billions of dollars in
savings. But even on the existing data centers, they are not
fully utilized if you look at their performance metrics, both
from a server standpoint as well as the facility itself,
software inventories, new systems, consolidations.
I will ask Mr. Powner, who knows the details, to give you a
little bit more details. But I think this is a target-rich area
for the Congress, and we are poised to work with you to try to
identify more opportunities for savings.
Dave?
Mr. Powner. Representative Connolly, if you start with data
centers, we have saved about $4 billion to date, and your
oversight has been instrumental with follow-up hearings, with
the scorecard. We have had five, and there is another one
scheduled next month.
But when you really look at data center consolidation,
there is a lot more on the table, as Comptroller General Dodaro
mentioned, billions more. DOD alone, when we started data
center consolidation, had an estimate of $4.8 billion in
savings. They have only saved a couple of hundred million. So
there is a huge opportunity there.
When you mentioned the duplication, we saved about $2
billion on duplicative email HR systems and the like. We still
have a long way to go there. We are well aware, based on the
work we are doing for you on individual requests and your
scorecard, that there are many more opportunities to reduce
those duplicative commodity systems.
Mr. Connolly. I do want to say I think this is a great
example of what you were talking about in response to my
colleagues, the collaboration actually, not just guidance from
but hands-on collaboration from GAO and this committee in
trying to effectuate positive change that frees up dollars,
saves dollars, and makes the government more secure and more
efficient. And I want to applaud Mr. Powner and you, Mr.
Dodaro, for taking that lead and doing it. I think that is
really terribly important.
Mr. Dodaro. It is also a good example, if I might add,
Congressman, of the importance of congressional follow-up.
Mr. Connolly. Yes.
Mr. Dodaro. And I think compliments are due to you, Mr.
Hurd, Mr. Meadows, Ms. Kelly, for your constant follow-up in
these activities, and that is what can be yielded, billions in
savings, more efficient operations, but it requires that
commitment. We are happy to do our part.
Mr. Connolly. I would just end with a thought. I was
listening to one of the questions about how do you keep us
informed on this list, and it may be that we may want to look
at a mid-year reminder. You gave us 70 recommendations. We have
acted on 30. There are still 40 more to go. We estimate that
could save $10 billion, because our attention span up here, we
have been accused of having a very short attention span, and I
think that is very unfair, but a little reminder list might
help. So we might want to work on some mechanisms so we keep
those issues in front of us, because I don't think it is always
willful ignoring of the recommendations. I think sometimes we
just, in the hustle and bustle of life in this town, we lose
focus.
Mr. Dodaro. We would be happy to do that, and I have also
encouraged--we do update the list with the beginning of each
new Congress, and I have encouraged particularly oversight
committees to have a series of hearings on the individual areas
that I think would be helpful. But this year we started, and I
wanted to do updates on a couple of critical areas. So we are
due to have an update on the cyber security issue, critical
infrastructure protection, protecting personally identifiable
information, later this summer. We will make sure to do that.
Mr. Connolly. We look forward to working with you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Russell. The gentleman yields back.
I am pleased now to recognize the gentleman from
Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome back, Mr. Dodaro. You have been doing great work
for a long time, and we really appreciate it. There is a
definite harmony between the work on this committee and the
work that your folks do.
I want to raise an issue regarding retroactive
classification. We talk about the information we get in order
to make decisions that are necessary. In Afghanistan, we have
come upon this change that was introduced by the Trump
Administration recently where the information that we usually
get from the Special Inspector General for Afghan
Reconstruction used to send us publicly available information
quarterly about troop size, about the Afghan National Army
performance assessments, casualties, operational readiness,
actual and authorized strength figures. We had these ghost
units. We are paying 75 percent of the freight in Afghanistan
right now. We give them $5 billion a year, American taxpayer
money, to pay their troops, and we cannot discuss publicly and
the public doesn't get information about the fraud that was
going on there for a very long time, and may still be going on.
We have people on the ground there, but we don't get
information on the trained and untrained personnel. They have
even classified U.S. air strikes now in Afghanistan.
So there is a whole swath of information that under
President Bush and President Obama, that information came
directly to the public and to Congress so we could talk about
it. We have folks on the ground there, and we require that
information to act decisively on behalf of our sons and
daughters in uniform, and we need information on that war. We
are at war.
So Mr. Cummings and I wrote a letter to the Trump
Administration saying that we wanted that rescinded.
Could you talk a little bit about the obstruction and the
difficulty for you and for Congress in doing our jobs with the
lack of information coming out of DOD right now, and also
coming out of Afghanistan?
Mr. Dodaro. I asked Cathy Berrick to join me. She is our
Defense expert, so I will ask her to give her views on this.
But I would say right after 9/11 we saw a change in the
classification approach in the Federal Government to classify
more documents. After that occurred, we were asked to look at
the classification practices of a number of agencies and to
look at whether or not they were being consistent and what
their procedures were for classification. They seemed to be
settling down and an equilibrium in place over time, but what I
have seen over the years is that sort of approach ebbs and
flows over periods of time. I think it is very legitimate
questions that Congress should ask about the level of
classification.
We don't have classification authority at GAO. We are bound
by law. We have to treat the information that we use in the
same manner as the agencies that we receive the information
from. What we try to do is produce a detailed classified report
and then a public version of virtually everything that we do,
but it is not easy to do that and to get the classification
approaches through DOD and State and other agencies, Homeland
Security. It is not just DOD.
But Cathy can give you a little bit more insight. We would
be happy to work with you on this issue.
Mr. Lynch. Please. Thank you.
Ms. Berrick. As you mentioned, there is an initiative
within the Defense Department to look more closely at
information they allow to go into the public domain, and we are
certainly experiencing that on our products when we send them
to the Department for a sensitivity review. Just earlier this
week we issued a public version of a classified report on DOD's
first deployment of the F-35 to Japan that identified some
significant issues that are in the classified domain.
I will make a couple of points. First, as we can certainly
still brief you all and the congressional staff on the results
of our classified work given that they have clearances, so we
will continue to do that. We also have been asked, given this
concern, to look specifically at classification within the
intelligence community, how they are handling that for the
intelligence agencies, half of which fall into the Defense
Department. So we will be looking at that in detail and
providing recommendations to you all. In my experience as well,
this tends to ebb and flow as Congress raises concerns, as the
press asks more questions. We will see what, if any, changes
the Department makes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
I do have a classified briefing in the SCIF tomorrow
afternoon with the Special Inspector for Afghan Reconstruction,
but obviously I can't discuss that with my constituents, and
they are paying the bills.
But thank you both for your wonderful work. I really
appreciate it. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Russell. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from South Carolina.
Mr. Sanford. I thank the Chair.
I am going to get into questions in just a moment on both
VA medical supply and DOD headquarters reductions and workforce
requirements based on that not really being covered thus far in
the hearing. I would love to hear your thoughts on both of
those.
But before I do, I am just struck by the fact that Milton
Friedman once observed that the only way to make government
more efficient was to make it smaller, that fundamental to the
democratic process was inefficiency. If we wanted efficiency,
we would go out and get a king or a dictator. They can be quite
efficient. We would lose the open political system, but the
back and forth, one man's gold is another man's dirt, and vice
versa, that there is just built-in inefficiency.
So I am just struck in reading this report, when you talk
about tens and tens and tens of billions of dollars of
discovered waste, and that is not even the undiscovered portion
that might be out there--was Milton Friedman right?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, I am not an economist by training, but I
am an auditor, and I have been a student of government for 45
years, and I would say that when things don't work in the
government, a new thing is created, and the old thing remains.
That cumulative process over time adds clearly to the
inefficiencies in government operations, and there is a lack of
attention to routinely addressing these issues both in the
executive branch and in the legislative branch. I think both
branches can do much more to make government more efficient,
and we are happy to help in that regard.
Mr. Sanford. And I appreciate your work on that front. So I
will take that as a yes, that Milton Friedman was right, that
ultimately an important measure toward making government more
efficient is, in fact, making it smaller, because indeed you
used the word ``built-in.'' There are built-in inefficiencies,
and I think we all acknowledge those in looking at this
process.
Getting down into the weeds, in the few minutes that I
have, I don't know what you would rather stress, but I would
love to get your thoughts on both the VA medical supply, given
its importance to a lot of veterans out there, and/or DOD
headquarters, going back to how you just framed it, that
oftentimes we come up with the new but we still leave the old.
Some of the headquarters are redundant from a need standpoint,
thoughts on that as well. I would be curious to hear thoughts
on both of those.
Mr. Dodaro. Sure. First on the VA medical and surgical
supplies area, they started an initiative that was intended to
save about $150 billion, and this was to consolidate purchasing
across all their medical centers. But they limited the number
of items that they wanted to collect, they had no over-arching
strategy, they were supposed to involve the clinicians in
deciding how to do this and they didn't do that as much as they
should have, and thus they weren't very successful with their
initiative.
So we made a number of recommendations on how to address
that and actually achieve some of those savings. So they are
starting to move out, adding more commodities that could be
made. The VA medical centers operate in a very decentralized
operation, and certainly consolidating purchasing power across
a regional and a national basis would save tens of billions of
dollars over there in those supplies and operations, but you
have to have an organized, stable leadership and approach to
realize those savings over time.
So I think we are trying to get them into a better path
now, but it will require a lot of follow-up to achieve those
savings.
Mr. Sanford. Can I be really rude? Just because I am down
to a minute and 7 seconds.
Mr. Dodaro. Okay, yes.
Mr. Sanford. I would love if you would quickly address the
other, as well.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, I was. I was just going to move to that.
Mr. Sanford. Okay, I'm sorry.
Mr. Dodaro. We are in the same cadence.
Headquarters consolidation at DOD, a lot of money there.
What we found was that DOD set a goal to reduce it by 20
percent, but our question was 20 percent of what? You really
didn't have a good definition, a good baseline figure. So they
need to have more figures. They don't have a good accounting
for how many contractors they have at DOD. So we have said,
look, if you want to have that goal, you need a better
strategy. You have to set a baseline, you have to track it over
time, you have to identify what kind of workforce mix you
really want in terms of military/civilian and contract support
activities. So they are focused on trying to improve and gain
efficiencies in that area. We are giving them continuing
advice.
Mr. Sanford. Thank you again for your work.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Russell. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
DeSaulnier, for 5 minutes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have two subject areas. Hopefully I can get to both of
them. One of them I don't have great expertise on. I will offer
that to you, and I hope you can respond to it.
So, in a 2017 GAO report on the DOE and how it deals with
nuclear waste, there was a quote that said ``tens of billions
of dollars by adapting alternative approaches to treat a
portion of its low-activity radioactive waste.'' Most of this
is done at two sites, Savannah and Washington. I would just
like to know, without trying to go through the details and
trying to express expertise in a technical matter that I am not
familiar with, whether the DOE is responding to your
suggestions to go with one type rather than the one that is
more costly.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. Actually, congressional action will be
needed to help them in that area. Congress has acted to allow
the waste, the low-level nuclear waste at Savannah River, to be
treated in a different manner. So they can actually use grout,
which is cement, basically. At Hanford, everything is to be
treated as high level, which means it needs to be vitrified,
vitrification, turned into glass, basically, and then stored in
that way. That is a process that hasn't been perfected. They
are still working on that, and some of that will need to be
done that way at Hanford.
But there is this supplemental low-activity waste that they
don't really have a strategy for yet, and we think they could
use grout to do that. It could save a lot of money, tens of
billions of dollars, and it could be done faster. Since
Congress set the policy at Hanford, the technologies have
improved. We convened an expert panel to help us in that area,
so we think Congress should give DOE the flexibility to do
that. It will treat that supplemental low-activity waste faster
and cheaper.
Mr. DeSaulnier. And DOE, in your discussions, is not
arguing with your findings?
Mr. Dodaro. Mark is our expert here.
Mr. Gaffigan. They have not argued with that. In fact, I
think they would like the flexibility to do that. There are 54
million gallons of this waste at Hanford. None of it has been
treated. They have spent almost $19 billion so far. Only 5
million of that is high level, and to vitrify it all is not
necessary according to the experts. We are not experts on all
this stuff either, but we convened a National Academy panel, as
Mr. Dodaro said, in May of 2016, and they agreed that some of
that waste could be treated with the grouting.
Mr. DeSaulnier. So literally, they are waiting for
congressional ----
Mr. Gaffigan. They want that, because they have a
commitment to vitrify about a third, up to half of the total
waste, but the other waste, the supplemental, they haven't made
a decision yet on. They would like that option, the
flexibility, to go either way.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Okay. And on a totally separate subject,
and I know there have been a lot of questions about DOD but I
just wanted to get an understanding of where your role might be
in the future. My interest was piqued when we had a hearing
with the business advisory group and people who have dealt with
DOD oversight on a financial level for a long time. They had
McKenzie do a very basic oversight. They identified what they
believed was $125 billion of waste. So given it is our biggest
department, given concerns about procurement that you have
talked about, the technical levels of really good investments
but letting the public know the cost/benefit for these
investments in a world that is changing, and the back of the
office things that McKenzie identified, and on top of that then
having the first full audit that the IG is looking at.
So my concern is I know your roles are different, but to
the degree that you all are responsible for identifying waste
and more efficiency, how do we, hopefully, get more
accountability into the DOD? How do you see your role being
able to support the IG's efforts and the advisory board's
efforts?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, first of all, with regard to the
financial audit, our responsibility is to audit the financial
statements of the Federal Government. We have created a network
across the government where the Inspector Generals have
responsibility for doing the individual audits. We review their
work. We agree on a methodology. We stay in contact with them.
So we use their work to help us make our audit of the overall
statements of the Federal Government.
Some parts of the Federal Government we do ourselves. We do
all revenue collection, all the debt, auditing all the debt,
which unfortunately is the largest item on our balance sheet,
but that is a separate hearing ----
Mr. DeSaulnier. If I could interrupt, that is sort of what
I am getting at. Since this is new, this full financial audit,
you will have some responsibility for overseeing that so that
is done on the appropriate timeline, and there was best
practices asserted in that.
Mr. Dodaro. Oh, yes. We have regular meetings with the
independent auditors that have been hired for the services and
with DOD IG. I have met with Glenn Fine, the Acting IG. We are
very involved. We have a clear delineation of roles and
responsibilities. But GAO definitely has a role to play and
responsibilities in that area.
On the other business systems in DOD, about one-third of
our high-risk areas are DOD business practices--weapons systems
acquisition, contract management, inventory management, supply
chain operations, infrastructure. We are also reviewing their
new management approaches. They have a new chief management
officer now. That is something we have recommended for years
that they put in place. I am meeting tomorrow with the new
person who has been in that area. I have met with the Deputy
Secretary of Defense. I have met with all three service
secretaries. I have met with the comptroller over there. So we
are very involved in trying to help them achieve some of those
savings.
On the Defense Business Board, I am an observer on that
board, so I know what they are doing, and they use a lot of our
work to do their studies.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Mr. Dodaro. Sure.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Russell. The gentleman yields back.
We appreciate the depth of expertise that all of our
witnesses have.
To drill down more on the Hanford versus Savannah River, in
your report this is really the big-ticket item, tens of
billions, $40 billion. Just kind of doing the math between
facilities, it might be built, might not be built, processes
that occurred, those are huge sums.
So DOE, as I understand it, then, has no current authority
bound by law. It would take congressional action for them to
make a decision on vitrification versus grout. Is that correct?
Mr. Gaffigan. Yes. They have an order where they have
treated some waste at other sites through the grouting process.
But back in 2002 they were challenged in court, and they sought
clarification. So in 2004, the Congress clarified that, yes,
they did have that authority for everywhere except Hanford.
Mr. Russell. Why was it left out?
Mr. Gaffigan. Because Hanford at that time was not
convinced--the State of Washington, of course, is also a player
here--was not convinced that the technology was as good. They
had some concerns, for example, that DOE did grouting at Rocky
Flats outside of Denver, Colorado in the early '90s, and it
fell apart. In fact, when I first started my career almost 30
years ago, I did some of that work. But they have gotten better
at that, and some of the technologies have improved. So we
think it is an option, and at Savannah they have grouted 4
million gallons of the low-level waste successfully, as well as
4 million of the high-level waste.
Mr. Russell. And not had the legal challenges or ----
Mr. Gaffigan. They had the authority clarified by Congress
in 2004, and they have successfully done that.
Mr. Russell. I see. So if the committee or others, if we
were to take congressional action, then it would need to
specifically name Hanford as being on the same par?
Mr. Gaffigan. It would clarify that for them, yes.
Mr. Russell. What legal hurdles do you think that would
face?
Mr. Dodaro. I don't think there would be legal or ----
Mr. Russell. Because the other facilities are using this.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, right. You already have precedent at
Savannah River. I think, of course, the congressional
delegation from Washington needs to be involved in the process
because there are other perception issues that need to be dealt
with there. I think this evolved with good people making the
best decisions at the time and the maturity of the technology
at the time. But the maturity of the technologies involved now
is a different issue, so I think Congress could take a
different approach.
One area we added to the high-risk list with the last
update was environmental liabilities for the Federal
Government. Reported estimates now to clean up nuclear waste in
these other areas are approaching a half a trillion dollars. We
are spending tens of billions of dollars every year to clean up
this activity, but the liability keeps growing, as opposed to
going down. So there needs to be risk-based, cost-effective
strategies put in place, and that is why we suggested this
particular issue at Hanford be revisited.
Mr. Russell. And I think that is an excellent
recommendation. In fact, if this committee were to do nothing
else other than save $40 billion in the course of this term, we
would be doing great service to the republic.
With regard to other big-ticket items, $16.2 billion paid
in fraudulent EIC payments, $1.7 billion paid in identity theft
fraud. It is one thing to have duplication and fragmentation,
but to pay thieves and just calling it improper payments is not
only improper but it is an insult to every single taxpayer that
is out there.
Can you speak to any of your recommendations where delays
of payments could help buy time to give proper identification
and catch these frauds and prevent it? And then you have those
who say, oh, no, no, no, no, you can't do that because we don't
want to affect the economy and people want their refunds. Well,
as an American taxpayer, I think anyone out there, would you
accept a slight delay in your refund so that the thief next
door is not taking somebody else's money? I think most
Americans would be amenable to that. But can you speak to that
for a moment?
Mr. Dodaro. Oh, sure, I would be happy to. When identity
theft first came on the scene, in addition to the Earned Income
Tax Credit problem that they have with fraud and abuse--first
of all, tax administration has been on our high-risk list since
it was created back in the 1990s. So it has been a problem for
a long time.
Now, what we recommended to the Congress was that the IRS
get W-2s from employers earlier in the process. They are
processing tax returns in February and March largely, starting
maybe even earlier than that, but they weren't getting the W-2s
until April. So the crooks file early, okay?
Mr. Russell. Sure, in January get a refund, be gone, and
the actual person files.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. So Congress acted on our recommendation.
They implemented it. The W-2s now come in earlier, except there
are still a lot that come in in paper form that they can't
process quickly enough. So we have recommendations to encourage
Congress to mandate more electronic filing of W-2s from
employers. Right now the threshold is set at 250 employees. We
think it could be done at 10 in that area. IRS's own estimates
are that they could save $300 million by delaying it a couple
of weeks to do that.
Now, I think we have suggested IRS do a cost/benefit
analysis and share it with the Congress and see if we can get
agreement. I think you could have a phased approach over time
that allows them to delay the returns until more electronic
information can come in, and then I think over time if you can
get more electronic information in, they can get their systems
up to date, they won't need the extra time in that approach. So
that is kind of what we are looking at.
Mr. Russell. And we really need to assist in these
findings. Your previous recommendations have helped, but we
see, as technology advances, there are a lot of crooks that
leverage it, and the IRS is not the favorite agency of the
American public, but we need to try to help them with the right
tools and have the public respond, and Congress certainly needs
to take the lead on that.
I am out of time for my initial round of questions.
I would like to recognize the gentle lady from New York,
and then if we have time available we will go to a couple of
additional questions.
The gentle lady is recognized.
Ms. Mahoney. Thank you so much.
Welcome, and thank you so much for everything that GAO does
for the people of America.
I want to talk to you about the boat stations of the Coast
Guard and your report on them. The Coast Guard's mandate is to
prevent the loss of life, injury, and property damage in the
maritime environment through its search and rescue efforts. It
maintains over 200 stations with some combination of boats and
helicopters along the U.S. coastline, and we are extremely
grateful and appreciative of the hard work and sacrifice of
these men and women in the Coast Guard.
But this year's report highlights a 2017 GAO report on
actions needed for the U.S. Coast Guard to close stations that
are identified as overlapping and being a duplication. Are you
familiar with this report?
Mr. Dodaro. I am.
Ms. Mahoney. And the GAO found in your report that the
Coast Guard has a sound process for analyzing the boat
stations, and following this process the Coast Guard and its
contractor wrote, and I quote, that they ``identified 18
unnecessarily duplicative boat stations with overlapping
coverage that could be permanently closed without negatively
affecting their ability to meet the two-hour response and
search time.''
Are you familiar with these findings?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, I am.
Ms. Mahoney. And in 2017, GAO reported that the Coast
Guard's leadership still believed that these findings were
valid. Is that true?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Ms. Mahoney. So closing the unnecessary duplication of
stations could save up to $290 million, they say. That is a lot
of money over 30 years.
So, Mr. Dodaro, if that is true, then why are these
duplicative stations still open?
Mr. Dodaro. There has been some resistance from the local
communities, and there has been some resistance in the Congress
as a result of that, and that has prevented it from being
closed so far.
Now, the one thing I would want to point out, in addition
to the savings, there is an important operational aspect that
the Coast Guard points out, and that is the fact that because
so many of these stations aren't as actively busy, people
aren't getting the training necessary to stay up to speed. We
raised this issue at the Navy about not adequately having time
for training, and as a result, partly as a result of that, they
had some accidents with their operations over time. They need
to have proper training.
So, to me, this is not only saving money but allowing the
Coast Guard people, who we have great respect for as well,
allow their people to get proper training. So I would encourage
Congress to allow the closure of these stations.
Ms. Mahoney. Well, I had one closed in my district. Of
course, no one liked to see it closed. It was a popular service
that was in the district I am privileged to represent, but we
closed it because it was no longer needed. We haven't closed
any of these since 1988.
What are the obstacles that stop these things from being
closed?
Mr. Dodaro. I will ask George Scott, our expert in this
area, to address that, Congresswoman.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. As we reported last year, the Coast
Guard has a sound, rigorous process for identifying which
stations to close. Since 1973, they have made eight attempts to
close a series of stations, and as the Comptroller General
pointed out, in each instance either there has been opposition
at the local level and/or congressional intervention which has
prevented the Coast Guard from following through on making the
closures.
One of the points we make and that Gene made as well, it is
not just about saving money but there are also operational
impacts. For example, the Coast Guard spent over $2 million to
repair a station a few years ago damaged by Hurricane Sandy
that was on the closure list. So again, in addition to
diverting resources from existing stations, we are actually
spending money that we wouldn't have to spend if they were
allowed to move forward with closing those stations.
I actually sort of view this as a good news story. If
Congress does nothing, no action is actually needed, then the
Coast Guard can actually follow through with its plan to move
forward with closing these stations. And we also made
recommendations for the Coast Guard to, once they have a plan
in place with the timeframes to close these stations, that they
also turn their attention to some air stations where there is
also some potential duplication and overlap in air stations.
They are not quite as far along in their process yet, but I
think allowing them to move forward with this first round of
closures will really set the stage for them to follow through
with potential analysis of closing duplicative air stations as
well.
Ms. Mahoney. This seems ridiculous that they have
identified unnecessary facilities that are costing $260
million. I remember when we had this problem with the military
bases. We had a bipartisan effort where we did a bill that once
the Commission came back and said that these bases had to be
closed, Congress no longer had a role in it, it had to be
closed, and maybe that is what we have to do here. Everybody is
going to fight for services that are in their community. That
is our job. So if they are trying to close something in a
community, it is jobs, it is activity, it is economic activity
in the area, it is going to be fought tooth and nail by members
of Congress.
So I respectfully request the Chairman to look at the base
closing bill and see if maybe we need to do the same thing with
the Coast Guard stations, because we are incapable of closing
something that has been there for a number of years and that
people like, even though it is not needed, is unnecessary, and
is wasting taxpayer funds, especially when you say they are
being repaired when they are not even being used. It is sort of
ridiculous.
Anyway, my time is up, and I thank you for yielding to me,
and thank you very much. Good to see you again.
Mr. Russell. The gentle lady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Palmer for some follow-up.
Mr. Palmer. I will be brief.
In the supplemental security income, you identify a 40
percent increase in individuals under age 18. Is there any
insight into the cause of this increase?
Mr. Dodaro. I believe most of the increase, a big part of
it, has been in children.
Go ahead, Barb. The question was about the 40 percent
increase in Social Security SSI population benefits and what is
driving the increase.
Mr. Palmer. The supplemental security income, you have a 40
percent increase in the number of children, 14 to 17 I think,
14 to 18. Any insight into why we had that increase? What are
people claiming they are qualified for?
Ms. Bovbjerg. Well, we are confirming that qualification.
That is not just applications. That is how many people have
come on the rolls. So there are more children with
disabilities. We think that increasingly people are better able
to recognize what may be happening with their child.
Mr. Palmer. So it is better diagnostic techniques?
Ms. Bovbjerg. Yes, and when they are in school, for
example, there is the disability program in public schools
where schools are required to pay attention and to identify
children with disabilities. So I think there is a great
sensitivity.
Mr. Palmer. Okay. On the Earned Income Tax Credit, you
talked about delaying the payment for a couple of weeks. Do you
think that would help with reducing the improper payments, the
$16 billion in improper payments on the Earned Income Tax
Credit?
Mr. Dodaro. I think it could because it could allow more
time for the auditing to be done. They can increase the
auditing for the Earned Income Tax Credit as well. What we are
suggesting is you could delay them for everybody, all types of
returns ----
Mr. Palmer. Yes, you don't single anybody out.
Mr. Dodaro. Right, right. But while you are doing that, you
could audit more of the EITC returns and hopefully identify
additional ones that should not be paid. So it could help with
the improper payments in the EITC, as well as prevent identity
theft.
Mr. Palmer. And my last question is on Medicare Advantage.
GAO made five recommendations, none of which have been
implemented, including one priority recommendation. Do you have
any communication between Medicare and GAO on that and any
explanation for why they have not implemented these
recommendations, particularly the one priority recommendation?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. I met with Seema Verma, who is the
Administrator for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services. I met with Secretary Price before he left, and I am
going to meet with the new secretary as well. We are now
meeting on a quarterly basis with them to go over all open
recommendations in GAO.
Ms. Nikki Clowers can give a more specific update.
Mr. Palmer. Let me just ask this: If those recommendations
were implemented, would it have any impact on reducing the
improper payments, the $14 billion in improper payments?
Ms. Clowers. It would certainly result in cost savings. We
estimate billions of dollars each year if they would fully
implement our recommendations on the Medicare Advantage
payments, which is really the coding. They need better
adjustments between what they pay in Medicare fee-for-service
and making coding adjustments when they translate to the
payments under Medicare Advantage. They have taken some steps
in making those adjustments, but we think the adjustments are
still too low. If they got better data, more updated data to
help make those coding adjustments, they will make significant
savings.
Mr. Palmer. My last question on that is, is this an issue
of antiquated data systems, or is it--I mean, I don't
understand why, particularly when one is a priority, that they
haven't acted on this. And again, considering the magnitude of
savings that could be achieved.
Mr. Dodaro. It just causes them to--there is no limitation
on it. We did it. You just need to get updated information. It
is just that they don't want to change the process that they
have in place is my feeling, and we are trying to continue to
persuade them that they need to change and that it will result
in billions in savings.
Mr. Palmer. I was afraid that that would be the answer.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you for indulging me
another round of questions.
Mr. Russell. I appreciate the questions.
The gentleman yields back.
I want to thank the witnesses and thank you, Mr. Dodaro,
for your great work. And I also want to point out for the
record that you lead by example. In a conversation that we had
prior to this hearing, you had mentioned a figure of the money
that you turned back to the government. And what was that
figure?
Mr. Dodaro. Last year, as a result of our work and
Congress' actions on it and the executive branch, over $73
billion in financial benefits occurred. That is $128 back for
every $1 invested in GAO.
Mr. Russell. This shows government the way it should
function and the way it should work. I thoroughly believe if we
doubled the size of our auditors and doubled the size of our
Inspectors General, we could get at a lot of the country's
problems right there. But, as has been pointed out in this
hearing, we have a responsibility to act, or maybe in the case
of the Coast Guard to not act if they have authority, right?
But I think it does mention something that has also been
raised in this hearing by the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Connolly, that it is probably incumbent upon us to do more of a
touch. What we see is the GAO and the Department of the IG,
they reach out continually, but it is probably incumbent upon
us to do more of a touch and a line of action, and you have
certainly given us some crucial areas today where we could take
some action in a bipartisan fashion to get at many of these
problems.
I am very grateful for all of the hard work that each of
you do. A lot of times it is thankless work, and unadvertised,
but it shows true public servants to our great country, so I am
very, very grateful to each of you for the work that you do.
The hearing record will remain open for two weeks for any
member to submit a written opening statement or questions for
the record.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
committee stands adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:53 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]