- INDUSTRY VIEWS OF THE CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM STANDARDS PROGRAM
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
INDUSTRY VIEWS OF THE CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM STANDARDS
PROGRAM
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY AND
INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
FEBRUARY 15, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-49
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-483 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Rogers, Alabama
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania
William R. Keating, Massachusetts
John Katko, New York
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Will Hurd, Texas
Filemon Vela, Texas
Martha McSally, Arizona
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York
J. Luis Correa, California
Mike Gallagher, Wisconsin
Val Butler Demings, Florida
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California
John H. Rutherford, Florida
Thomas A. Garrett, Jr., Virginia
Brian K. Fitzpatrick, Pennsylvania
Ron Estes, Kansas
Don Bacon, Nebraska
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Steven S. Giaier, Chief Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION
John Ratcliffe, Texas, Chairman
John Katko, New York
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Gallagher, Wisconsin
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Brian K. Fitzpatrick, Pennsylvania
Val Butler Demings, Florida
Don Bacon, Nebraska
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex
(ex officio)
officio)
Kristen M. Duncan, Subcommittee Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Statements
The Honorable John Ratcliffe, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Protection:
Oral Statement.................................................
1
Prepared Statement.............................................
2
The Honorable Cedric L. Richmond, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection:
Oral Statement.................................................
9
Prepared Statement.............................................
10
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................
11
Witnesses
Mr. Chet Thompson, President, American Fuel and Petrochemical
Manufacturers:
Oral Statement.................................................
13
Prepared Statement.............................................
14
Ms. Kirsten Meskill, Director, Corporate Security, BASF
Corporation, Testifying on Behalf of the American Chemistry
Council:
Oral Statement.................................................
18
Prepared Statement.............................................
19
Mr. Pete Mutschler, Environment, Health, and Safety Director, CHS
Inc.:
Oral Statement.................................................
21
Prepared Statement.............................................
22
Mr. Paul Orum, Chemical Safety Advocate, Coalition to Prevent
Chemical Disasters:
Oral Statement.................................................
24
Prepared Statement.............................................
25
For the Record
The Honorable John Ratcliffe, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Protection:
Statement of the National Association of Chemical Distributors.
3
Statement of the Institute of Makers of Explosives.............
4
Appendix
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Chet Thompson.....
43
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Kirsten Meskill...
43
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Paul Orum.........
44
INDUSTRY VIEWS OF THE CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM STANDARDS
PROGRAM
----------
Thursday, February 15, 2018
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Protection,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room HVC-210, Capitol Visitor Center, Hon. John Ratcliffe
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Ratcliffe, Bacon, Fitzpatrick,
Donovan, Richmond, and Demings.
Mr. Ratcliffe. The Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure and Protection
will come to order. The Chair welcomes those joining us today
in the audience. I want to remind everyone that is here as a
guest of the committee that we do not allow anyone to disrupt
the proceeding in any manner with signs or placards.
The subcommittee is meeting today to receive testimony
regarding the Chemical Facility Antiterrorism Standards
program, more commonly referred to as CFATS. I will recognize
myself for an opening statement.
Before we begin, though, I would like to say I know that I
speak for everyone on this subcommittee in extending our
heartfelt condolences to the victims of yesterday's shooting in
Florida. A school should never be a place where students or
teachers fear for or lose their lives. As we learn more I
certainly hope that no other family will be forced to endure
this type of senseless tragedy.
The Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards program
began in 2007 in order to keep dangerous chemicals out of the
hands of terrorists seeking to do our Nation harm. Since then,
the program has grown and strengthened through the tireless
work put in by the men and woman at DHS and through the
relentless effort of industry to keep their facilities secure.
The daily management and security of high-risk chemicals is
not an issue that the Government can solve on its own. Working
with industry stakeholders in this area is an integral part and
aspect of our Nation's continuing counterterrorism efforts.
By identifying high-risk facilities and ensuring that they
have appropriate security measures in place, the risks
associated with these chemicals can be heavily mitigated.
Especially after recent tragedies, greater collaboration
between the Government and facility owner-operators also can
provide confidence and peace of mind to the American public.
It is important to point out that CFATS is a broad program
that covers facilities that use, manufacture, store, or handle
specific quantities of chemicals that DHS has identified as
being extremely dangerous.
As shown by the various industries that our witnesses come
from, facilities under this program touch all aspects of our
economy, such as energy and health care, mining, agriculture,
electronics, and plastics. The need for Congress and DHS to get
this program right is both a National security and economic
imperative.
The CFATS program has used risk-based performance
standards, such as perimeter security, access control, and
cybersecurity, to examine and evaluate a facility's security
posture.
While it is up to individual owner-operators of a CFATS-
covered facility to choose what programs best ensure the
security of stored chemicals, a high-risk facility ultimately
must implement stringent standards as set forth in CFATS.
As DHS previously stated before this subcommittee, ``the
significant reduction in the number of chemical facilities that
represent the highest risk is an important success in the CFATS
program and is attributable both to the design of the program
and the work of CFATS personnel and industry at thousands of
chemical facilities.''
Through engagement and collaboration with industry
stakeholders over the past few years, this committee is hopeful
that the CFATS program can continue to protect chemicals from
those who mean to do us harm.
I would like to thank our panel for taking time today to
testify. Your thoughts and opinions are very important as we
oversee the Department of Homeland Security in meeting its
duties under the Chemical Facilities Anti-Terrorism Standards
program.
As stakeholders, you offer a unique and integral insight
into the interworkings of this program, which is set to expire,
by the way, at the end of this year. I look forward to a robust
conversation with our distinguished panel today that will
support our efforts in overseeing the CFATS program.
[The statement of Chairman Ratcliffe follows:]
Statement of Chairman John Ratcliffe
February 15, 2018
The Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards program, or CFATS
program, began in 2007 in order to keep dangerous chemicals out of the
hands of terrorists seeking to do our Nation harm. Since then, the
program has grown and strengthened through the tireless work put in by
the men and woman of DHS, and through the relentless effort of industry
to keep their facilities secure. The daily management and security of
high-risk chemicals is not an issue that Government can solve on its
own. Working with industry stakeholders in this area is an integral
aspect of our Nation's continuing counterterrorism efforts. By
identifying high-risk facilities and ensuring that they have
appropriate security measures in place, the risks associated with these
chemicals can be heavily mitigated.
Especially after recent tragedies, greater collaboration between
the Government and facility owner-operators also can provide confidence
and peace of mind to the public.
It is important to point out that CFATS is a broad program that
covers facilities that use, manufacture, store, or handle specific
quantities of chemicals that DHS has identified as being extremely
dangerous. As shown by the various industries that our witness come
from, facilities under this program touch all aspects of our economy,
such as energy, health care, mining, agriculture, electronics, and
plastics. The need for Congress and DHS to get this program right is
both a National security and economic imperative.
The CFATS program has used Risk-Based Performance Standards, such
as perimeter security, access control, and cybersecurity, to examine
and evaluate a facility's security posture. While it is up to the
individual owner-operators of a CFATS-covered facility to choose what
programs best ensure the security of stored chemicals, a high-risk
facility ultimately must implement stringent standards set forth in
CFATS. As DHS previously stated before this subcommittee, the
significant reduction in the number of chemical facilities that
represent the highest risk is an important success of the CFATS program
and is attributable both to the design of the program and to the work
of CFATS personnel and industry at thousands of chemical facilities.
Through engagement and collaboration with industry stakeholders
over the past few years, this committee is hopeful that the CFATS
program can continue to protect chemicals from those who mean to do us
harm.
I would to thank our panel for taking the time today to testify.
Your thoughts and opinions are very important as we oversee the
Department of Homeland Security in meeting its duties under the
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards program. As stakeholders,
you offer a unique and integral insight into the interworkings of this
program which is set to expire at the end of this year. I look forward
to a robust conversation with our distinguished panel that will support
our efforts in overseeing the CFATS program.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Before I recognize the Ranking Member I ask
unanimous consent to insert statements from the National
Association of Chemical Distributors and the Institute of
Makers of Explosives. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
Statement of the National Association of Chemical Distributors
February 15, 2018
The National Association of Chemical Distributors (NACD) is pleased
to provide the following statement for inclusion in the record of the
February 15, 2018, hearing, Industry Views of the Chemical Facility
Anti-Terrorism Standards Program.
NACD commends the subcommittee for holding this important hearing
as a first step in reauthorizing the Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism
Standards (CFATS) program--NACD strongly urges you to introduce CFATS
reauthorization legislation as soon as possible so it can proceed
through Congress and be signed into law well before the program's
January 2019 expiration date.
about nacd
NACD is an international association of nearly 440 chemical
distributors and their supply-chain partners. NACD members represent
more than 85 percent of the chemical distribution capacity in the
Nation and generate 93 percent of the industry's gross revenue. NACD
members, operating in all 50 States through more than 2,800 facilities,
are responsible for nearly 130,000 direct and indirect jobs in the
United States. NACD members are predominantly small regional
businesses, many of which are multi-generational, and family-owned.
NACD members meet the highest standards in safety and performance
through mandatory participation in NACD Responsible Distribution, the
association's third-party-verified environmental, health, safety, and
security program. Through Responsible Distribution, NACD members
demonstrate their commitment to continuous performance improvement in
every phase of chemical storage, handling, transportation, and disposal
operations.
While security has always been an inherent element of Responsible
Distribution, following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001,
distributors were the first sector of the chemical industry to mandate
security measures for its members. NACD continues to assess Responsible
Distribution's security measures against current threats. In 2013, NACD
added a specific Security Code to Responsible Distribution that
consolidated many prior requirements and enhanced others. These
requirements apply to all NACD members, including those who do not have
facilities subject to the CFATS regulations. Over the past 16 years,
NACD members--both CFATS-regulated and non-CFATS-regulated companies--
have made substantial investments to make their facilities more secure.
nacd supports long-term reauthorization of cfats
The CFATS program has made the chemical industry and our Nation
much more secure. Since its establishment in 2007, the industry has
invested millions of dollars and instituted thousands of new security
measures at our facilities.
From the beginning, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has
taken a collaborative, common-sense approach in implementing the CFATS
regulations. Despite being dependent on temporary appropriations
measures during the first 7 years of the program, the agency did a
commendable job in writing the regulations and setting up the internal
infrastructure to be able to implement and enforce the new standards.
One reason for the success of the CFATS program is the fact that
DHS has taken the time to truly learn about the diverse chemical
industry and work with companies on security measures that meet the
CFATS Risk-Based Performance Standards while providing flexibility to
each unique chemical facility in doing so. DHS has excelled in outreach
to the industry by publishing numerous fact sheets and ``lessons
learned'' documents; interacting with facility owners and operators
during the Chemical Sector Security Summits and other trade association
meetings; and always making inspectors and headquarters personnel
available to talk through issues and answer questions.
In addition, DHS worked with NACD and the American Chemistry
Council to develop a CFATS Alternative Security Program (ASP) Guidance
Document and Template to enhance the process for submitting site
security plans. The ASP provides DHS with greater clarity about
regulated facilities' security measures and how they meet or exceed
CFATS requirements, while simplifying the compliance process and giving
facility owners and operators a comprehensive security document to
follow.
The ``Protecting and Securing Chemical Facilities from Terrorist
Attacks Act'' of 2014 (Pub. L. No. 113-254), which for the first time
provided CFATS a multi-year authorization, further enhanced security
efforts by providing regulatory certainty to both industry and DHS.
This stability allowed DHS to increase efficiencies in the program
while streamlining the information submission process for regulated
facilities.
For example, in 2016, DHS rolled out an enhanced risk-tiering
methodology to identify more accurately high-risk facilities and assign
them to appropriate risk tiers. DHS notified all facilities with
threshold quantities of CFATS chemicals of interest that they must
submit new Top-Screen surveys to the agency. At the same time, the
agency launched version 2.0 of the Chemical Security Assessment Tool
(CSAT 2.0), the on-line portal facilities use to submit Top Screens,
Security Vulnerability Assessments, and Site Security Plans/ASPs. CSAT
2.0 is much more streamlined and user-friendly than the old version,
which allows facilities to submit their information and DHS to analyze
the material more easily. DHS has virtually completed this re-tiering
process and is conducting authorization inspections and compliance
inspections of facilities assigned to different tiers as well as newly-
regulated facilities.
A long-term reauthorization of CFATS in the next few months would
allow for the continuation of this positive momentum. NACD urges the
subcommittee leadership to introduce CFATS reauthorization legislation
as soon as possible so it can move through the process and be signed
into law before there is a threat of a program lapse. Doing so will
provide needed certainty and enhance the security of chemical
facilities and our Nation.
NACD looks forward to working with the subcommittee and Congress on
CFATS reauthorization legislation in the coming weeks and months.
Thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments.
______
Statement of the Institute of Makers of Explosives
February 15, 2018
Dear Chairman Ratcliffe and Ranking Member Richmond: The Institute
of Makers of Explosives (IME) would like to provide the following
information for your edification as you conduct the hearing Industry
Views of the Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS)
Program. As an industry regulated by both the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS/the Department) and the Department of Justice, Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF), we believe we can
provide a unique view for the subcommittee.
Founded in 1913, IME is a nonprofit association that provides
comprehensive recommendations concerning the safety and security of
commercial explosive materials. IME represents U.S. manufacturers and
distributors of commercial explosive materials as well as other
companies that provide related services. IME provides technically
accurate and reliable information and recommendations concerning
commercial explosive materials through our Safety Library Publications
and other guidelines. A significant number of IME best practices have
been adopted into the regulations of Federal and State agencies.
IME has supported the CFATS program, as a matter of policy, since
Congress created the program in Section 550 of the 2007 Appropriation
process. When it was time to reauthorize the program during the 113th
Congress (H.R. 4007/Pub. L. No. 113-254), IME was there supporting it.
IME has also worked closely with DHS personnel and, we believe, have
developed a good working relationship based on professionalism, and a
respect for each other's focus on security. IME is a member of the
Chemical Sector Coordinating Council, participates in the annual
Chemical Security Summits, and regularly invites DHS personnel to speak
to our members at industry meetings.
In regard to the CFATS program, overall, we can, in all good
conscience, say that the CFATS program is in a much better place in
2018, than it was 4 years ago. The Department has rolled out the
Chemical Security Assessment Tool (CSAT) 2.0 and, according to our
members' experience and feedback, has done a good job screening
explosive manufacturing facilities. While there may be differences over
whether or not a facility should be tiered, the process used is
efficient and effective. If we were to give it a grade, it would be a
firm ``B'' for solid accomplishment. Nevertheless, we have detailed
four areas below where the agency can improve.
duplicative regulation of explosives should be eliminated
IME's highest concern is that DHS regulations on explosive
materials duplicate security regulations under the jurisdiction of ATF.
Duplicative regulatory requirements impose significant costs that are
impacting jobs and industry investment without a commensurate increase
in security of commercial explosives.
When the Department promulgated the CFATS Chemicals of Interest
(COI), Appendix A, they included explosive materials that have been
regulated by ATF for safety and security purposes for nearly a half
century under the Organized Crime Control Act of 1970 (OCCA), and later
by the Safe Explosives Act of 2002 (SEA). In fact, explosives are the
only materials on the COI for which security regulations already
existed under the jurisdiction of another agency. Given that ATF
regulatory requirements, along with our industry's best practices, have
resulted in a sustained and exemplary security record for the
commercial explosives industry, the costs incurred under the
duplicative CFATS requirements far exceed any benefits.
As mentioned above, per the OCCA, 18 U.S.C. Chapter 40, and the
SEA, also known as Federal Explosives Law (FEL), ATF regulates
explosives under 27 CFR Part 555 for safety and security. ATF's
explosives mission involves preventing terrorists and other criminals
from accessing explosives. ATF regulations (based on IME's American
Table of Distances) are also designed to ensure that there would be no
significant impact to the public from an unintended detonation at an
explosives facility.
There is no rationale for DHS to include explosives on the COI, as
evidenced by the Government's own data on explosive incidents. The U.S.
Bomb Data Center (USBDC), established by Congress in 1996 as a National
collection center for information on arson and explosives-related
incidents throughout the United States, incorporates information from
various sources such as ATF; the Federal Bureau of Investigation; and
the United States Fire Administration. The USB DC publishes annually
the Explosives Incident Report (EIR) (Unclassified), providing
analytical data regarding explosives-related incidents, bombings,
recoveries, and thefts/losses reported through the Bomb Arson Tracking
System (BATS).
According to available EIRs, commercial explosives, as components
of Improvised Explosive Devices in the United States, have remained at
less than 2% for 20 years. Explosives thefts have been on a consistent
downward trend. Over the past 20 years, thefts of explosives reported
by licensees/permittees have plummeted 92%. The EIR data further
underscores the excellent security record of the commercial explosives
industry by reporting only 8 thefts of commercial explosives in 2015,
and 61 from 2011-2015. Although the industry strives for zero thefts,
the number is infinitesimal considering that 14,550,000 pounds of
commercial explosives were consumed in the United States during the
2011-2015 period.\1\ Clearly, the record shows that ATF regulations and
industry best practices effectively ensure the security of commercial
explosives and prevent diversion for criminal or other illicit use. The
fact that a negligible amount of commercial explosives have been used
for illicit purposes illustrates the effectiveness of regulations and
industry best practices in place long before explosives were
redundantly included under the CFATS regulations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ USGS, Mineral Yearbook--Explosives. By Lori E. Apodaca (2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While there is no empirical data showing a need for regulation, IME
was able to gather data on how much CFATS-duplicative compliance costs
the industry at ATF-regulated sites. Below are four case studies of
estimated or expended resources that illustrate our concern:
IME Member Company--Case Study 1, CFATS Expenses $350,000-370,000
(est.)
Area perimeter fencing
$65,000 for fence and labor
$60-80,000 to clear brush and trees for fence installation
$30,000 for gate with remote entry access camera system
$50,000 camera system per each magazine location on the site
Employee development and implementation time
Travel expenses for assessment and DHS inspection
IME Member Company--Case Study 2, CFATS Expenses $433,820 (actual)
Signage--$6,800
DHS-approved locks & construction to accept new locks--
$29,600
Travel for training and inspections--$1,800
Gate replacement--$10,000
Fence installation--$3,500
Solar lighting--$4,600
Video verified Intruder Detection System (IDS)--$223,650
Video verified monitoring--$151,470
Video verified maintenance (to date)--$2,400
Yearly Recurrent Cost $70,400
Video-verified monitoring and maintenance and lighting
IME Member Company--Case Study 3, CFATS Expenses $837,400 (actual)
Fencing--$679,200
New locks--$3,200
Reinforce gates--$1,200
Install IDS--$151,500
Signage--$2,300
IME Member Company--Case Study 4, CFATS Expenses $500,000-$1 Million
(est.)
* Subject to DOD Contractual Requirements
Underground power and communication conduit for security
systems required by DOD 4145.26-M.
Alternate option, $300,000 per magazine site at 10
sites=$3 million.
CFATS Total estimates and actual expenses of $2.64 million (estimate).
Considering all four sites were already regulated for security by
the ATF, CFATS requirements provided minimal additional security
benefits. The industry, with hundreds of sites Nation-wide, only has an
estimated 2 dozen tiered facilities, with nearly half of those being
tiered under the new CSAT 2.0 process. IME is still working to generate
an accurate accounting of the costs that the duplicative regulations
impose on the explosives industry. When that number is finalized we
will share it with the subcommittee. Nevertheless, we are sure you
would agree with us that one wasted dollar on duplicative regulations
is too much, let alone $2.64 million.
IME has repeatedly requested the Department relieve the industry
from this duplicative and burdensome regulation. Most recently, IME met
with Mr. Robert Kolasky, Deputy Under Secretary (acting), National
Protection and Programs Directorate, in his position as regulatory
reform officer (RRO) for the Department. The meeting was held on
October 30, 2017 to discuss regulatory reform per Executive Order (EO)
13771 on Reducing Regulation and Controlling Regulatory Costs and EO
13777 on Enforcing the Regulatory Reform Agenda. IME briefed Mr.
Kolasky on the situation and explained how removal of this duplicative
regulation would allow DHS to focus valuable resources on other
critical risks to our Nation. The Department did respond, informally,
that they will not pursue rulemaking to remove what IME has identified
as unnecessary regulation that imposes costs which exceed benefits;
however they indicated they would not object to a legislative fix if
IME chooses to pursue that route.
For this reason, IME requests Congress amend 6 U.S.C. Chapter 1,
Subchapter XVI, Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards, Section
621(4) to include as an excluded facility ``(F) a business premises
where explosive materials are manufactured, imported, stored or
distributed subject to the regulation of the Department of Justice,
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, under 18 U.S.C.
Chapter 40 and 27 CFR Part 555.''
As an association that is globally recognized and respected for
advancing the security and safety of commercial explosives, we are
confident that removing these materials from the redundancy of the
CFATS program would not negatively impact public safety and security.
Regulations and practices that long predate the CFATS program have
effectively ensured explosives security and safety for decades.
Additionally, the amendment of CFATS regulations in deference to the
explosives regulatory scheme mandated by ATF would alleviate burden on
DHS and allow resources to be appropriately focused on legitimate
security threats.
chemicals of interest should be reviewed
During promulgation of the CFATS regulations, DHS included in the
list Chemicals of Interest (COI), Appendix A, a chemical that is not
commercially manufactured and which listed is causing tiering errors
and needless confusion and concern.
``Ammonium nitrate (AN), [with more than 0.2 percent combustible
substances, including any organic substance calculated as carbon, to
the exclusion of any other substance] with a Chemical Abstract Service
(CAS) number of 6484-52-2.''
First, to the best of IME's determination, this product is not and
never has been commercially manufactured. Per our research, the product
was inadvertently created during a site clean-up operation where the AN
had become contaminated. However, in order to transport the material
for disposal, a CAS number was required. The duplicative listing of the
CAS number 6484-52-2 to also identify the solid form of AN used in the
industry causes confusion often resulting in mistakes made in top
screens and additional efforts expended to correct them. Each time this
happens, it causes great confusion and concern as the ramifications of
being tiered are discovered, and eventually additional effort is
expended to figure out how to correct the mistake.
Second, the solid form of AN is an oxidizer, whereas the mixture of
contaminated AN listed on the COI is identified as an explosive
material. This is a significant concern for the industry, given that AN
is a commonly-used product and its generally insensitive
characteristics make it safe to handle, transport, and distribute under
normal circumstances. The misleading description of contaminated AN
causes needless concern to those outside of the commercial explosives
industry that AN itself poses a serious danger to communities where it
is manufactured, stored, and used, when, in fact, it does not. IME did
bring this problem to the attention of DHS personnel; however, they
were not receptive to our request to remove the non-commercial product
from the list. For this reason, IME recommends the subcommittee require
DHS to open the COI list to notice and comment.
personnel surety program should retain all vetting options
As DHS rolls out its second phase of its Personnel Surety Program
(PSP), from compliance by CFATS Tier 1 and 2 facilities to Tier 3 and 4
facilities, the transition is expected to be smooth. DHS appears to
have done an adequate job of preparing to add more than 3,000
facilities into the PSP, and by phasing-in compliance over 3 years, the
agency will prevent a tidal wave of compliance issues hitting the
Department in a very short time frame.
Nevertheless, IME is planning to submit comments to the Information
Collection Request for the PSP (1670-0029) issued on December 26, 2017.
IME has submitted multiple comments over the past 5 years explaining
our concerns and opposition to certain elements of the program. While
many of those concerns have been addressed, we urge the subcommittee to
focus on the following:
First, while the Personnel-Surety-focused language of the CFATS Act
of 2014 (HR 4007) directed the Department to accept visual verification
as a method to comply with Risk-Based Performance Standard (REPS)
12(iv)--Personnel Surety, as an additional option to the other three
options already proposed, DHS continues to be resistant to the option.
As a matter of fact, in the Information Collection Request for the PSP
(1670-0029), the Department wrote:
``Option 4. High-risk chemical facilities may visually verify certain
credentials or documents that are issued by a Federal screening program
that periodically vets enrolled individuals against the TSDB. The
Department continues to believe that visual verification has
significant security limitations and, accordingly, encourages high-risk
chemical facilities choosing this option to identify in their SSPs the
means by which they plan to address these limitations.''
IME fought for this vetting option based on the fact that the
safety and security of explosives is closely regulated by ATF under the
FEL. The FEL requires persons who import, manufacture, store, or
distribute explosives to obtain a license, and those who receive or use
explosives and do not have a license, to obtain a permit. Among the
many requirements that these business entities or persons must meet in
order to obtain a license or a permit is to submit to ATF for a
background check the names of all employees who are authorized to
possess \2\ explosives or those empowered to make management decisions
or set company policies. The FEL standards for the background checks
conducted by ATF are the forerunner of the background check standards
that were subsequently adopted by DHS for the plethora of programs it
administers for transportation workers.\3\ These same standards are the
basis for RBPS 12. All of these programs include a check for
``terrorist ties'' by vetting against the terrorist screening database
(TSDB) the names of individuals needing access privileges to security-
sensitive areas, assets, or activities.\4\ These programs are
operational and have been used to successfully vet populations in need
of comprehensive security assessments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ ``Possession'' is interpreted as both actual and constructive.
\3\ Hazardous Materials Endorsement (HME) threat assessment,
Transportation Worker Identification Credential (TWIC), Free and Secure
Trade credential, and Trusted Traveler programs.
\4\ The TSDB is a consolidated database of terrorist watch list
information administered by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
through the Terrorist Screening Center (TSC). The TSC was created by
the September 16, 2003, Homeland Security Presidential Directive--6
(HSPD-6), which directed the TSC to integrate all existing U.S.
Government terrorist watch lists.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
IME had to work through the legislative process to ensure that our
members would not be required to vet their employees through yet
another Federal program to be able to do their jobs. We urge the
subcommittee to remain vigilant that DHS does not add additional
conditions or requirements to companies using this option, such that it
becomes an unachievable option.
Second, it is worth taking a step back to examine the
appropriateness and need for the PSP. To begin with, it is important to
understand how terrorist ties have been identified and addressed since
the tragic events of 9/11. Since the TSDB was created and delegated to
the FBI, the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) and the
Customs and Border Protection (CBP) agency, among other DHS components,
were authorized to link into this system. TSA obtains a ``mirror copy''
of the TSDB from the FBI to facilitate vetting under the programs
administered by the agency.
TSA's Office of Intelligence and Analysis (I&A) oversees all
security threat assessments required by programs the agency
administers, such as TWIC, HME, Secure Flight, etc. The Infrastructure
Security Compliance Division (ISCD) asked I&A to conduct the TSDB check
of individuals under the PSP. Since TSA, not ISCD, will be conducting
these TSDB checks, it begs the question as to why ISCD did not pursue
options to leverage the vetting programs that I&A already oversees,
rather than setting up another stand-alone program, the PSP, which is
nothing more than a portal to funnel information to I&A.
In addition to monitoring DHS to ensure that option 4--visual
inspections of credentials remains viable; the subcommittee should
ensure the program is serving the public well. A well-run duplicative
program is still a duplicative program. If another option that would be
more cost-effective and achieve the same goal is in existence, the
subcommittee should consider using it.
field staff need additional training, oversight
It is understandable that the CFATS program may experience staffing
inconsistencies with field inspectors as it matures and transforms from
mainly assessing site security plans to one conducting inspections.
With a large and diverse field staff, it is to be expected there may be
occasional confusion and misinterpretation of the regulations and
policies, and questions regarding their proper implementation.
Nevertheless, without careful vetting of employees and consistent
oversight, field staff may become self-empowered to interpret and apply
the rules as they see fit.
Over the past year two instances have been brought to our attention
where additional training and oversight were needed to correct
conclusions reached by inspectors. In both these instances, the
inspectors may have been aware of the DHS regulation, but they were not
aware of the other regulations explosives operations must also comply
with, and after the proper consultations were made, the Department's
excessive demands were rescinded.
Neither of these examples are meant to characterize the field staff
in general, but simply to illustrate that the commercial explosives
industry must follow duplicate sets of rules and regulations between
the ATF and DHS, and because of the duplicity--problems will arise. We
urge the Department and the subcommittee to maintain vigilance in
oversight and training of field staff and communication of policy.
We believe that by taking the actions outlined above the
subcommittee can ensure the program will be well-functioning and help
keep our Nation safe through the entirety of the next authorization
time line.
Thank you for your consideration of these views, if you have any
questions please contact us and we will be happy to discuss it with
you.
Mr. Ratcliffe. With that, the Chair now recognizes my
friend, the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Richmond, for his
opening statement.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning and I
want to thank the Chairman for having this very important
meeting with this subcommittee's oversight of the Chemical
Facility Anti-terrorism Standards, CFATS program.
Twelve years ago, the Bush administration issued a call to
action to address credible terrorist threats to high-risk
chemical facilities across the country. At the time, chemical
facilities security was considered one of the most significant
security gaps in the post-9/11 era.
Secretary Chertoff asked Congress to pass a balanced, risk-
based security measure for the chemical industry. Within a
year, Congress attached language to the CHS appropriations bill
giving DHS temporary authority to implement a chemical security
program.
CFATS survived on annual authorizations through the
appropriations process for 8 years. The lack of certainty and
stability stunted the program's growth.
Congress finally passed a 4-year authorization bill in 2014
following the tragic explosion at the West Texas Chemical
facility. Since then, the CFATS program has invested in better
tools, better-trained personnel and a better strategic vision
for the future. In short, the CFATS program has matured.
Today the program has buy-in of industry and bipartisan
support on the Hill. Although I think we can do more to advance
the objectives of the program, it is clear that CFATS has made
us safer.
Authorization for CFATS expires in December of this year.
If Congress does not act, CFATS will be relegated once again to
annual authorizations through the appropriations process or
worse.
Last year, this subcommittee began its reauthorization
efforts with a series of candid, closed-door roundtables. I am
encouraged that today we will begin hearing these stakeholder
perspectives on the record.
As the subcommittee's reauthorization efforts continue, I
hope we will have an opportunity to hear from the Department.
In the mean time, I look forward to hearing from the witnesses
here today on how we can translate the lessons learned from the
first 12 years of the CFATS program into proposals to make it
more efficient, more effective, and more impactful.
Toward that end, there are three topics I would like to
hear more about. First, as of today, high-risk targets with
significant chemical holdings, like public water systems, are
exempt from CFATS. Every head of DHS from Secretary Chertoff to
Secretary Johnson have said those exemptions should be
eliminated.
I would be interested to learn if the witnesses here today
agree with our former DHS Secretaries.
Second, as I have mentioned, CFATS has matured into a more
stable program than what it was just 4 years ago. I will be
interested to know how the stakeholders here today would like
to see the program evolve.
Finally, I would like to know what the Federal Government
can do to help chemical facilities adapt their security
operations in response to evolving threats and technologies
like drones.
Like many of my colleagues on this panel, my district is
home to a number of chemical facilities. They play a crucial
role in the local economy but with that comes risk.
The CFATS program helps address that risk and makes
communities like mine safer without being overly burdensome.
I look forward to continuing this subcommittee's
reauthorization efforts, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Richmond
follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Cedric L. Richmond
February 15, 2018
Good morning. I want to thank Chairman Ratcliffe for continuing
this subcommittee's oversight of the Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism
Standards (CFATS) program.
Twelve years ago, the Bush administration issued a call to action
to address credible terrorist threats to high-risk chemical facilities
across the country.
At the time, chemical facility security was considered one of the
most significant security gaps in the post-9/11 era, and Secretary
Chertoff asked Congress ``to pass a balanced, risk-based security
measure for the chemical industry.''
Within the year, Congress attached language to the DHS
appropriations bill, giving DHS temporary authority to implement a
chemical security program.
CFATS survived on annual authorizations through the appropriations
process for 8 years--and the lack of certainty and stability stunted
the program's growth.
Congress finally passed a 4-year authorization bill in 2014
following the tragic explosion at the West, Texas chemical facility.
Since then, the CFATS program has invested in better tools, better-
trained personnel, and a better strategic vision for the future.
In short, the CFATS program has matured.
Today, the program has the buy-in of industry, and bipartisan
support on the Hill.
And although I think we can do more to advance the objectives of
the program, it is clear that CFATS has made us safer.
Authorization for CFATS expires in December of this year.
If Congress does not act, CFATS will be relegated once again to
annual authorizations through the appropriations process, or worse.
Last year, this subcommittee began its reauthorization efforts with
a series of candid, closed-door roundtables.
And I am encouraged that today we will begin hearing these
stakeholder perspectives on the record.
As the subcommittee's reauthorization efforts continue, I hope we
will have an opportunity to hear from the Department.
In the mean time, I look forward to hearing from the witnesses here
today on how we can translate the lessons learned from the first 12
years of the CFATS program into proposals to make it more efficient,
more effective, and more impactful.
Toward that end, there are three topics I would like to hear more
about.
First, as of today, high-risk targets with significant chemical
holdings--like public water systems--are exempt from CFATS.
Every head of DHS from Secretary Chertoff to Secretary Johnson has
said those exemptions should be eliminated.
And I will be interested to learn if the witnesses here today agree
with our former DHS Secretaries.
Second, as I have mentioned, CFATS has matured into a more stable
program than it was just 4 years ago.
I will be interested to know how the stakeholders here today would
like to see the program evolve.
Finally, I would like to know what the Federal Government can do to
help chemical facilities adapt their security operations in response to
evolving threats and technologies, like drones.
Like many of my colleagues on this panel, my district is home to a
number of chemical facilities.
They play a crucial role in the local economy, but with that, comes
risk.
The CFATS program helps address that risk, and makes communities
like mine safer, without being overly burdensome.
I look forward to continuing this subcommittee's reauthorization
efforts, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentleman.
Other Members of the committee may have opening statements.
If they do, those may be submitted for the record as I
mentioned.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
February 15, 2018
Good afternoon. I want to thank Chairman Ratcliffe and Ranking
Member Richmond for holding this hearing today to examine the Chemical
Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards program, or ``CFATS.''
Through this program, DHS works with operators of high-risk
chemical facilities to ensure that security measures are in place to
prevent a bad actor from using on-site chemicals in a terrorist attack.
Make no mistake--the possibility that a terrorist could use a
chemical plant as a weapon of mass destruction is not mere conjecture.
It is a credible threat that has been echoed by security experts at
the National Infrastructure Protection Center, the Homeland Security
Council, and high-ranking officials throughout the U.S. Government,
including former Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff,
President Barack Obama, and even the Chairman of this Committee.
We have seen terrorist plots targeting chemical facilities
including one of the
9/11 hijackers who we later learned had been scouting U.S. chemical
plants.
Many of these at-risk facilities are not located in remote areas.
In a 2014 study, the Environmental Justice and Health Alliance for
Chemical Policy Reform found that more than 130 million Americans live,
work, and go to school in the shadow of at-risk chemical facilities.
The study also found that there is a concentration of such
facilities in low-income communities and communities of color--with
higher poverty rates and lower housing values.
In the event of a terrorist attack on a chemical facility, these
Americans would most directly be harmed.
Indeed, in 2013, a fertilizer plant explosion in sparsely-populated
West, Texas leveled nearby schools, houses, commercial buildings, and
even retirement homes.
A dozen first responders lost their lives, in part because they did
not know the chemical composition of the fire.
Despite the fact that this facility had reported its holdings to
other Federal and State regulators, DHS was not aware that this at-risk
facility even existed.
We learned some hard lessons after West--and tragically, I fear we
may not be done learning them.
I worry that the Department is still not sharing CFATS information
with State and local emergency responders, police departments, and
firefighters.
I also worry that the program may be too focused on large
operations with security teams and regulatory affairs departments and
may not be giving needed attention to small so-called ``outlier''
facilities, those facilities that fly under the Federal radar but could
nonetheless are at risk.
Many of these facilities operate in areas with volunteer
firefighters without specialized training and resources.
As the Congressman for a rural area and a former volunteer
firefighter, I am deeply troubled by this.
The authorization for the CFATS program expires in December of this
year.
Although we are late in beginning our reauthorization efforts, I
believe we still have time to identify opportunities to incrementally
improve the program.
As authorizers, however, the most important thing we must do is
actually get reauthorization across the finish line.
We cannot afford to tie CFATS to temporary reauthorizations through
the annual appropriations process again as we did in the first 7 years
of the program.
I look forward to hearing from the panel about their experience
with CFATS, and I hope that I can impress upon my colleagues across the
aisle the need to take swift action to move forward with
reauthorization.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Ratcliffe. We are fortunate to have a very
distinguished panel of witnesses before us today on this
important topic. Mr. Chet Thompson is the president of the
American Fuel and Petrochemical Manufacturers. Mr. Thompson
previously served as deputy general counsel at the
Environmental Protection Agency, so I look forward to hearing
how the CFATS program and EPA regulations interact with each
other from you. Thanks for being here.
Ms. Kirsten Meskill is the director of corporate security
for the BASF Corporation, but is here testifying on behalf of
the American Chemistry Council. Ms. Meskill comes to us from
BASF, the largest chemical producer in the world, as she was
names one of the most influential people in security in 2016 by
Security Magazine. Welcome. We are glad to have you.
Mr. Peter Mutschler is environment, health, and safety
director of CHS, Inc. Mr. Mutschler also serves as the
secretary of the board of directors for the ResponsibleAg
program. Glad to have you here, Mr. Mutschler.
Finally, Mr. Paul Orum is the chemical safety advocate for
the Coalition to Prevent Chemical Disasters. Thank you for
agreeing to be with us today, sir.
I would now ask each of the witnesses to stand and raise
your right hand so I can swear you in to testify.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Ratcliffe. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
have answered in the affirmative. You all may be seated. Thank
you. Witnesses' full written statements will appear in the
record.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Thompson for his opening
statement.
STATEMENT OF CHET THOMPSON, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN FUEL AND
PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member
Richmond, and Members of the subcommittee. Again, it is a real
honor and privilege to be here. As you mentioned, my name is
Chet Thompson. I am the president of the American Fuel and
Petrochemical Manufacturers.
AFPM represents 97 percent of the Nation's refining and
petrochemical manufacturing capacity in this county. That
includes 118 refineries, 248 petrochemical facilities. We are
located in 33 States across the country. We support more than 3
million jobs and bring about $600 billion to the U.S. economy
each year.
Our members make the gasoline, the jet fuel, the
petrochemicals that power our economy, power the world's
economy and make modern life possible. America's refining and
petrochemical companies play an important role in ensuring and
maintaining the security of our energy and petrochemical
infrastructure.
As I sit here today I can tell you without hesitation that
nothing is more important to our members than the safety and
security of their work force, their employees, their
contractors, and certainly their surrounding communities.
This safety and their safety requires that we protect our
facilities and critical infrastructure against potential
security threats.
Accomplishing this is the shared responsibility of the
Government and our member companies. We have a great
partnership with DHS at the moment and we believe they have
done a great job implementing the CFATS program.
For all these reasons, we fully support the reauthorization
of the CFATS program and urge Congress not to let this
important program lapse.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to use my limited time today, I
just want to highlight a few points of my written testimony.
First, the overall structure of the CFATS program is sound and
is not in need of a major statutory overhaul. Again, our
members support the mission and the goal of CFATS and believe
that the United States of America is far safer as a result of
this program.
We strongly endorse the program's performance-based
approach that allows facilities to develop security plans that
fit their specific risk profiles as opposed to a one-size-fits-
all approach that other agencies often adopt.
Second, Congress' CFATS reauthorization in 2014
dramatically improved the program. Some of the larger
improvements included the revisions to DHS's risk assessment
tools, their tiering methodology, the establishment of the
Expedited Approval Program for Tier 3 and Tier 4 facilities,
and certainly streamlining the personnel vetting for Tier 1 and
2 facilities.
Your 4-year reauthorization was also critically important.
It provided us, industry, with the certainty needed to make the
long-term investments that we have made, and it certainly
provided DHS the support and resources they need to improve the
program. We support another multi-year reauthorization to
continue this positive momentum.
So in addition to reauthorizing the program for another
multi-year period, we offer the following recommendations as
you move forward with your deliberations.
First, we urge Congress to continue protecting the
confidentiality of CFATS site security information. DHS and
covered facilities should not be required to publicly disclose
or provide site security information to persons who lack the
requisite security clearances.
CFATS at its core is a security program. Mandating the
public disclosure of sensitive information, such as security
system designs, control system schematics, worst-case scenario
discharge data, COI records and other technical response
information could threaten the safety of not only our
facilities but the security of the Nation's critical energy
infrastructure.
Second, we also urge Congress to continue to subject CFATS
program, particularly Appendix A, to the formal notice and
comment rule-making process under the Administrative Procedures
Act. Revisions to Appendix A would have broad implications for
the chemical facilities, including whether they are subject to
the program and how they get tiered.
As such, proposed changes to Appendix A should be
transparent and it should be open to public review and public
comment.
Finally, we caution against adding new and extraneous
provisions that will slow or diminish the progress DHS has made
in implementing the CFATS program. More specifically, Congress
should not mandate or authorize DHS to require facilities to
undergo inherently safer technology review as part of the
security planning process and nor should it mandate additional
stakeholder involvement in the security plan development
process.
So thank you again for the opportunity to be here. I look
forward to working with this committee and with DHS in the
months ahead.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thompson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chet Thompson
February 15, 2018
The American Fuel & Petrochemical Manufacturers (AFPM) appreciates
the opportunity to provide testimony on the Chemical Facility Anti-
Terrorism Standards (CFATS) program. AFPM is proud to represent 97
percent of the Nation's refining and petrochemical manufacturing
capacity, including 118 refineries and 248 petrochemical manufacturing
facilities in 33 States. Our members make the gasoline, diesel, jet
fuel, and petrochemicals that make modern life possible. AFPM member
companies meet the needs of our Nation and local communities,
strengthening economic and National security, and supporting more than
3 million U.S. jobs and adding $568 billion each year to the U.S.
economy.
America's refining and petrochemical companies play an important
role in ensuring and maintaining the security of America's energy and
petrochemical infrastructure. The safety and security of our member
company employees, contractors, and surrounding communities are of the
highest importance, and as a result our companies invest in some of the
most advanced technologies, safety, and security practices in the
world. The protection of critical infrastructure against potential
threats is a shared responsibility between Government and stakeholders
that our members take seriously.
Despite well-documented early challenges with the CFATS program,
the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has made significant
improvements to the program in the time since Congress reauthorized
CFATS in 2014. In particular, the 2014 statute addressed major
impediments to completing site security plans and streamlined the
vetting process for facility access, updates that AFPM members
supported. Most importantly, the 4-year reauthorization provided
industry with the certainty needed to make long-term facility security
investments and enabled DHS to efficiently run the CFATS program and
appropriately re-tier sites.
The strength of the CFATS program lies in its flexibility. No two
facilities are alike, and so each of the approximately 4,000 facilities
covered by the CFATS program will have different threat profiles and
security needs. Additionally, the threat environment is always
changing. As terrorists and other bad actors evolve their tactics, so
must facilities adapt their security procedures. A command-and-control
regulatory structure would not only add additional cost to complying
with regulations, but will also likely lead to less security and
increased risk.
With performance-based standards comes an increased need for
cooperation. To that end, AFPM appreciates the long-standing
cooperative relationship--spanning multiple administrations--with DHS
and commends the professionalism of the DHS program offices. AFPM and
its members have participated in multiple advisory groups within DHS,
such as the Chemical Sector Security Council, the Oil and Natural Gas
Sector Security Council, and were members of the Risk-Tiering
Methodology Working Group. These forums provide opportunities for
shared learning and have proven extremely beneficial given the data-
driven nature of security risk assessment. For example, these forums
helped DHS to develop robust, risk-based performance standards (RBPS)
that avoid being too prescriptive for an industry as diverse in size
and function as the chemical sector, but that also include strict
enforcement penalties for noncompliance.
The current CFATS authorization will expire in January 2019,
providing both an impetus for action in 2018 and an opportunity to make
modest improvements to the program. AFPM urges Congress to enact a
multi-year reauthorization that retains the core elements of the 2014
legislation.
the 2014 cfats reauthorization improved the program
The CFATS program was originally authorized in the 2007
appropriations bill and gave DHS the imperative, but little statutory
guidance, on how to establish the new security program. DHS eventually
developed the top-screen program, tiering, and RBPS approach, but
struggled to approve site security plans and ran into issues with both
tiering and governance. The 2014 statutory changes helped DHS
dramatically improve the program. Improvements included updates to risk
assessments and the tiering methodology, the establishment of an
Expedited Approval Program (EAP) for Tier 3 and 4 facilities, the
reinforcement of coordination with State and local officials, and
streamlining the vetting process through the Personnel Surety Program
(PSP) for Tiers 1 and 2.
The structure of the CFATS framework is sound. AFPM supports the
performance-based approach that has been applied to CFATS
implementation and regulation, and believes this approach has worked
well for facilities from a compliance and efficiency standpoint. As a
result, major changes are not necessary.
The past 4 years have allowed covered facilities to develop an
informed understanding of the implications of the 2014 statutory
changes. This has provided AFPM members an opportunity to offer
suggestions for assessing and reviewing the effectiveness of the
changes made in the 2014 law.
Updated Risk Assessments and Tiering Methodology.
The 2014 Act directed DHS to develop a security risk assessment
approach and corresponding tiering methodology for covered chemical
facilities that take into consideration relevant threat information,
potential off-site consequences, and loss of human life. The re-tiering
process began in early April 2017.
Updates made by the 2014 Act to the Chemical Security Assessment
Tool (CSAT), required by the Office of Infrastructure Protection's
Infrastructure Security Compliance Division (ISCD) for Top-Screen
completion, made the CSAT 2.0 process more user-friendly and less
burdensome to facilities. The revised CSAT 2.0 process also does a more
effective job of collecting relevant data while cutting out waste,
making the process more efficient.
Streamlined Vetting Process Through the Personnel Surety Program (PSP).
The 2014 statutory changes also streamlined the PSP vetting process
for Tier 1 and 2 facilities. Under the current statute, the program
vets an individual against the terrorist screening database, eliminates
duplicative applications, and provides redress if an individual
believes their information submitted for screening is inaccurate.
While improvements to the vetting process for Tiers 1 and 2 were
welcome, it should be noted that similar application to Tiers 3 and 4
is not necessary for lower-risk facilities. DHS should pause before
extending personnel surety to Tier 3 and 4 facilities until it has had
time to evaluate the effectiveness of this requirement at Tier 1 and 2
facilities. Such evaluation by DHS should be based on available DHS
data, and undertaken in a manner that shows an overwhelming need for an
increased regulatory burden that would achieve demonstrable security
results.
As such, AFPM urges lawmakers to clarify that Tier 3 and 4
facilities are exempt, or alternatively would welcome a GAO study on
the value of expanding PSP to Tiers 3 and 4.
Expedited Approval Program (EAP).
The current statute also established an Expedited Approval Program
(EAP) for chemical facilities that fall under Tiers 3 and 4. The EAP
enables those facilities to move to an approved site security plan more
quickly. AFPM supports the EAP program and recommends no further
changes.
Coordination with State and Local Officials.
Updates in the 2014 statute reinforced better coordination with
State and local officials to improve emergency management operations.
AFPM members also support the establishment of regional offices to
improve further coordination between State and local officials.
Establishing regional offices would mirror what other regulatory
agencies have done and will provide DHS greater reach and understanding
of regional sites. At the same time, AFPM cautions against overly
prescriptive or duplicative programs. Policy makers must balance the
need for sharing truly critical information with the risk associated
with more individuals knowing potential sensitive security information.
In addition, there are other statutes better suited for information
coordination, including EPA's Risk Management Plan program, that deal
with community ``right to know'' policies. CFATS should remain focused
on preventing terrorist attacks.
recommendations for the 2018 cfats reauthorization
As policy development for a CFATS reauthorization bill gets under
way, AFPM looks forward to continuing to work with lawmakers,
stakeholders, and DHS. As Congress considers potential changes to the
CFATS program, AFPM offers the following recommendations:
(1) Enact a multi-year, but not permanent, reauthorization.
AFPM urges Congress to pass another multi-year reauthorization bill
that would provide industry with the continued certainty it needs to
make long-term facility security investments. A multi-year
reauthorization would enable DHS to efficiently run the CFATS program.
However, given historic challenges with the program's implementation,
AFPM would recommend a sunset to allow Congress to address any needed
changes at a future date.
(2) Protect the confidentiality of site security information.
Reauthorization legislation should not permit the disclosure of
site security information to the general public, or anyone who does not
have a need to know or the required security clearances to obtain such
information. Facilities must protect sensitive information from
individuals that might pose a threat to the facility's employees or
property. Sensitive information--such as security system designs,
control system schematics, COI records, and tactical response
information for emergency personnel--could threaten National security
if it falls into the wrong hands.
(3) Promote transparency in any changes to Appendix A and Chemicals of
Interest (COI).
A facility is considered a ``covered facility'' under CFATS if it
is engaged in the manufacturing, storage, and distribution of COIs
listed under Appendix A of CFATS. Currently, if DHS wants to modify
Appendix A, it must undergo notice and comment rule making. AFPM
encourages Congress to maintain this requirement.
Changes to COI, threshold quantities, and concentrations in
Appendix A are critical decisions with broad applicability governing
whether facilities are subject to CFATS and, in part, how they are
tiered. Therefore, allowing changes to be made to Appendix A without
going through notice and comment would greatly undermine transparency
in the designation process and deprive DHS of potentially important
information in its decision making. Any changes should be clearly based
on risk, scientific data, and take into consideration current industry
mitigation practices. For these reasons Congress should ensure that
proposed changes to Appendix A continue to be subject to the formal
notice and comment rule-making process.
Additionally, AFPM would support establishing an advisory council
and subjecting chemicals in question under Appendix A to peer review.
This would further enhance the transparency of the designation process
and stakeholder engagement.
(4) Avoid major changes that will further hamper implementation of the
CFATS program and divert resources to duplicative or otherwise
wasteful policies.
DHS has made significant progress in implementing the CFATS
program, but work remains. AFPM cautions against adding new and
extraneous provisions that will slow or diminish the progress to date,
including expansion of stakeholders involved in SSP development,
resubmission of top-screen information untethered from a material
change to a facility's profile, requirements for further credentials,
or other related changes.
AFPM appreciates the opportunity to provide its views on CFATS, and
looks forward to working with Congress and the administration to
reauthorizing this important program.
the 2014 cfats reauthorization improved the program and major changes
are unnecessary.
The statutory changes to CFATS passed by Congress in 2014 have
helped DHS improve the program dramatically. These include updates to
risk assessments and tiering methodology, the establishment of an
Expedited Approval Program (EAP) for Tier 3 and 4 facilities, the
reinforcement of coordination with State and local officials, and
streamlining the vetting process through the Personnel Surety Program
(PSP) for Tiers 1 and 2.
The structure of the CFATS framework itself is sound. AFPM supports
the performance-based approach that has been applied to CFATS
implementation and regulation, and believes this approach has worked
well for facilities from a compliance and efficiency standpoint. As a
result, major changes to the program are not necessary.
policy recommendations for the 2018 cfats reauthorization.
The 2014 CFATS reauthorization bill addressed a number of issues,
including major impediments to completing site security plans and a
streamlining of the vetting process for facility access. Most
importantly, the 4-year reauthorization provided industry with the
certainty needed to make long-term facility security investments and
enabled DHS to efficiently run the CFATS program.
As policy development for a CFATS reauthorization bill gets under
way, AFPM looks forward to continuing to work with lawmakers,
stakeholders, and DHS. As Congress considers potential changes to the
CFATS program, AFPM offers the following recommendations:
(1) Enact a multi-year, but not permanent, reauthorization.--CFATS
authorization expires in January 2019. Congress should pass another
multi-year reauthorization bill, as this would provide industry with
the continued certainty it needs to make long-term facility security
investments. A multi-year reauthorization would also enable DHS to
efficiently run the CFATS program. Additionally, AFPM would recommend a
sunset to allow Congress to address any needed changes at a future
date.
(2) Protect the confidentiality of site security information.--
Reauthorization legislation should not permit the disclosure of site
security information to the general public, or anyone who does not have
a need to know or the required security clearances to obtain such
information. Facilities must protect sensitive information from
individuals that might pose a threat to the facility's employees or
property. Sensitive information--such as security system designs,
control system schematics, COI records, and tactical response
information for emergency personnel--could threaten National security
if it falls into the wrong hands.
(3) Promote transparency in any changes to Appendix A and Chemicals
of Interest (COI).--Currently, if DHS wants to modify Appendix A, it
must undergo notice and comment rule making. AFPM encourages Congress
to maintain this requirement.
Allowing changes to be made to Appendix A without going through
notice and comment would greatly undermine transparency in the
designation process and deprive DHS of potentially important
information in its decision making. Congress should ensure that
proposed changes to Appendix A continue to be subject to the formal
notice and comment rule-making process.
Additionally, AFPM would support establishing an advisory council
and subjecting chemicals in question under Appendix A to peer review.
This would further enhance the transparency of the designation process
and stakeholder engagement.
(4) Avoid major changes that will further hamper implementation of
the CFATS program and divert resources to duplicative or otherwise
wasteful policies.--DHS has made significant progress in implementing
the CFATS program, but the work is still on-going. AFPM cautions
against adding new and extraneous provisions that will slow or diminish
the progress to date, including expansion of stakeholders involved in
SSP development, resubmission of top-screen information untethered from
a material change to a facility's profile, requirements for further
credentials, or other related changes.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Thompson.
Ms. Meskill, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your
opening statement.
STATEMENT OF KIRSTEN MESKILL, DIRECTOR, CORPORATE SECURITY,
BASF CORPORATION, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN
CHEMISTRY COUNCIL
Ms. Meskill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Members of the
subcommittee for the opportunity to testify today. I am Kirsten
Meskill. I am director of corporate security at BASF
Corporation.
BASF Corporation is headquartered in Florham Park, New
Jersey. We have over 100 facilities throughout North America,
and in 28 States, and more than 17,000 employees in North
America.
I am the immediate past chairman of the Chemical Sector
Coordinating Council and the current chair of the security
committee for the ACC, American Chemistry Council. I am here
today on behalf of the ACC to voice general support for a long-
term reauthorization of the Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism
Standards, CFATS.
ACC member companies manufacture products that are critical
to the everyday health and well-being of the Nation and
essential for developing a more sustainable and competitive
economy. Because of our critical role in the Nation's economy
and our responsibility to our employees and to the communities,
security is a top priority for my company and for the ACC.
In 2001, ACC created a stringent mandatory security program
called the Responsible Care Security Code. Since its creation,
ACC members have invested more than $17 billion under the
security code to further enhance site security, transportation
security and cybersecurity at our facilities. The security code
has become a gold standard for the industry and serves as a
model for regulatory programs.
Today, chemical manufacturing is experiencing a renaissance
thanks to the increase in domestic shale gas production. ACC
has identified more than 300 new capital projects worth more
than $185 billion, which will add thousands of jobs and
generate billions of dollars of economic activity.
Ensuring that clear and workable Federal programs, such as
CFATS, remain in place is an important part of establishing a
stable regulatory environment needed to foster these new
investments.
Over the past 4 years, the Department of Homeland Security
has significantly improved its administration of the CFATS
program, which has had a positive effect on enhancing security
at chemical facilities. Several factors have led to the recent
success of the CFATS program, including better site inspections
and more streamlined authorization process.
Most importantly, DHS leadership has demonstrated a
commitment to working with members of the regulated community
to improve the implementation of the program. While DHS has
made considerable strides to improve the CFATS program, there
are additional areas for improvement.
First, improving transparency in DHS risk determination.
This comes by being more transparent with facility operators
about risk determinations and tiering levels and ways to
potentially reduce the risk or even eliminate it.
Since the operator is responsible and has authority and
resources for making security risk management decisions for the
facility, it is important that they have access to all the
information about risk tiering.
Second, reconsider the value of TSDB screening at low-risk
facilities. Over the past year, DHS has been implementing risk-
based performance standards at 200 high-risk facilities at
Tiers 1 and 2. This requires facility operators to collect
sensitive personal information from thousands of employees and
contractors for DHS to vet against the Terrorist Screening
Database.
DHS is now planning to extend that program to an additional
37 low-risk facilities at Tiers 3 and 4. This will expand
vetting to thousands of more employees and contractors. ACC and
its members are concerned that such an expansion is unnecessary
and will put personal information at risk. It is unclear what
benefit is associated with the additional vetting given the
cost.
While we support vetting at high-risk Tier 1 and 2
facilities, we hope DHS can reconsider this requirement at
lower-tier levels 3 and 4.
Finally third, establish a CFATS public-private
partnership. DHS should leverage CFATS and industry stewardship
programs such as ACC Responsible CARE program with the goal of
further enhancing the safety and security of hazardous
chemicals.
By doing so, DHS would be able to recognize responsible
operators that go beyond regulatory compliance and incentivize
them to continue development of chemical security programs that
enhance security beyond the universe of CFATS.
I would like to close by saying that CFATS has helped make
our industry and our communities more secure. It is a program
that will grow stronger by adopting some additional
improvements and by the continued engagement of this committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I am
looking forward to answering any questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Meskill follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kirsten Meskill
February 15, 2018
Kirsten Meskill is the director of corporate security, for BASF
Corporation. BASF Corporation is headquartered in Florham Park, New
Jersey with over 100 production facilities in 28 States and more than
17,000 employees in North America. The largest sites are located in
Geismar, Louisiana and Freeport, Texas. Kirsten is the immediate past
chairperson of the Chemical Sector Coordinating Council and the current
chairperson of the security committee of the American Chemistry Council
(ACC).
ACC offers general support for long-term reauthorization of the
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS). ACC member
companies manufacture products that are critical to the everyday health
and well-being of our Nation and essential to developing a more
sustainable and more competitive economy. Because of our critical role
in the Nation's economy and our responsibility to our employees and
communities, security is a top priority for my company and for ACC
member companies.
In 2001, ACC created a stringent, mandatory security program called
the Responsible Care Security Code. Since the program was created, ACC
members have invested more than $17 billion under the Security Code to
further enhance site security, transportation security, and
cybersecurity at their facilities. The Security Code has become a gold
standard for the industry and serves as a model for regulatory
programs.
The business of chemistry is a $768 billion enterprise that
provides more 800,000 skilled, good-paying American jobs. I am happy to
report that chemical manufacturing is experiencing a renaissance in the
United States thanks to the increase in domestic shale gas production.
In fact, ACC has identified more than 300 new capital investment
projects that are worth more than $185 billion, which will add
thousands of jobs and generate billions of dollars in economic
activity. Ensuring that clear and workable Federal programs such as
CFATS remain in place is an important part of establishing the stable
regulatory environment needed to foster these new investments.
Over the past 4 years, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
has significantly improved its administration of the CFATS program,
which has had a positive impact on enhancing security at chemical
facilities. Several factors have led to the recent success of CFATS
program, including better site inspections and a more streamlined
authorization process. Most importantly, DHS leadership has
demonstrated a commitment to working with members of the regulated
community to improve the implementation of the CFATS program.
While DHS has made considerable strides to improve the CFATS
program, more work needs to be done.
1. Improve transparency in DHS risk determinations.--DHS should be
more transparent with facility operators regarding what is
driving risk determinations for establishing how facilities
fall into a certain tier level and potentially what they may
consider to reduce that risk or even eliminate it all together.
More often than not, facility operators are left in the dark as
to why they are tiered at a specified level, when in fact it is
the operator who has the overall responsibility and authority
for making security risk management decisions for that
facility.
2. Reconsider the value of TSDB Screening at low-risk facilities.--
Over the past year, DHS has been implementing Risk-Based
Performance Standard 12(iv) at 200 High-Risk Facilities, Tiers
1 and 2. This process requires facility operators to collect
sensitive personal information from thousands of employees and
contractors and send that information to DHS for vetting
against the Terrorist Screening Database (TSDB). Now DHS is
planning to extend the program to an additional 3,700 low-risk
Tier 3 and 4 facilities involving tens of thousands of
employees' and contractors' personal information. ACC and its
members are concerned that such an expansion is unnecessary and
will put people's personal information at risk. It is not clear
that the benefit associated with the TSDB vetting is worth the
cost and risk. While we support TSDB vetting at high-risk Tier
1 and 2 facilities we want DHS to reconsider this requirement
for lower-risk Tier 3 and 4 facilities.
3. Establish a CFATS Public/Private Partnership.--DHS should
leverage the benefits of CFATS and Industry Stewardship
Programs, such as the ACC Responsible Care program, with the
goal of further enhancing the safety and security of hazardous
chemicals. By doing so, DHS would be able to recognize
responsible operators for going beyond mere regulatory
compliance and incentivize the use of chemical security
programs that enhance security beyond the universe of CFATS-
regulated facilities.
CFATS has helped make our industry and communities more secure.
It's a program that will grow stronger by adopting the improvements
outlined in my testimony and by the continued engagement of this
committee to make sure CFATS stays on track.
ACC and its members encourage you to support this important program
and make the improvements that are needed to take CFATS to the next
level while providing DHS with the appropriate Congressional oversight
and guidance.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Ms. Meskill.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Mutschler for 5 minutes for
his opening statement. Yes, the mic, the button there.
STATEMENT OF PETE MUTSCHLER, ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND SAFETY
DIRECTOR, CHS INC.
Mr. Mutschler. Sorry. Yes, good morning, Chairman Ratcliffe
and Ranking Member Richmond, Members of the subcommittee, thank
you for the opportunity to be here today. My name is Pete
Mutschler, and in addition to my position as the director of
environment and safety for CHS and my position on the Board of
Directors for ResponsibleAg, I am also here representing The
Fertilizer Institute and the Agricultural Retailers
Association.
CHS is a leading global agribusiness owned by farmers,
ranchers, and cooperatives across the United States. CHS
supplies the farmers with what they need to produce and market
their products. We are committed to helping our farmer-owners
succeed.
CHS is a member of The Fertilizer Institute, which is the
national trade association representing the fertilizer
industry. TFI represents companies engaged in all aspects of
the fertilizer supply chain. Commercial fertilizers account for
50 percent of the current crop yields that we see today.
CHS is also a member of the Agricultural Retailers
Association and ARA represents the interests of agriculture
retailers. Products and services agricultural retailers provide
are critical to the success of our Nation's farmers.
We are grateful for your efforts to ensure the passage of
H.R. 4007, which provided the Department of Homeland Security
and the industry with much-needed certainty for the CFATS
program. With the current reauthorization expiring in December
2018, we express our support for a multi-year reauthorization
that continues to provide the industry with certainty needed to
make long-term investments and enables the Department to
efficiently run the program.
We also believe that there is a need for reauthorization in
the future to allow Congressional oversight in review of the
program.
Approximately one-third of the 6,500 agriculture facilities
are regulated under the CFATS program in this country. TFI
estimates that the agriculture sector accounts for about half
of all CFATS-registered facilities.
CHS has 390 of these facilities registered under CFATS, so
we have a great deal of experience with this program.
We are pleased with the Department's efforts to improve the
program and to enhance stakeholder engagement. We did need to
expend additional resources to comply with the program, but we
have seen a real return on that investment.
Today, DHS and the industry are focused on the common goal
of ensuring that the products we handle are used appropriately
and safely. Working with DHS and the CFATS program, CHS now has
a better idea of the security risk at our facilities.
Our security risks are prioritized now so we can focus our
efforts on the highest-risk facilities first. Moreover, CFATS
has allowed us to build stronger relationships with our
neighbors and communities, which is incredibly important to the
cooperative system.
It is important that any reauthorization does not permit
the disclosure of sensitive site security information to anyone
that does not have a critical need to know.
In addition, we are strong supporters of a robust public
engagement and believe that any changes to the CFATS program,
including Appendix A, should be done through a formal notice
and comment rulemaking process.
I am also here to represent a relatively new program to our
industry, ResponsibleAg. ResponsibleAg is a voluntary industry
stewardship program that launched in 2015 to help
agribusinesses comply with Federal environment, safety, and
security rules, including the CFATS program.
At the core of the program is a compliance assessment
process and a robust suite of resources designed to assist
retailers in their compliance efforts. ResponsibleAg is
designed to help protect employees, first responders, and the
public.
Currently, CHS has 200 facilities that participate in the
program and over 100 ResponsibleAg-certified facilities.
Overall in the industry, 2,600 agriculture retail facilities
have signed up to be a part of ResponsibleAg. Nineteen hundred
of them have been assessed and nearly 1,000 have been
certified.
Over one-third of the agriculture retail facilities in the
country are ResponsibleAg participants. We continue to
encourage more facilities to participate in the program, but we
are very pleased with the progress we have made to date.
As a part of the reauthorization of the CFATS program, I
respectfully ask the Members of this subcommittee to consider
how ResponsibleAg and other stewardship programs can complement
and enhance the limited resources of the CFATS program. For now
I simply ask that you be willing to work with us to potentially
find a way to recognize these stewardship programs in the
reauthorization.
Finally, as Members of this committee work to
reauthorization the CFATS program, I want to stress that any
lapse in the program would be a serious concern to us. It would
be highly disruptive to both the industry and the regulated
community.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to share the views
of CHS, TFI, and ARA.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mutschler follows:]
Prepared Statement of Pete Mutschler
February 15, 2018
Good morning, Chairman McCaul, Subcommittee Chairman Ratcliffe,
Ranking Member Thompson, Subcommittee Ranking Member Richmond, and
Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to be here
today.
My name is Pete Mutschler. I am a director of environment, health,
and safety for CHS Inc. and the secretary of the Board of Directors for
ResponsibleAg. I am also here on behalf of The Fertilizer Institute
(TFI) and Agricultural Retailers Association (ARA). CHS Inc. is a
member of both associations.
CHS Inc. is a leading global agribusiness owned by farmers,
ranchers, and cooperatives across the United States. Diversified in
energy, grains, and foods, CHS is committed to helping its customers,
farmer-owners, and other stakeholders grow their businesses through its
domestic and global operations. CHS supplies energy, crop nutrients,
grain marketing services, animal feed, food and food ingredients, along
with business solutions including insurance, financial, and risk
management services. The company operates petroleum refineries/
pipelines and manufactures, markets, and distributes Cenex brand
refined fuels, lubricants, propane, and renewable energy products.
As I mentioned earlier, CHS is a member of The Fertilizer Institute
(TFI), which is the national trade association representing the
fertilizer industry. TFI represents companies that are engaged in all
aspects of the fertilizer supply chain. Approximately 50 percent of
crop yields are attributable to the use of commercial fertilizers.
CHS is also a member of the Agricultural Retailers Association
(ARA). ARA represents the interests of agricultural retailers, who
provide farmers with crop nutrients, crop protection, seeds, and other
products and services to support our Nation's farmers.
We are grateful for your efforts to ensure passage of H.R. 4007
which provided the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and industry
with much-needed certainty for the CFATS program. With the current
authorization expiring in December 2018, we express our support for a
multi-year reauthorization that continues to provide industry with the
certainty needed to make long-term facility investments and enables the
Department to efficiently run the program. We believe periodic
reauthorization is important to allow continued Congressional oversight
and review of the program.
It is estimated that there are approximately 6,500 agricultural
retail facilities in the United States. Approximately one-third of
these facilities are regulated under the CFATS program because they
store or handle fertilizer products included in Appendix A: Chemicals
of Interest (COI). TFI estimates that the agricultural retail sector
accounts for about half (50 percent) of all CFATS-regulated facilities.
CHS has approximately 390 facilities registered with CFATS, so we have
a great deal of experience with the program.
While the initial roll-out of the CFATS program was challenging, we
are pleased with the Department's efforts to improve the program and
enhance stakeholder engagement. We did need to expend capital resources
to comply with the program, but we have seen benefits from our
participation. Today, we are focused on the common goal of both DHS and
industry, namely to ensure that the products we handle, and that are
critical to America's farmers, are used appropriately. In considering
the benefits of our participation, CHS now has a better idea of the
security risks at our facilities. Our risks are prioritized which
allows us to focus our efforts on the most high-risk facilities and
commit the appropriate level of human and financial resources on our
low-risk locations. Moreover, CFATS allows us to build stronger
relationships with our neighbors and communities, a hallmark of the
cooperative system.
We believe it is important that any reauthorization not permit the
disclosure of sensitive site security information to the general
public, or to anyone who does not have a need to know, or the required
security clearance to obtain, such information. The program must ensure
that this highly-sensitive information is protected from individuals
that might pose a threat to the facility's employees or property.
In addition, we are strong supporters of robust public engagement
and believe any changes to the CFATS program, including Appendix A,
should be done through a formal notice and comment rule making.
As I mentioned previously, I also serve on the board of directors
for ResponsibleAg. ResponsibleAg is a voluntary, industry stewardship
program that launched in 2015 with the goal of assisting agribusinesses
to comply with Federal environmental, health, safety, and security
rules focused on the safe handling and storage of fertilizer products,
including the CFATS program. At the core of the program is a Federal
regulatory compliance assessment addressing current Federal
regulations. These assessments identify any issues of concern,
recommendations for corrective action if needed, and provide a robust
suite of resources to assist in compliance. ResponsibleAg is designed
to protect employees, first responders, and the general public through
an organized program of periodic and thorough assessments.
CHS is very supportive of ResponsibleAg. Currently, we have 200
facilities that participate in the program and over 100 ResponsibleAg-
certified facilities. Overall, almost 2,600 agricultural facilities
have signed up with ResponsibleAg, 1,900 facilities have been assessed,
and nearly 1,000 facilities have been certified. Over one-third of
agricultural retail facilities are ResponsibleAg participants. While we
continue to encourage more facilities to participate, we are very
pleased with the progress to date.
As part of the reauthorization of the CFATS program, I respectfully
ask that Members of this subcommittee consider how ResponsibleAg and
other third-party audited stewardship programs can complement and
enhance the limited resources of the CFATS program. For now, I simply
ask that you be willing to work with us to potentially find a way to
recognize these stewardship programs in a reauthorization.
Finally, as Members of this committee work to reauthorize the CFATS
program, I want to stress that any lapse in the program would be a
serious concern. It would be highly disruptive to both the regulated
community and the Department's efforts to address any potential risks
to National security.
Thank you again for the opportunity to share the views of CHS, TFI,
and ARA. Protecting the public, our employees, and our communities is
paramount to us all, and we look forward to working with the committee
on this shared goal and a successful reauthorization of the CFATS
program.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Mutschler.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Orum for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF PAUL ORUM, CHEMICAL SAFETY ADVOCATE, COALITION TO
PREVENT CHEMICAL DISASTERS
Mr. Orum. Good morning. My name is Paul Orum and I thank
you for this opportunity to address the effectiveness of the
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards program. The dangers
of chemicals and terrorists are well-known. The question today
is whether CFATS solutions are sufficiently protective and
efficient and resourceful.
Congress should reauthorize CFATS for a limited term. But
Congress should also recognize the significant risks of simple
reauthorization. While CFATS has improved fence line security
to some degree, strategies to protect rather than reduce
chemical targets are inevitably fallible.
Better strategies are available.
The program should generate solutions, not just control
problems. It should use all available options: Improve public
confidence by respecting community concerns, better optimize
solutions, and more effectively use available resources, such
as employee expertise.
Even small changes could make the current program much more
effective. Here are 5 general areas and 10 practical
recommendations to build on the current program.
First, use all available options, not just management and
control strategies. Current CFATS standards focus on risk-based
management and control while neglecting prevention. As a
result, the chemical industry spends billions protecting
chemical targets. This is not only a high-risk strategy in
terms of terrorism, but also wasteful in an economic sense.
Modernizing facilities in ways that remove chemical targets can
reduce the need for such expenditures.
CFATS can better align production and security by first
seeking to avoid the need for security measures and then
addressing residual vulnerabilities. Specifically, DHS should
compare target reduction practices that companies are already
using, help other facilities evaluate these practices and
involve qualified private-sector solutions developers in the
process.
Second, continue to exercise oversight, especially though
of the ability of CFATS to realistically ensure protection.
U.S. Government Accountability Office has produced useful
reports about the program. However, GAO reports to date have
evaluated CFATS program implementation rather than the adequacy
of the standards to realistically ensure protection.
Congress should ask GAO to investigate whether CFATS
standards actually protect life, property, and security against
known and evolving threats.
Third, use all available resources, especially make better
use of employee input. Facility employees are often the most
vulnerable in a chemical release, but also the most
knowledgeable about problems and remedies. There are existing
employee input requirements in CFATS but more systematic and
substantial employee input will improve security planning.
Fourth, to improve public confidence, respect community
concerns. The lack of public information under CFATS admittedly
makes it difficult for DHS to address public concerns. While
site security plans are understandably protected information,
chemical hazards are often at the same time well-known.
Secrecy is at once not a real option and not responsive to
communities. When evident problems are not addressed, public
confidence wanes. The program should respect the public's
fundamental interests in disaster preparedness and knowledge of
solutions that can reduce well-known hazards.
Fifth, support other programs that improve chemical
security. EPA's Risk Management Planning requirements are also
important to chemical security because the RMP program engages
civil society in prevention and preparedness in ways that CFATS
does not. We are very concerned with the administration's 20-
month delay of modest but important amendments to the RMP
program.
We are concerned that the delay endangers police, fire, and
other emergency responders, impedes local disaster planning,
and delays preparations for safer technology assessments that
could help reduce terrorist targets.
Congress should also be aware of the need for credible
independent evaluation of new developments in Federally-funded
toxic gas science and should assert its interest in assuring
the integrity of Federal research.
I would be pleased to answer any questions or otherwise
follow up about how these recommendations might be achieved.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Orum follows:]
Prepared Statement of Paul Orum
February 15, 2018
Good morning, my name is Paul Orum. Thank you for this opportunity
to address the effectiveness of the Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism
Standards (CFATS) program of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS).
The dangers of chemicals and terrorists are well known. The
question today is whether CFATS' solutions are sufficiently protective,
efficient, and resourceful.
Congress should reauthorize CFATS, for a limited term. But Congress
should also recognize the significant risks of simple reauthorization.
While CFATS has improved fence line security to some degree, strategies
that protect rather than reduce chemical targets are inevitably
fallible. (See Chemical Security Breaches in the News in Attachment A.)
Better strategies are available.
The program should generate solutions, not just control problems;
use all available options; improve public confidence by respecting
community concerns; better optimize solutions; and more effectively use
available resources such as employee expertise.
Even small changes could make the current program much more
effective. Here are 5 general areas and 10 practical recommendations to
build on the current program.
Use all available options--not just management and control strategies.
Current CFATS standards focus on risk-based management and control
strategies, while neglecting prevention. As a result, the chemical
industry spends billions protecting chemical targets.\1\ This is not
only a high-risk strategy in terms of terrorism, but also wasteful in
an economic sense. Modernizing facilities in ways that remove chemical
targets can reduce the need for such expenditures. CFATS can better
align production and security by first avoiding the need for security
measures and then addressing residual vulnerabilities. Specifically,
DHS should compare target reduction practices that companies already
use, help facilities evaluate these practices, and involve qualified
private-sector solutions developers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Since 2001, member companies of the American Chemistry Council
industry trade association have spent more than $17 billion on chemical
security, www.americanchemistry.com/policy/security, accessed February
12, 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CFATS' 18 performance standards are important but incomplete. The
standards encourage chemical facilities to overly commit resources to
conventional security measures. These sunk costs can then become a
barrier to target reduction strategies that could more effectively
protect people, property, and security. In this way, CFATS tends to
perpetuate terror targets that could be removed by a more complete
strategy. No amount of fence line security will assure protection,
address supply chain risk, or modernize facilities. Conventional
security will also inevitably attenuate over time.
There has been some reduction in the need for chemical security
measures, but the exact extent is hard to determine. Several thousand
facilities have tiered out of high-risk status by removing or modifying
chemical holdings.\2\ But what are the lessons learned about target
reduction opportunities from practices at these facilities?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Between 2007 and 2017 DHS redeterminations cut the number of
high-risk facilities by about half from more than 7,000 to about 3,500.
Figures have fluctuated as DHS re-determined the status of some
facilities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Independent surveys show hundreds of facilities across some 20
industry sectors reducing chemical targets, including bleach producers,
water utilities, power plants, oil refineries, aluminum smelters, and
many manufacturers, among other industries.\3\ (See sector list in
Attachment B.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Survey reports by Paul Orum include: Preventing Toxic
Terrorism, Center for American Progress, 2006; Toxic Trains and the
Terrorist Threat, Center for American Progress, 2007; Chemical Security
101, Center for American Progress, 2008; Safer Chemicals Create a More
Secure America, Center for American Progress, 2010; Who's in Danger?
Race, Poverty, and Chemical Disasters, Environmental Justice and Health
Alliance for Chemical Policy Reform, 2014.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Successful companies commonly adopt an alternate chemical or
process, use a chemical in a less dangerous or less concentrated form,
or generate a chemical only as needed without storage. Other options
may co-locate chemical suppliers with users, improve inventory control,
or consolidate and minimize bulk storage. These changes remove
unnecessary dangers and avoid some costs of regulatory compliance,
liability insurance, personal protective equipment, community
notification, emergency planning, and site security. When fully
considered, these measures often save money, and can help get companies
off the treadmill of expensive partial solutions.
Congress should direct DHS to:
1. Identify, compile, and compare target reduction practices that are
already in use in industry (including non-covered and previously
covered facilities). In this context, the Department is not approving
or disapproving particular technologies, but rather comparing similar
facilities and industry sectors and identifying relevant target
reduction practices. This process will generate opportunity awareness
and capacity within the Department.
2. Assist chemical facilities in evaluating how target reduction
options can reduce the need for security measures and reduce the
potential consequences of a terrorist attack. Security vulnerability
assessments and site security plans should incorporate the review of
target reduction options. To the extent that the target reduction
measures reduce the need for required security measures (under CFATS
2102(b)(1)), covered facilities should be permitted to use the target
reduction measure to meet and avoid required risk-based performance
standards (under CFATS 2102(a)(2)(C)).
3. Establish methods and procedures to facilitate technical assistance
and the transfer and diffusion of target reduction technologies between
qualified private-sector entities, covered chemical facilities, and the
Department. Provide for deliberate information sharing with qualified
private-sector entities engaged in the design, development, and supply
of target reduction technologies. This change will help rectify the
lack of attention to prevention strategies and lack of involvement of
solutions developers in existing information-sharing provisions (of
CFATS Section 2103). CFATS information sharing otherwise focuses on
emergency response.
4. Produce an annual aggregated lessons learned analysis of trends in
successful target reduction practices and emerging target reduction
opportunities.
5. Improve interagency coordination by sharing information on risk
reduction achieved through demonstrated and emerging target reduction
practices with the Director of National Intelligence as well as
Federal, State, and local government agencies that have
responsibilities for security, safety, or natural disaster preparedness
at chemical facilities.
Exercise oversight--especially of the ability of CFATS standards to
realistically ensure protection.
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) has produced useful
reports about CFATS. However, GAO reports to date have evaluated CFATS
program implementation rather than the adequacy of the standards to
realistically ensure protection. Congress should ask GAO to investigate
whether CFATS standards actually protect life, property, and security
against known and evolving threats. GAO should also evaluate how DHS
manages information about practices at facilities that tier down or out
of the program.
Congress should request that GAO:
6. Review the sufficiency of security risk determinations and
countermeasures under CFATS and the need for revised or additional
strategies to address evolving security risks (e.g., drones and cyber
threats).
7. Assess whether local emergency response resources are sufficient to
credibly respond to a worst-case chemical facility terrorist incident.
8. Evaluate how the Department documents, maintains, and utilizes
information on instances of changes to facility tier assignments under
CFATS 2102(e)(3) and how management, utility, and use of the
information can be improved. Successful practices of facilities that
tier down or out of the program can inform the Department only if this
information is organized and usefully retrievable.
Use available resources--especially make better use of employee
input.
Facility employees are often the most vulnerable in a chemical
release, but also the most knowledgeable about problems and remedies.
There are existing employee input requirements in CFATS (2102(b)(2) and
2102(d)(2)(C)(ii)). More systematic and substantial employee input will
improve security planning.
Congress and DHS should:
9. Require facility owners to develop and maintain written employee
input plans to:
Consult with employees and their representatives in the
development of security vulnerability assessments and site
security plans, to include employees with technical expertise
in design engineering and process operations, whenever
available;
Document and maintain records of the employees involved, the
team's recommendations, and the owner or operator's resolution
of those recommendations;
Designate responsible parties and time lines for corrective
actions;
Provide for employee input during audits and inspections;
and
Certify that input is received from employees and their
representatives to the greatest extent practicable.
To improve public confidence, respect community concerns.
The lack of public information under CFATS makes it difficult for
DHS to address public concerns. While site security plans are
understandably protected information, chemical hazards are often at the
same time well-known. Secrecy is at once not a real option and not
responsive to communities. When evident problems are not addressed,
public confidence wanes. The program should respect the public's
fundamental interests in disaster preparedness and knowledge of
solutions that can reduce well-known hazards.
Some examples: Prior to the deadly fire and explosion, West
Fertilizer in West, Texas was well-known in the community yet
reportedly had no fence, frequent theft of chemicals, and a practice of
self-service by farmers after hours. The graffiti that is common on
rail cars attests to their public visibility and accessibility.\4\ The
chemical release from Arkema in Crosby, Texas after Hurricane Harvey
was widely publicized, as is the norm for chemical emergencies.
Residents near the PBF refinery (formerly ExxonMobil) in Torrance,
Calif., are conducting high-visibility organizing for alternatives to
hydrofluoric acid that will not endanger the community. (Notably,
Chevron's Salt Lake City refinery is converting from hydrofluoric acid
to liquid ionic catalysts, a promising technology that eliminates a
major potential of an offsite toxic gas release.) Lack of public
confidence--in CFATS, industry, and Government in general--is one
reason communities are very interested in fail-safe target reduction
solutions that are effective even if control strategies fail.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ CFATS does not regulate chemicals in transportation, but
assessments and plans should address interrelated supply chain risks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress and DHS should:
10. Delimit protected information to the extent that the information is
already publicly available, readily discoverable, or otherwise lawfully
disclosed.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Similar factors have successfully delimited chemical trade
secret claims for many years under section 322(b) of the Emergency
Planning and Community Right to Know Act of 1986.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Support other programs that improve chemical security.
Risk Management Planning (RMP).--EPA's RMP requirements are also
important to chemical security. Because the RMP program engages civil
society in prevention and preparedness in ways that CFATS does not,
risk management planning is also important to chemical security. We are
very concerned with the administration's 20-month delay of the modest
but important amendments to the RMP program.\6\ EPA produced the
amendments after years of public comment and consultation between the
agency, DHS, OSHA, ATF, and other agencies. We are concerned that the
delay endangers police, fire, and other emergency responders; impedes
local disaster planning; and delays preparations for safer technology
assessments that could help reduce terrorist targets.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Chemical Disaster Rule, 82 FR 4594, January 13, 2017.
\7\ The Chemical Disaster Rule requires certain oil refineries,
paper mills, and chemical plants to conduct safer technology
alternatives assessments. Information on chemical hazards and
alternatives in these sectors is found in the report, Who's In Danger?
(cited above), pp. 33-36.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Over a 10-year period some 2,291 serious chemical facility
incidents killed 59 people, injured or forced a total of 17,000 people
to seek medical treatment, forced approximately half a million to
shelter or evacuate, and caused $2.7 billion in property damages.\8\
EPA data show that serious releases occur as often as 2 or 3 times per
week Nation-wide. Millions of Americans live in danger of a chemical
release, including 1 in 3 school children.\9\ African American, Latino,
and low-income populations are disproportionately affected--especially
in fence-line communities.\10\ A terrorist attack on industrial
chemicals would likely first impact the same populations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ EPA Regulatory Impact Analysis exh. 6-5 at 87 (Dec. 2016),
http://www.regulations.gov/document?D=EPA-HQ-OEM-2015-0725-0734.
\9\ Kids In Danger Zones, Center for Effective Government, 2014.
\10\ Who's in Danger? Race, Poverty, and Chemical Disasters,
Environmental Justice and Health Alliance for Chemical Policy Reform,
2014.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Toxic gas science.--Congress should also be aware of the need for
credible, independent evaluation of new developments in Federally-
funded toxic gas release and dispersion science. Concerned
organizations have warned that industry and Government reevaluation
efforts could result in changes to the National guidance documents used
for emergency response planning in a manner that intentionally reduces
perception of risk and industry costs.\11\ The Chlorine Institute
issued, and then withdrew, guidance that dramatically-reduced
dispersion scenario distances for chlorine gas.\12\ Several companies
relied on the document to starkly reduce estimated RMP vulnerability
zone distances. Such changes could put at risk emergency responders,
facility employees, and the public. The National Transportation Safety
Board and the Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board both have
clear independent authority to investigate systemic issues affecting
the chemical industry but neither organization has apparently taken up
this issue to date. The relevant Congressional committees should assert
their interest in assuring the integrity of Federal research.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Washington Fire Chiefs letter to Senator Maria Cantwell,
August 2, 2017; Columbia Riverkeeper letter to Members of Congress,
August 28, 2017.
\12\ Chlorine Institute Pamphlet 74, Edition 6, Guidance on
Estimating the Area Affected by a Chlorine Release, June 2015.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I would be pleased to answer any questions or otherwise follow up
on how these recommendations might be achieved.
Attachment A.--Chemical Plant Security Breaches in the News
Security agencies and others have repeatedly warned that a
terrorist attack could release industrial chemicals and harm thousands
of people around some chemical facilities. In response, Congress
created security requirements called Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism
Standards (CFATS). But year after year, news reports show instances--
more than 100 and counting--of security measures failing to impede
uninvited news reporters, thieves, or hackers. The ease with which
reporters and others observe lax security underscores the need for a
more effective and comprehensive CFATS program that reduces unnecessary
targets of opportunity whenever feasible. In fact, at least hundreds of
chemical facilities have successfully switched to safer and more secure
chemicals and processes that effectively remove ready targets for
terrorists.
the real story: security breaches in the news
``I parked across the street and walked along the railroad tracks
[and] spent a half-hour working my way around [a Los Angeles chlorine
facility], trying doorknobs, squeezing into openings in the fence and
snapping photos of security weaknesses. An unarmed guard, a contractor,
was posted at the main entrance, but in the back, out of view of the
security cameras, only a padlock and chain secured a gate that led
straight to [chlorine rail] tankers . . . No one stopped or questioned
me.''--Washington Post, Outlook, Matthew Quirk, April 9, 2017.
``The increased number of intrusions into energy computer controls
last year brings the number of such incidents in the industry to more
than 400 since 2011, Homeland Security data show. Security specialists
say that's likely a conservative number because energy companies aren't
required to report cyber attacks to the U.S. Government.''--
Fuelfix.com, March 22, 2017.
``Federal law enforcement investigators are searching in at least
three States for more than 500 pounds of explosives stolen from a CSX
train . . . ''--CBS News, April 22, 2016.
``A Chinese steel manufacturer faces renewed U.S. criminal charges
over allegations that it arranged to improperly obtain confidential
trade secrets from DuPont and got access to hacked information from the
U.S. company's computers.''--Reuters, January 7, 2016.
``A Lockport man was charged Friday with a trespassing violation
after he allegedly flew a drone near the VanDeMark Chemical Co. plant,
which produces highly toxic phosgene gas.''--Buffalo News, December 5,
2015.
``The Roberts County Sheriff's Department needs the public's help
after a reported theft involving two 150-pound Chlorine gas tanks that
will be harmful, possibly fatal, if exposed. [T]he tanks were reported
stolen from the rural water pump station.''--KSFY.ABC, Sioux Falls, SD,
September 11, 2015.
``The Calcasieu Parish Sheriff's Office and the Joint Terrorism
Task Force are investigating a drone flying over an industrial facility
in Calcasieu Parish. According to the sheriff's office, agencies
received two separate complaints, one on March 3 at 2 p.m. and the
other one on Monday morning . . . ''--KATC-TV3, Southwest Louisiana,
March 18, 2015.
``A San Francisco Federal court has sentenced U.S. businessman
Walter Liew to 15 years in prison for stealing trade secrets from
chemical giant DuPont and then selling them to a State-owned Chinese
company.''--Fortune, July 10, 2014.
``More than half of all facilities licensed last year by Texas to
carry ammonium nitrate lacked either secure fencing or locked storage
areas for the potentially explosive chemical compound . . . [One
security incident] involved an employee of a fertilizer facility who
stole 4 tons of ammonium nitrate fertilizer.''--Dallas News, November
3, 2013.
``The Texas fertilizer plant that exploded 2 weeks ago, killing 14
people and injuring about 200, was a repeat target of theft by
intruders who tampered with tanks and caused the release of toxic
chemicals . . . Police responded to at least 11 reports of burglaries
and five separate ammonia leaks at West Fertilizer Co. over the past 12
years . . . ''--Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, May 4, 2013.
``In rural areas across the United States, the thriving meth trade
has turned storage facilities like West Fertilizer Co and even
unattended tanks in farm fields into frequent targets of theft,
according to several government and fertilizer industry reports issued
over the past 13 years . . . Chemical safety experts said the recurrent
security breaches at West Fertilizer are troubling because they suggest
vulnerability to theft, leaks, fires or explosions.''--Reuters, May 3,
2013.
``A break-in at a small north Georgia water treatment plant is
raising alarms among security experts. Authorities said sometime last
weekend, someone broke in and altered the chemical settings in the
filtration system . . . [T]here are no roaming security guards or
cameras at the plant, just a rusty barbed wire fence, a sign and a
small lock.''--Atlanta Journal-Constitution, April 30, 2013.
``Two south Georgia chemical companies are still figuring out
exactly what thieves stole from them. Investigators aren't saying much
about what the crooks may have been after, but tens of thousands of
dollars worth of chemicals are gone . . . ''--WMC Action News 5/WALB
News 10, Southern Georgia, 2013.
``There is an interesting chemical theft story over on
www.lohud.com about the bulk gasoline theft from three retail stores in
New York. It seems that someone drove a tank truck into three separate
closed-for-the-night gasoline stations and pumped gasoline out of the
in-ground tanks into the tanker.''--Chemical Facility Security News
blog, March 16, 2012.
``At least 48 chemical and defense companies were victims of a
coordinated cyber attack that has been traced to a man in China,
according to a new report from security firm Symantec Corp. Computers
belonging to these companies were infected with malicious software
known as `PoisonIvy,' which was used to steal information such as
design documents, formulas and details on manufacturing processes . . .
the victims include 29 chemicals companies . . . ''--Reuters, December
31, 2011.
``A 20-year old Mound man and former Gustavus Adolphus College
student faces a felony charge for allegations he stole chemicals from a
classroom with the intent of making an explosive device.''--St Peter
Herald, Faribault, MN, April 22, 2010.
``A few yards off a south county road, with only a chain link fence
to protect it, sits an ammonia tank big enough to kill thousands.''--
KMOV News 4, St. Louis, MO, January 31, 2008.
``A private security company's unarmed guards have been yanked out
of the city's two water filtration plants amid concerns about
safeguarding Chicago's drinking water. Water Management employees found
gaping holes in the company's performance, City Hall sources said.
`They were sleeping. They weren't where they were supposed to be.' ''--
Chicago Sun Times, October 22, 2007.
``One water facility visited this past week had a large hole in its
protective chain-link fencing, allowing anyone to easily access a
storage shed where canisters of chlorine gas are stored. The fence had
been down for more than a month, after a truck from a nearby shipping
company accidentally rammed it.''--Whittier Daily News, Whittier, CA,
May 29, 2007.
``Frankly, I could toss a rock to these tankers [at Nashville metro
wastewater plant] so there's no security here--nothing that's going to
stop a terrorist attack. Last fall, just in the shadow of the State
Capitol, we spotted this chlorine tanker sitting unattended for
hours.''--News Channel 5, Nashville, TN, April 10, 2007.
``We park [at DuPont's Edge Moor plant] across the street from what
appear to be eight chlorine tank cars near two storage tanks the size
of grain elevators. There's a large gap in the fence where railroad
tracks exit the plant . . . [Once inside] the only barrier between me
and the chance to unleash possible toxic catastrophe is a striped pole
bearing a sign that reads Men at Work.''--Washington Monthly, March
2007.
``Five years after terrorists murdered 2,996 people in the Sept. 11
attacks, the Trib embarked on a probe to see how well railroads and
their customers secure lethal hazardous materials . . . [T]he Trib
penetrated 48 plants and the freight lines that service them to reach
potentially catastrophic chemicals in populated parts of Seattle,
Tacoma, Atlanta, Pittsburgh, Las Vegas, San Francisco's Bay Area and
the New Jersey suburbs, as well as two port facilities in Oregon and
Washington.''--Pittsburgh Tribune, January 14, 2007.
``[In New Jersey], surrounded by a tall chain-link fence on a dead-
end street, stands a chemical plant that . . . could pose a potentially
lethal threat to the 12 million people who live within a 14-mile
radius. A Discover reporter managed to find the inconspicuous plant,
take a few photographs, and spend some moments pondering how fragile
the building was and the havoc that could be caused with a single well-
aimed truck bomb.''--Discover Magazine, July 2006.
``Train cars on the fringe of downtown Fresno are right out in the
open--no fence, no rail police, no security guards. We hung around for
more than half an hour and no one questioned our being there.''--CBS
Channel 47, Fresno, CA, April 28, 2006.
``Gates to the depot are unlocked and unguarded, allowing unimpeded
access to tracks where cars loaded with deadly chlorine, ammonia or
oleum gases are stored . . . Security is so lax that a reporter and
photographer recently spent 10 minutes driving along a rail bed beside
cars holding toxic chemicals without being challenged, or even
approached, by railroad employees.''--New York Times, March 27, 2006.
``We began to investigate just how close we could get to one of
these [rail] tankers. It took us about 1 hour to find out . . . Train
yards in South Florida are wide open. We walked around this tanker
holding facility under the cover of darkness for 6 hours.''--CBS 4,
South Florida, November 14, 2005.
``On a recent visit to Chalmette Refining [Louisiana], a Times
editorial writer had no trouble standing in the nearby park for 15
minutes with a large knapsack . . . At two plants in Dallas that use
large amounts of chlorine, the same writer parked a car on the
periphery and milled about for more than a half-hour without being
stopped. The fencing was minimal--far less than at a nearby automobile
factory.''--New York Times, May 22, 2005.
``At the Olga Plant in eastern Lee County during a random visit, we
found the front gate wide open with no workers in sight. `There has
never been a time at the Olga water plant where I felt secure,' said
[a] utility worker.''--NBC2, Lee County, FL, May 16, 2005.
``[The chemical plant in northern New Jersey] remained loosely
guarded and accessible. Dozens of trucks and cars drove by within 100
feet of the tanks. A reporter and photographer drove back and forth for
5 minutes, snapping photos with a camera the size of a large sidearm,
then left without being approached.''--New York Times, May 9, 2005.
``The chemicals in these facilities have the potential to affect
hundreds of thousands of valley residents, but in many cases the only
security being used is a chain link fence . . . Crime reports . . .
show that the company [Hill Brothers Chemical] called police 35 times
between 2002 and 2004; 13 of those calls were burglary reports.''--CBS
5 News, Phoenix, AZ, February 17, 2005.
``[F]our tanker cars stood in a row in an unfenced CSX
Transportation rail yard . . . There were no visible barriers . . .
except about 100 yards of open space and tracks. There was ample cover
for someone to hide or stash a weapon. No security personnel stopped to
question why the visitors were lingering there and why one of them was
taking pictures. There was no visible security--not even a `no
trespassing' sign.''--Baltimore Sun, January 16, 2005.
``6NEWS investigators walked the fence line at Jones Chemicals . .
. At a gate there was a gap big enough for a person to crawl under . .
. At the Transflo terminal . . . we found the front gate wide open.''--
NBC News 6, Charlotte, NC, March 3, 2004.
``A tour of Houston-area industrial facilities by a Chronicle
reporter and photographer, accompanied by a security consultant, found
obvious, easily corrected and therefore inexcusable security lapses . .
. Ramshackle gates and unmended fences, the Chronicle's consultant
said, could not stop cattle, much less a bomb-laden vehicle.''--Houston
Chronicle Editorial, December 31, 2003.
``We found gates unlocked or wide open, dilapidated fences and
unprotected tanks filled with deadly chemicals in dozens of plants in
metropolitan areas that could put more than one million people at risk
in the event of a terrorist attack . . . There was one plant in Chicago
that I simply sat on top of the tank and waved `Hello, I'm on your
tank.' ''--CBS `60 Minutes' citing Carl Prine, Pittsburgh Tribune,
November 16, 2003.
``At three [Portland area facilities], a reporter parked his car
outside of perimeter fencing but within 30 yards of the most dangerous
chemical tanks or rail tank cars and remained there--in his car or
outside his car taking pictures of the tanks--for as long as 90 minutes
without being challenged.''--Portland Oregon Tribune, October 3, 2003.
``A reporter and photographer were able to walk within a stone's
throw of several railroad cars used to store chemicals [at JCI Jones
Chemicals]. The pair took notes and photographs in plain sight for more
than 15 minutes--noting the lack of a perimeter fence and several wide-
open warehouse doors . . . ''--Times Herald-Record (Warwick, NY),
August 3, 2003.
``Someone who apparently planned to use anhydrous ammonia to make
crystal methamphetamine had tampered with a 2,000-gallon tank at
Channel Chemical plant. About 600 gallons was missing. Last May, an
ammonia leak caused by a thief who stole the chemical from a food
processing plant at Arlington, Washington, forced the evacuation of
about 1,500 people.''--Associated Press, Gulfport, MS, February 23,
2003.
``We decided to put security to the test. We drove our news car
right into a site that stores tons of chlorine. We had easy access to
all areas for about 5 minutes before an employee stopped us.''--KVBC
Channel 3, Las Vegas, November 19, 2002.
``[Channel 7 found] wide open gates and doors, automatic fencing
that doesn't close properly, few or no security guards . . . fences
that have missing barbed wire, or sizable gaps, or have been trampled
to the ground, unchallenged access to chemical storage areas.''--ABC
Channel 7, Chicago, IL, November 6, 2002.
``Officials at four chemical plants have confirmed that they have
no night security guards . . . Within the last year, workers once saw
two strangers running through the Noveon plant . . . ''--The Louisville
Courier-Journal, October 14, 2002.
The International Security Management Association, an industry
organization, advertised in Roll Call against mandatory National
chemical security standards and argued instead for voluntary measures.
One ISMA officer is from Sony Electronics--a company with security so
lax at its Pittsburgh facility that a news reporter stood next to a 90-
ton rail car of chlorine without rousing any response from company
security.--Roll Call, Sept. 19, 2002; personal communication with
Pittsburgh Tribune reporter Carl Prine.
``The [Pittsburgh Tribune's] latest foray into 30 chemical
factories, shippers and warehouses in [Baltimore, Houston, and Chicago]
buttresses a recent investigation into western Pennsylvania's unguarded
toxic facilities.''--Pittsburgh Tribune-Review, May 5, 2002.
``The security was so lax at 30 sites [in western Pennsylvania]
that in broad daylight a reporter--wearing a press pass and carrying a
camera--could walk or drive right up to tanks, pipes and control rooms
considered key targets for terrorists.''--Pittsburgh Tribune-Review,
April 7, 2002.
``On Jan. 31, [a shotgun wielding] robber had trespassed on
property owned by Citgo Petroleum Corp., one of several refining
companies that claimed to have boosted security in the wake of the
Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.''--San Antonio Express-News, February 16,
2002.
``A CBS investigation found mammoth holes in security. Just last
week we gained access to several chemical companies including BP
Chemical and Kinder Morgan.''--CBS 2, New York City, November 6, 2001.
``This month infiltrators in frogmen suites [gained access to] a
Sterling Chemicals, Inc., plant in Texas City. The frogmen were cops
testing security at the plant. Sterling's recent security upgrades--
prison-like watchtowers, security cameras, concrete barricades at all
entrances and additional guards--had not kept them out.''--Newsweek,
November 5, 2001.
``At Cleveland Hopkins there are also security gaps around the
perimeter of the airport . . . Just off the highway, a jet fuel storage
tank is completely accessible to any passing motorist.''--0990.3 WCPN
FM, Cleveland, OH, October 23, 2001.
Compiled by Paul Orum, Revised May 15, 2017.
Attachment B.--Chemical Security; Sample Changes at Chemical Facilities
Many leading companies are already reducing chemical targets of
opportunity. Surveys identify existing alternatives used across some 20
industries:
Bleach manufacturers eliminate bulk chlorine gas by
generating chlorine as needed ``just in time'' on-site,
eliminating transportation and storage vulnerabilities.
Petroleum refineries avoid dangerous hydrofluoric acid
alkylation by using less hazardous sulfuric acid; others are
moving to liquid ionic or solid acid catalysts.
Water utilities eliminate bulk chlorine gas by using liquid
chlorine bleach, ozone without storage, and ultraviolet light
as appropriate.
Paper mills eliminate bulk chlorine gas by using hydrogen
peroxide, ozone, or chlorine dioxide without bulk storage.
Pool service companies eliminate chlorine gas by using
chlorine tabs or liquid bleach.
Manufacturers of polyurethane foams eliminate bulk ethylene
oxide by substituting vegetable-based polyols.
Soap and detergent manufacturers eliminate bulk oleum and
sulfur trioxide by using sulfur burning equipment on-site.
Manufacturers of ferric chloride eliminate bulk chlorine gas
by processing scrap steel with less concentrated liquid
hydrochloric acid (<37 percent) and oxygen.
Titanium dioxide producers eliminate bulk chlorine gas by
generating chlorine on-site as needed without storage, or by
using the sulfate process.
Secondary aluminum smelters eliminate bulk chlorine gas by
removing impurities with nitrogen gas injected with magnesium
salts.
Manufacturers of semiconductors, silicon wafers, and metal
products eliminate concentrated hydrofluoric acid by using less
concentrated forms (<50 percent).
Power plants eliminate bulk anhydrous ammonia gas by using
cleaner combustion or by using aqueous ammonia or urea in
pollution control equipment; they also remove chlorine gas by
using liquid bleach to treat cooling water.
Refrigerated warehouses reduce anhydrous ammonia gas through
low charge ammonia refrigeration systems.
Wholesale chemical distributors eliminate most bulk chlorine
gas and sulfur dioxide gas by distributing alternatives such as
liquid bleach and sodium bisulfite.
Pulp mills, food processors, wastewater plants, and
hazardous waste recovery operations eliminate bulk sulfur
dioxide gas by, as appropriate, generating sulfur compounds on-
site or purchasing sodium bisulfite, metabisulfite,
hydrosulfite, or other alternatives.
Diverse manufacturers eliminate bulk chlorine gas by
generating chlorine on-site as needed without storage, such as
for fuel additives, water treatment chemicals, and aramid
polymers used to make bulletproof vests.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Orum.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions. I want
to ask a question about the Expedited Approval Program, but
before I do, very quickly if I can get each of you to answer
this as briefly as possible.
We have heard a lot about facilities that are either newly-
tiered or that have changed tiers. So I want, as quickly as
possible again, whether you feel the CFATS program right now is
correctly considering variables like consequences and threats
and vulnerabilities when we are assessing the risk? I guess,
more specifically, has this re-tiering initiative methodology
from your perspective been successful?
I will just go across the board. Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you for the question. Certainly our
members believe that since the reauthorization in 2014 that the
re-tiering process has been improved and folks believe that
that risk are better being assessed. A number of our facilities
have been re-tiered, so we are pleased with the direction.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Great.
Ms. Meskill.
Ms. Meskill. I agree with that. Many of ACC's members are
also pleased. We have seen a general over-the-industry
reduction in the number of higher-risk facilities.
However, going back to the point that I made in my opening
statement, there is really a lack of transparency so as
industry we don't quite know how these risk tierings were
applied to the general sites and so it is difficult for me to
comment on whether or not it has addressed the real hazards and
risks out there without really having full transparency to how
these conclusions were made.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you.
Mr. Mutschler.
Mr. Mutschler. Our experience on the re-tiering has been
very positive actually and the engagement between our
facilities and DHS has been positive. I will agree we don't
always understand why, but they have been very willing to open
up a dialog and answer our questions as to why we are moving
around to the point that they can. So it has been very positive
for us.
Mr. Ratcliffe. OK.
Mr. Orum.
Mr. Orum. There is not much public information as others
have pointed out, for evaluating this. For that reason I have
suggested that GAO should be reviewing sufficiency of the
tiering and of the overall protectiveness of the program.
Mr. Ratcliffe. OK. So you mentioned GAO. The GAO also
reported in 2017 that very few facilities have participated in
DHS's Expedited Approval Program, which, as you all know, is
intended to reduce the burden and expedite the processing of
security plans for Tier 3 and Tier 4 facilities.
So I really want to find out why you think that that
participation in the Expedited Approval Program has been so
limited? If you have thoughts on the implementation by DHS
about what we can do to enhance participation, I would like to
hear that.
Again, I will just go across the board.
Mr. Thompson. Well, quickly, I will say that we certainly
believe through this re-tiering process, and as more of our
facilities get re-tiered and moved potentially to that 3 and 4
category, you are going to see a greater use of the Expedited
Approval Process.
Mr. Ratcliffe. OK.
Ms. Meskill. I agree with that as well. As new sites and
companies, particularly small and medium, come into the CFATS
regulatory area, I think we will see more expedited approval
process for those companies like mine and for other member
companies of ACC that have been with CFATS from the very
beginning, to go back into the expedited approval process is
really backtracking and so it doesn't make a lot of sense for
us.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you.
Mr. Mutschler. From the agricultural retailers' position,
the expedited approval process has actually worked very well
for us and I can see that continuing on. We have actually had
no problem once we have gone into the tier side of the program.
Mr. Orum. I have no strong bias about the Expedited
Approval Process other than that it should be as substantial as
the rest of the process. Our overall concern is just the
sufficiency of what facilities look at when they do their
evaluations and their Site Security Plans, rather than that
process.
Mr. Ratcliffe. OK. My time is about to expire.
Mr. Mutschler. I want to give you a quick opportunity. You
mentioned that ResponsibleAg program as being a voluntary
stewardship program that has been successful in your industry.
I am wondering, are the requirements under that program, do
you think they are more stringent on security issues than the
CFATS program is? Why would facilities opt to participate in
that ResponsibleAg program if they are regulated by CFATS?
Mr. Mutschler. I don't think it is more or less. I think
the regulations are there and compliance is pretty standard
across the board. Why would they choose to participate in that?
It is because, you know, with under CFATS or any regulatory
program our operations only get evaluated every so often. The
resources just are not there to get onto every site.
We can use ResponsibleAg to cover, you know, like I said,
1,900 of them have been assessed and that just assures them
that they are complying with the regulations and gives the
communities a comfort level that we are doing the right thing.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Terrific, thank you. My time is expired.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member, Mr. Richmond.
Mr. Richmond. Let me kind-of pick up where the Chairman
left off. Since CFATS was established, I guess over a decade
ago, we had about 70,000 facilities covered. Now it is down to
3,500 today in terms of high-risk. That has been reduction
largely in response to facilities voluntary reducing or
removing dangerous chemicals and thereby hopefully eliminating
a potential terrorist target.
Are there ways that you think we can leverage that data or
looking at those 3,500 facilities that have reduced their risk?
Maybe trying to figure out if there are any metrics or
similarities across the line without compromising security or
the proprietary interests of those companies?
We will start with you, Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Well, I certainly would support, you know,
more information and my members will welcome the information
that other facilities have used in order to exit the program.
We see no downside to that whatsoever.
Mr. Richmond. Well, the question is: Do you think you could
do it without giving up any proprietary information of those
companies?
Mr. Thompson. Well, again, it depends. Without knowing
precisely the information we are talking about I couldn't
answer that of course. Certainly there would have to be a
balance between not releasing proprietary information or, you
know, security-related information.
But to the extent that DHS could synthesize this into
something that could be released publicly I think that would
help. But competing against this train is this notion of
driving at this, you know, as I said in my testimony, I don't
believe they should force inherently safer technology reviews.
You know, that is not appropriately a part of this program.
But certainly other aspects of what facilities have done we
would welcome it.
Mr. Richmond. Mr. Orum.
Mr. Orum. Yes, there are ways to make better use of that
information without just compromising proprietary information.
First, I think DHS should be producing lessons learned
analyses, which can be done simply by aggregating and
anonymizing information rather than including facility-specific
information about those lessons learned.
Second, remember that trade secret factors have been used
for many years to successfully deal in public information.
Where information is already available or readily discoverable
it basically is not secret, can't be kept secret. For example,
under the Emergency Planning and Community Right To Know Act,
those criteria have been used very successfully.
Third, I think that the need-to-know information sharing
under Section 2103 of CFATS should be specifically broadened
such that private-sector developers of target reduction
technologies can have an access to that information for
purposes of technology transfer and diffusion and technical
assistance.
Otherwise, that section is all focused on emergency
response. That is part of the failure, I think, of imagination
of the program as a whole, that it is not focused more on the
prevention side.
Mr. Richmond. Speaking of prevention, what should we be
doing to address the statutory exemptions for certain types of
high-risk facilities like water treatment systems and nuclear
power plants?
Mr. Orum. Drinking water and wastewater facilities just
should definitely be included in the program. Half of large
drinking water facilities already don't use bulk chlorine gas
and there is a trend in that direction.
The others two-thirds of wastewater facilities do not use
bulk chlorine gas. The bleach manufacturers that serve them are
an increasing number, although still relatively small, no
longer bringing in rail cars and 90 tons of chlorine gas.
That whole system and the supply chain of transportation
that serves it could very effectively be brought under the
program. It is just a matter of Congress doing it.
Mr. Richmond. I see my time is running out, and I just hope
at some point we have a conversation about whether you all
think we have adequately--or, the conversation about drones and
these facilities.
My district is the largest petrochemical footprint in the
country, and I worry about drones and security in the
neighborhood security every day. So I hope that comes up in
questions or later testimony.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Donovan, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and just my friend
from Louisiana just hit on something I was gonna speak on, too.
Since the reauthorization in 2014, our enemies' methods of
threatening our systems have changed, drones being one of them.
Are there any things that this committee could do to help
in your efforts to protect the facilities that we are talking
about here with these new rising threats, whether it be in the
field of physical security or cybersecurity?
I would ask the entire panel. I would be very interested in
hearing your expertise.
Mr. Thompson. Well, let me certainly echo what the Ranking
Member and what you just said about drones. Drones is certainly
a high threat and concern of our industry as well. We have been
working closely with the FAA on drone issues.
We encourage DHS to work with FAA on drone issues, you
know, to coordinate between the two agencies, you know, who
should lead and how to protect the airspace above our
facilities. It is a very important issue.
We also believe that DHS should implement a voluntary
program for our facilities to report potential drone attacks so
there can be more of a collection of data to help us going
forward.
Ms. Meskill. I agree. We are all very worried about drones,
particularly the weaponization and arming of drones. Those
drones entering airspace over our chemical facilities.
Currently in many States, some States have passed
regulation putting that area restricted so that drones cannot
cross it, but that is not uniform across all our States. So we
are looking for that.
Drone technology is great. It is advancing quickly and it
is really completing our security and safety programs. It is
fantastic. The ability to use drones to do inspections of
smokestacks and other structures without putting other
scaffolding in place is really great.
As we watch security advancement we can even implement
drone technology to do perimeter checks and things like that.
So it is really great, but we are paralyzed because we are very
concerned about weaponized drones coming over our facilities.
We don't have a way to defend ourselves against that right now.
Mr. Donovan. Thanks.
Mr. Mutschler. Again, from the agricultural side of the
industry, you know, we agree with everything I have heard here,
but I really believe highly in the public-private partnerships
to address any new risk that is coming our way. I think DHS has
done a very good job working with us, and particularly looking
at the risk to the agricultural sector.
We are remote facilities. We are scattered all over the
countryside, and we have some unusual risk. They have been very
open to work with us on assessing those risks, and I think what
the committee can do is encourage these public-private
relationships using some of the stewardship programs to look at
best management practices in addition to just regulatory
requirements.
Mr. Orum. Here again I think you have a prime issue to put
to the Government Accountability Office for an in-depth study
on whether current existing CFATS standards are, in fact,
sufficient to address evolving risks of concern.
Mr. Donovan. Quickly, could each of you just speak 15, 20
seconds on cybersecurity and what you feel could be an
assistance to you in protecting your facilities from a cyber
attack?
Ms. Meskill. Sure. Access to intelligence, so it is a
continuing theme that we have heard over and over again. We
need information. Clearly we need declassified or Classified
information. We need to share that information. We need to
understand where those risks are, where they are evolving,
where they are happening in the industry so that we can then
design our security programs to address those risks.
Mr. Thompson. I certainly wasn't avoiding the question. I
was trying to be a gentleman.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Thompson. But like I say, there is a certain way this
ranks high with the drone issue, cybersecurity as well. AFP and
our members have been actively involved with this. Certainly
there is a risk-based performance, I believe No. 8, that deals
with this issue. So our security plans address cyber.
We have also been working closely with NIST and their
framework for this issue and so we are actively involved and
certainly the Government in sharing information, finding ways
voluntarily to share amongst ourselves would be the way the
Government could help.
Mr. Mutschler. Again, I get back to that public-private
partnership deal and on cybersecurity we are currently at the
table with DHS talking about precision agriculture and what is
the vulnerabilities of those systems. I think those dialogs are
incredibly healthy for us as the industry to protect the
systems. It is doing a good job on opening the eyes of the
regulatories to us as to what is actually out there right now,
so----
Mr. Donovan. I thank you all and I also invite each of you
to share with us anything that comes up after this hearing on
how we could help you protect those facilities. Thank you for
your testimony.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the time that I don't have
remaining.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Florida, Chief
Demings.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman and thank you
to our witnesses for joining us here today.
The CFATS Act of 2014 includes protection for workers,
including a requirement that facilities to the extent practical
consult with at least one knowledgeable employee or labor union
representative in security planning and vulnerability
assessments.
Mr. Orum, can you elaborate on the benefit of having
employees on the ground contribute to security plans and
service force multipliers for monitoring compliance?
Mr. Orum. Yes, employees tend to get hurt first and worst
by chemical releases. They also observe problems every day and
are knowledgeable about remedies. Basically the more involved
employees are the more fixes to the problems.
There are a number of things that CFATS could do more
substantially, including employees routinely in inspections,
for example. Making sure that companies certify that they have
consulted with employees, requiring an input plan in which
employee recommendations are documented as well as the
responses to those recommendations.
DHS could also do a sort-of ``See Something, Say
Something'' educational campaign for employees. It is possible
also that transferring the whistleblower protection provisions
to OSHA, which administers such programs for a couple dozen
agencies, could help make them more effective.
Mrs. Demings. You know, as a former police chief, I
frequently ask the men and the women on the ground who were
doing the job for their opinions on how we could do it better
and how we could keep them safer. For the other panelists, what
are the circumstances that would make it impractical for a
facility to ask an employee for help with a security or site
security plan?
We will start with you, Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Well, it is not as much whether it is
impractical. I think what we are always striving to do is find
the appropriate balance. We are dealing with highly-sensitive
security information and so we need to balance that and the
need to limit that information from getting out more publicly
where it could pose greater risks with, you know, balance that
with certainly the expertise that some of our work force could
bring to bear.
So our facilities, you know, are always looking for that
balance. If there are folks within the work force that can add
to the development of vulnerability assessments or security
plans, certainly we bring that expertise to bear. But again, it
is a balance and there is not a one-size-fits-all answer here.
This isn't about what Mr. Orum said about identifying
problems and releases. This is about security. So we need to
take a different account.
Mrs. Demings. Isn't identifying problems a part of a
security plan?
Mr. Thompson. Absolutely, but some of the releases that
were being referenced there are other programs like EPA's Risk
Management Planning program and EPGA. There are lots of other
programs.
I think it is important for us when we talk about this to
remember we are talking about CFATS and security and the
highly-sensitive information that we are dealing with. Again,
that is what makes us want to--this isn't an issue of just
stiff-arming our employees. This, again, is the issue of
finding the appropriate balance to deal with highly-sensitive
information.
Ms. Meskill. So I agree with everything Mr. Thompson said,
but in addition, across the industry, plans are developed at a
site level. It is that site director who is ultimately
accountable and responsible for safety and security at his
facility. So there is immediately on-site employee engagement
and involvement in development of those plans.
Of course you need some technical skill as well. At my
company, and I know at other member companies at ACC, you have
individuals like me and teams like me that advise and give that
technical skill.
But ultimately it is the people on the ground that are
coming up with those plans because, like Mr. Orum said, they
are the first ones who know the risks. They are really in the
best position to develop those plans.
Mrs. Demings. Yes.
Mr. Mutschler. I kind-of agree with everything I have
heard. One thing is, you know, I truly believe that there is
not an adequate safety and security plan that doesn't include
the input from all employees at certain phases of the project.
We have had tremendous luck with DHS on this issue, and
particularly with our outreach program for non-regulated
facilities.
They will sit down with all our employees and we will go
through a vulnerability assessment and the only thing that
where it starts crossing the line is when you have this road
map that shows you exactly how to damage the facility.
That is the area that we need to protect. But we take input
on all levels of our safety programs and security from not only
the employees but the communities we work with. You know, we
have law enforcement involved in that same process. They need
to be.
Mrs. Demings. Excellent. Thank you very much and I am out
of time.
I will yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentlelady.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Nebraska, Mr.
Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you all for being here and this is a new
subject matter for me, so I am trying to learn as fast as I
can. Could you give me an example, any of you, of a Tier 1
facility versus a Tier 2? What kinds of things are we looking
at that are different? I don't know if I understand it?
Mr. Mutschler. I will start with that. It is not completely
known by the regulated party, but, you know, the amount of work
that they do analyzing the vulnerabilities and what possibly
could be in there as multiple factors. Not only what is stored
on the site, where it is located, what is the general make-up
of the geography, and the population in the area.
I have always been surprised to see which ones are tiered
at which levels, so----
Mr. Bacon. That is interesting that it is hard for you to
ascertain in you are having to live it.
Any other thoughts on that question?
Ms. Meskill. No, I agree with that. You know, and I made
reference to this earlier, during the reauthorization process
there were sites that fell out of tiering, which did surprise
us. So oftentimes it is a bit of a surprise to us, industry.
Because we don't have sufficient transparency or knowledge
as to what exactly is being looked at.
Mr. Bacon. Mr. Thompson, you talk about flexibility and how
important it is. Can you describe what does that really mean
and why is that so important to you for CFATS?
Mr. Thompson. Well, again, it is important as I said in my
testimony about, you know, this being performance standards and
not one-size-fits-all. Every facility is different, every work
force is different.
I don't disagree with any, you know, what the panel has
said. I think we were consistent about getting input from our
work force. What we, you know, are opposed to are mandates that
tell us exactly how to go about it.
So, you know, that is the main point here. We need the
flexibility to develop the best plan that we can to provide the
maximum security. In some situations that will involve lots of
work force involvement and in other situations maybe less so.
So we just need the flexibility to develop the best plan we
can working with DHS.
Mr. Bacon. Ms. Meskill, on the DHS CFATS officials are they
helpful to you? I mean, are they good advisors? Are they a
little bit ambiguous or----
Ms. Meskill. No.
Mr. Bacon [continuing]. Help you get to the solution?
Ms. Meskill. No, they have been extremely helpful, and we
do work extremely closely with them, both at the chem sector
level but also at the ACC level and then at the site level.
They have been very gracious in responding to questions, very
responsive and overall, yes.
I think they try very hard to understand and relate to the
challenges that industry has and complications that those
challenges present sometimes to make us comply with the
regulation.
Mr. Bacon. To the remaining three, have you found them
helpful as well?
Mr. Mutschler. I would like to lead off with that one. I
have found them extremely helpful.
Mr. Bacon. Good.
Mr. Mutschler. In our industry we have a lot of people that
are not security experts. They are selling fertilizer. They are
giving farmers advice. They are trying to, you know, market
grain and that is their main job.
Every time we have interacted with the DHS personnel they
have been very professional, very informative. They have really
helped ease the anxiety of our locations. In my overall opinion
it has been a tremendous success because of the people that are
involved.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. That is good to hear. Anybody else.
Mr. Thompson. Well, I certainly won't miss the opportunity
to echo our thanks to DHS. They do a terrific job. This is a
hard program. They have done, you know, we can't say enough.
Mr. Orum. I would add that average community member has
never met a DHS CFATS employee, I presume. My impression is
though, however, and I keep harping on this, there is a kind-of
a mindset failure that is too much focused on conventional
security and not enough on the reduction of risk profiles as a
potential security measure. More should be done to use that
aspect.
Mr. Bacon. OK, thank you very much. I would just wish all
of our agencies had that kind of feedback for helping out their
customers.
I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentleman.
I thank all the witnesses for your testimony today, and I
thank the Members for all their questions.
I can relate to you all that the combination of the
National shooting tragedy and a change in the House calendar
prevented some Members of the subcommittee from attending our
hearing today. Some of those Members will likely have
additional questions for you as witnesses and we will ask you
to respond to those in writing.
Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will
remain open for a period of 10 days. Without objection, the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:01 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Chet Thompson
Question 1a. One of the risk-based performance standards imposed by
CFATS is cybersecurity. In your experience, is DHS providing your
member with the information and support that they need in order to
secure their systems against evolving cyber threats?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1b. How do your members account for cybersecurity in their
security plans?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1c. How has the CFATS program improved cybersecurity for
chemical facilities?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. DHS published its standards guidance for CFATS in
2009. While updated guidance has been provided for some of those
standards in the past 9 years, one more recent threat that seems to
remain unaddressed by the area perimeter standard is the threat posed
by unmanned aerial systems, or drones. In the wrong hands, drones can
be used to surveil perimeter security systems to discover weaknesses,
or--in the worst case--to carry explosives over barriers designed to
stop ground vehicles. What are your respective groups doing to educate
your members about drone threats to their facilities and about the
countermeasures they can employ?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2b. Have facility operators found that the law allows them
to effectively defend their facilities against unauthorized drone
activity?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2c. What more do you feel DHS can do to help chemical
facilities successfully manage the risks posed by drones?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Kirsten Meskill
Question 1a. One of the risk-based performance standards imposed by
CFATS is cybersecurity. In your experience, is DHS providing your
members with the information and support that they need in order to
secure their systems against evolving cyber threats?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1b. How do your members account for cybersecurity in their
security plans?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1c. How has the CFATS program improved cybersecurity for
chemical facilities?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. DHS published its standards guidance for CFATS in
2009. While updated guidance has been provided for some of those
standards in the past 9 years, one more recent threat that seems to
remain unaddressed by the area perimeter standard is the threat posed
by unmanned aerial systems, or drones. In the wrong hands, drones can
be used to surveil perimeter security systems to discover weaknesses,
or--in the worst case--to carry explosives over barriers designed to
stop ground vehicles. What are your respective groups doing to educate
your members about drone threats to their facilities and about the
countermeasures they can employ?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2b. Have facility operators found that the law allows them
to effectively defend their facilities against unauthorized drone
activity?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2c. What more do you feel DHS can do to help chemical
facilities successfully manage the risks posed by drones?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Paul Orum
Question 1a. In your testimony, you suggest not enough has been
done to investigate the efficacy of the performance requirements DHS
has established in the CFATS program. How might the CFATS performance
standards fall short in addressing evolving cybersecurity threats?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1b. How might the CFATS performance standards fall short
in addressing the threats posed by drones?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
[all]