- PRESIDENT'S BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
[Senate Hearing 115-548]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-548
PRESIDENT'S BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
FEBRUARY 14, 2018
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the Committee on Finance
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-666-PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
ORRIN G. HATCH, Utah, Chairman
CHUCK GRASSLEY, Iowa
RON WYDEN, Oregon
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
BILL NELSON, Florida
JOHN CORNYN, Texas
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
JOHN THUNE, South Dakota
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
RICHARD BURR, North Carolina
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
JOHNNY ISAKSON, Georgia
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
MICHAEL F. BENNET, Colorado
PATRICK J. TOOMEY, Pennsylvania
ROBERT P. CASEY, Jr., Pennsylvania
DEAN HELLER, Nevada
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
CLAIRE McCASKILL, Missouri
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
A. Jay Khosla, Staff Director
Joshua Sheinkman, Democratic Staff Director
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Hatch, Hon. Orrin G., a U.S. Senator from Utah, chairman,
Committee on Finance...........................................
1
Wyden, Hon. Ron, a U.S. Senator from Oregon......................
3
ADMINISTRATION WITNESS
Kautter, Hon. David J., Acting Commissioner, Internal Revenue
Service, and Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy, Department of
the Treasury, Washington, DC...................................
5
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL
Hatch, Hon. Orrin G.:
Opening statement............................................
1
Prepared statement with attachment...........................
31
Kautter, Hon. David J.:
Testimony....................................................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
33
Responses to questions from committee members................
36
Wyden, Hon. Ron:
Opening statement............................................
3
Prepared statement...........................................
53
Communication
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA).......
55
(iii)
PRESIDENT'S BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
----------
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Finance,
Washington, DC.
The hearing was convened, pursuant to notice, at 2:35 p.m.,
in room SD-215, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Orrin G.
Hatch (chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Crapo, Thune, Portman, Heller, Cassidy,
Wyden, Cantwell, Menendez, Carper, Cardin, Brown, Casey,
Warner, McCaskill, and Whitehouse.
Also present: Republican staff: Jay Khosla, Staff Director;
Chris Armstrong, Chief Oversight Counsel; Rory Heslington,
Professional Staff Member; Eric Oman, Senior Policy Advisor for
Tax and Accounting; Mark Prater, Deputy Staff Director and
Chief Tax Counsel; and Nicholas Wyatt, Tax and Nominations
Professional Staff Member. Democratic staff: Adam Carasso,
Senior Tax and Economic Advisor; Michael Evans, General
Counsel; Daniel Goshorn, Investigative Counsel; Ian Nicholson,
Investigator; and Tiffany Smith, Chief Tax Counsel.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ORRIN G. HATCH, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
UTAH, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Chairman. The hearing will come to order. We are
gathered here for the second time today to talk once again
about the President's proposed budget for fiscal year 2019.
We are very grateful to have Mr. David Kautter with us, the
Acting IRS Commissioner, here today. He is going to talk
specifically about the President's proposed budget for the IRS.
Mr. Kautter has served admirably in this capacity. He has
filled two critical roles with the administration during the
busiest time the tax policy world has seen in decades, and this
is no easy task. Mr. Kautter deserves our thanks for serving
with such distinction.
Now, some of my colleagues may tune me out for the next
several minutes, as they have already heard me talk effusively
about the success of the new tax reform law, but I hope people
are listening, because there has been quite a bit of good news
lately.
Any major change to the tax system should be evaluated on
the merits, whatever they may be. And by and large, we are
seeing great things from tax reform. Some have argued that our
tax reform bill, which provides middle-class tax relief and
lower taxes on job creators, benefits only the rich or the
high-ranking officers of greedy corporations. Well, that is
kind of a bogus, stupid comment, but that is common every time
you do one of these things.
Others tend to vilify companies' statements about their
capital structure, including dividend payments, indebtedness,
or share buybacks as things that benefit only the wealthy
stockholder or investor. Yet quite often, a business's success
or bottom-line results in increased valuations of middle-class
retirement accounts and pensions. In fact, our private
retirement system has been the biggest generator of middle-
class wealth in our Nation's history. And because more than
one-third of all corporate stock holdings in the United States
are in various forms of retirement accounts, growing businesses
contribute directly to the expansion of that middle-class
wealth.
So yes, with lower corporate tax rates and other reforms to
our business tax system, we have seen some immediate success,
as hundreds of major companies have publicly announced their
plans to raise wages, distribute bonuses, or boost employee
401(k) contributions. At the same time, today's success is
helping to improve the retirements and investments of millions
of middle-class Americans. I would say those are really good
things.
That said, despite all of this good news, we still have a
great deal of work to do to ensure that the tax laws are
implemented correctly. The Treasury Department, IRS, and
Congress, especially the tax-writing committees, have to work
together to ensure that the law is implemented and administered
as Congress intended. We look forward to working with the
administration and with IRS specifically as they continue to
implement this law and issue guidance to us.
This committee will also be examining possible
administrative reforms at the IRS, giving the IRS greater
flexibility and bringing it into the 21st century. Now, I look
forward to continued feedback from the IRS and Treasury on ways
we can work to improve the taxpayer system and taxpayer
services and administration.
That said, I have made no secret about my disagreements
with the Internal Revenue Service over the years. I led, along
with my good friend Ranking Member Wyden, the most thorough and
comprehensive bipartisan investigation of the IRS in decades. I
have gone after the IRS for everything from wasteful spending
to political targeting to questionable enforcement practices.
No one here needs to remind me about IRS missteps, regardless
of which President or Commissioner has been at the helm.
But personally, I think it is high time that Congress
reexamines its approach to the agency. Because IRS will bear
the brunt of the burden in implementing and administering the
tax code and the new tax provisions, it needs sufficient
personnel and resources to carry out its important missions at
this critical juncture.
Let us keep in mind that the IRS is the only agency in the
government that touches every single American every single
year. And that is why I have pushed for such robust oversight
over the years. It is also why the IRS should get the resources
it needs to do its job right. For example, the IRS is still
using computer software that is older than most of my committee
staff. And you can take a look at them: they are not all
millennials. In fact, a number of them are anything but
millennials. [Laughter.]
The agency is shedding staff and resources. Agency
reductions might be a good thing in some cases, but it should
be done through thoughtful reforms, not the blunt axe of blind
budget cuts. The administration in its budget has proposed
additional cuts to funding for the IRS. I think that is a
mistake. While I have had quite a bit to say over the years
about the allocation of resources at the IRS, now, directly
after passage of a major overhaul of the tax system, is not a
great time to further reduce the taxpayer services' budget of
the agency that will do most of the work in implementing the
updated tax code.
We need to take a close look at this issue and be fiscally
responsible with any solutions. But as we do this, we should
also consider what is in the best interests of proper and
effective administration of our recently reformed tax code.
Before I close, I do want to state that we have noticed an
executive business meeting for this time. If at any point
during the hearing a suitable quorum is present, I intend to
pause the hearing and move to votes on the nominations of Mr.
Dennis Shea and Mr. C.J. Mahoney. Thereafter, we will resume
our hearing.
And with that, I will turn to Senator Wyden and give the
floor to him.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Hatch appears in the
appendix.]
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. RON WYDEN,
A U.S. SENATOR FROM OREGON
Senator Wyden. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. As we
talked about this morning and I think you noted, we have had a
spirited discussion so far.
Based on public documents--and this tally, colleagues, is
going to be a running one--it is $120 billion for stock
buybacks to $5 billion for worker compensation. So we will
continue to provide updates on that matter.
Less than 2 months ago, Republicans passed legislation
making $10 trillion in tax changes pretty much on the fly, the
biggest overhaul in 3 decades, and there was a web of
complicated rule changes. Now they are giving short shrift to
the IRS, which is the agency that actually has to implement
those changes and provide services to American families and
businesses based on the new rules.
The IRS said it would need nearly $400 million to implement
the new law, but the Trump budget holds the agency's funding
flat. The budget makes a fake reference to increasing
enforcement dollars, but it kicks the actual decision to the
appropriators in Congress, who are unlikely to fork over the
necessary resources. And that comes at a time when tax cheats
are looking at the Trump tax law and licking their chops,
planning complicated new schemes of abusing the rules to get
out of paying their fair share, particularly with the new pass-
through loophole. The law is an open invitation for scamsters
to game the system, leaving a heavier burden for Americans who
do follow the rules.
This is not an academic matter. Denying the IRS the
resources it needs to be an effective agency impedes its
ability to serve the public. And the Trump administration knows
that. By the administration's own projections, as a result of
continued budget cuts for taxpayer service, fewer than half the
people who pick up the phone to call the IRS for filing
services in 2019 will get through, down from 75 percent in
2018. And that is with lawmakers on both sides already speaking
out about the poor service provided to taxpayers by the IRS.
Bottom line: the IRS might not be anybody's favorite
Federal agency, but the American people do expect it to
function without political agenda or interference.
So that brings me to another issue that needs to be
addressed this afternoon. Mr. Kautter, who is here with the
committee this afternoon in the middle of a tax-filing system,
is the Acting IRS Commissioner. This is supposed to be a
nonpartisan job overseeing the administration of tax law. But
Mr. Kautter is also currently the Assistant Secretary for Tax
Policy, and that position in this administration is about as
partisan a position as you can find.
The committee recently spent years investigating
accusations of political interference at the IRS. The
bipartisan investigation determined that sloppy work by IRS
officials led to both conservative and progressive tax groups
being subject to unfair scrutiny.
In my view, both sides would agree that the IRS ought to be
politics-free when it comes to administering the law. I recall
a lot of strong speeches to that effect, particularly from my
Republican colleagues.
But now the party in control of the White House has
flipped. There is a Republican political appointee running the
IRS at the very same time it is implementing an enormously
complicated and partisan law his department helped write.
In December, I wrote a letter to Mr. Kautter asking how he
would guarantee their politics are not bleeding into the IRS,
what policies or safeguards have been created to avoid
conflicts, any guidance regarding communication between the
White House and the agency, and several other subjects. I have
not received a response to these questions.
Given the energy and focus this committee has placed on the
issue of political influence at the IRS in the recent past, it
would certainly be hypocritical not to take it seriously now.
So, Mr. Kautter, we appreciate your being here. We are
going to have questions on those issues. And, Mr. Chairman, I
look forward to the hearing.
The Chairman. Well, thank you, Senator.
[The prepared statement of Senator Wyden appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Today we have the pleasure of being joined by
Mr. David J. Kautter, the Acting IRS Commissioner as well as
the Assistant Secretary of Treasury for Tax Policy. Mr.
Kautter, I want to thank you for being here today and
cooperating with the committee.
As one would hope, Mr. Kautter has extensive tax
practitioner experience. In fact, he has been a tax
practitioner for the past 43 years.
There must be something wrong with you. [Laughter.]
I know there is not. You are great.
Most recently, before his government service, Mr. Kautter
was a partner at RSM. He has also taught numerous courses in
tax law, including as an executive in residence for 4 years at
the Kogod School of Business at American University.
Prior to teaching, Mr. Kautter provided advice to clients
ranging from individuals to small businesses to global
multinational companies. For 20 years at Ernst and Young, he
provided this type of really competent service. During much of
that time, he was the leading tax specialist at the firm with
respect to the taxation of compensation and benefits.
Mr. Kautter has also served in the government before as tax
legislative counsel to Senator John ``Jack'' Danforth from 1979
to 1982, one of our colleagues for whom I have tremendous
feelings of respect. But during that time, he worked on the
Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981.
Mr. Kautter graduated with a bachelor's degree from the
University of Notre Dame and later received his juris doctor
from Georgetown University.
Mr. Kautter, we are grateful to have you here, and please
proceed with your statement.
STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID J. KAUTTER, ACTING COMMISSIONER,
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE, AND ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR TAX
POLICY, DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY, WASHINGTON DC
Mr. Kautter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hatch, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the IRS's
budget and current operations.
Today, we are 2\1/2\ weeks into the filing season, and I am
pleased to report that the 2018 filing season began on schedule
and is going well so far.
The IRS has successfully received more than 30 million tax
returns and has issued $28.9 billion in tax refunds to over 13
million taxpayers. The average refund so far is a little over
$2,000.
Against that backdrop, the President's fiscal year 2019
budget requests an appropriation of $11.135 billion for the
IRS, plus an additional $362 million through a program
integrity cap adjustment.
The budget balances competing priorities and increases
funding to operations support by 6.2 percent. Dedicated funding
is needed now to modernize IRS hardware and software so that we
have the technology needed to run day-to-day operations,
transform the taxpayer experience, improve cybersecurity, and
ensure we can continue to safeguard taxpayer data.
The IRS is subject to 2\1/2\ million cyberattacks on
average each day, 1 million of which are sophisticated attacks.
Some of the attacks are efforts to acquire taxpayer data, and
some are efforts to disrupt the functioning of the United
States government.
Increasing our investment in IRS infrastructure is
critical. Fifty-nine percent of IRS hardware and 32 percent of
its software are out of date. While the IRS has done a good job
of prioritizing its technology spending to safeguard taxpayer
data, ward off cyberattacks, and carry out a smooth filing
season, we are at a point where greater investment is needed.
Turning to taxpayer services under the budget, the IRS will
continue investing in the development of online tools to
improve taxpayer service for the increasing number of taxpayers
who prefer to interact with the IRS online.
At the same time, we recognize the importance of serving
the needs of all taxpayers, including those who prefer not to
interact with us online. So we will continue our efforts to
improve service on all our channels, including in person and
over the phone.
As I mentioned, protecting taxpayers and their personal
data from identity theft is an important aspect of taxpayer
service. The IRS has continued increasing taxpayer protections
to make the act of filing a tax return as safe and secure as
possible and is making solid progress.
The number of victims of tax-related identity theft last
year was down to 242,000, a 40-percent drop from 2016. The
number of tax-related identity theft victims has fallen nearly
65 percent in the past 2 years. Still, more remains to be done:
242,000 is too big a number.
This year, one of the IRS's highest priorities is
implementing the new tax reform law. This will be a major
effort for us throughout 2018 and next year as well. Our goal
is to ensure that taxpayers and tax professionals can
understand and navigate the changes made by the new law. This
is a huge undertaking.
We estimate that we will need to create or revise about 450
tax forms, publications, and instructions. We will need to
publish extensive guidance, including regulations, notices, and
frequently asked questions. And we will need to reprogram about
140 interrelated tax return processing systems to be ready for
the 2019 filing season. This work is already well underway.
For this work to be completed on time, we estimate the IRS
needs about $397 million in additional funding over the next 2
years. We are making this request separately from the
President's fiscal 2019 budget.
In addition to ensuring adequate funding for the agency,
Congress can also help the IRS by enacting three pieces of
legislation that will improve tax administration: renewing
streamlined critical pay authority, allowing correction
procedures for specific errors, and giving IRS authority to
require minimum qualifications for paid tax return preparers.
These provisions, along with other items highlighted in the
budget, will help the IRS continue building on its work to
serve the Nation's taxpayers.
I would also ask, as Congress considers proposals for
updating and reforming the IRS, that you include provisions
giving us the flexibility we need to respond to the evolving
needs of taxpayers.
In closing, I would like to make one final observation.
Since becoming Acting IRS Commissioner 3 months ago, I want you
to know how impressed I have been by the commitment of those I
have worked with at the IRS to taxpayer service and to doing
the right thing. It is clear to me that the typical IRS
employee is dedicated to providing taxpayers with high-quality
assistance and being a judicious steward of taxpayer dollars.
I would urge this committee and Congress to give the IRS
the funds it needs to effectively carry out its mission.
Chairman Hatch, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the
committee, that concludes my statement. I would be happy to
take your questions.
The Chairman. Well, thank you, Mr. Kautter.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kautter appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Let me just ask a couple of questions to you.
Last December, Congress passed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, the
most comprehensive tax reform in a generation. The new law
included changes across the tax code: lowering individual tax
rates across the board, simplifying the tax code for tens of
millions of American families, business tax rate cuts, and
converting the U.S. tax system away from a worldwide system and
toward a territorial one.
These reforms are already making a real difference for
taxpayers across the country, but a lot of work remains to be
done, and much of it at the IRS as it works with the Treasury
Department to implement and administer the new law.
Earlier this month, you issued the 2017-2018 Priority
Guidance Plan. The plan outlined an ambitious list of
priorities, including initial implementation related to the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act. Can you describe the IRS's Tax Cuts and Jobs
Act implementation efforts and how you see implementation
affecting agency needs in the near term?
I would also ask that you comment on any additional
flexibility or agency reforms that might be helpful to us here
today.
Mr. Kautter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, we are
requesting $397 million for implementation of the tax cut act.
Seventy-three percent of that money is for technology and
hardware. The IRS has 140 integrated programs that operate the
systems for the Internal Revenue Service. And 19 percent of the
funds we are seeking are for taxpayer assistance, for taxpayer
outreach, and education. Four percent of the money would go for
guidance, that is about $15 million, and 4 percent would go for
forms, publications, and program management.
The Secretary has been granted 79 different grants of
regulatory authority in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. We figure
that, as I mentioned earlier, we will need to adjust about 450
forms.
What is interesting is, compared to 1986 when we had the
last major tax reform bill, there were no personal computers,
there was no Internet, and 73 percent of the funds used to
implement the 1986 act did not go to technology. But we have
now become so dependent on technology that is a critical
element of what we have to do.
About 4 percent of the funds, as I said, would go to
guidance. We have issued the Priority Guidance Plan after
carefully reviewing the legislation and trying to identify
those areas of the law where we think taxpayers need the
greatest guidance.
In part, our challenge is that, in order to adjust the
software, we have to know what the forms are going to look
like. And to know what the forms are going to look like, we
need some guidance on what the law actually means. So we have
already started the process of updating forms where we can
without the guidance. And we have gotten a pretty good start,
so the wind is at our back.
The Chairman. Well, good. Let me just ask this question.
Congress increasingly recognizes that the IRS is in need of
reforms and improvement, including more money to efficiently
and appropriately implement the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act bill.
Recently, congressional leaders reached an agreement to
seek adequate funds for IRS in the fiscal year 2018 omnibus and
the fiscal year 2019 appropriations bills. Unfortunately, parts
of the President's budget appear to move in the opposite
direction and request additional cuts to critical areas such as
taxpayer services.
Now, effective tax reform implementation is a high priority
for this committee, as is IRS customer service and
effectiveness. Can you describe for the committee the effect
that additional budget cuts might have on both of these
priorities?
Mr. Kautter. Sure. Well, in developing the budget, Senator,
some difficult decisions had to be made. Given the increasing
number and sophistication of cyberattacks on the IRS system and
the age of some of its hardware and software, the decision was
made to increase the amount of funding going toward technology.
There is a small increase in the amount allocated to
enforcement. Enforcement since 2010 is down by over 40 percent.
We are proposing a small increase in the budget for
enforcement. Virtually every category that the IRS audits is
down since 2010.
Against that backdrop, the budget allocated more money
toward operations support and a slight amount more toward
enforcement. That came at the cost of taxpayer assistance.
With $397 million, we think we can effectively implement
the new Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, but it is true that we have a
formidable task in front of us.
The Chairman. Well, thank you.
Senator Wyden?
Senator Wyden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Commissioner, the tax bill passed in December capped State
and local taxes at $10,000. As you know, there have been many
news articles about how States might respond to the impact of
these changes on State budgeting and revenue. The Secretary,
Secretary Mnuchin, stated his intention to, quote, ``audit the
real estate taxes issue,'' which certainly has suggested an
audit focus on blue States, like maybe Oregon.
So I would like you to tell us, how would these audits
work?
Mr. Kautter. Well, Senator, at this point, no decision has
been made with respect to how the 2017 tax returns would be
audited. So it is--that decision will be made as time goes by.
Senator Wyden. So what should the American people make,
like people in my State, of his intention to do this? Is this
just kind of empty political talk, or is it a plan? How are you
going to go about doing this? Are you guys going to have a
meeting, and is there going to be a date when something is
offered up to describe how these audits would work?
Mr. Kautter. Well, the IRS has a very detailed process of
determining who will be audited and how the audits will be
conducted. And the formula that the IRS uses is not a matter
that is disclosed publicly. So the IRS----
Senator Wyden. So the American people are basically going
to be in the dark on something that implies certainly the
consideration of politics. The public is just going to be in
the dark.
Mr. Kautter. For decades, the IRS has followed the same
policy.
Senator Wyden. Okay. Have you been directed by the
Secretary to gear up for these audits?
Mr. Kautter. I have not.
Senator Wyden. So you have not had any discussion with him
about this comment that he made publicly?
Mr. Kautter. No.
Senator Wyden. Do you believe it is appropriate for the
Treasury Secretary to target taxpayers in the manner this
suggests?
Mr. Kautter. I think the desire to make sure that we
enforce the law as it is written is wholly appropriate.
Senator Wyden. So you do not think there is anything about
this that smacks of any politics at all?
Mr. Kautter. Well, my interpretation of the Secretary's
comment was that he believed the law applied a certain way and
that we should impartially apply the law as it is written.
Senator Wyden. Well, I have just got to tell you, given the
fact that you have told us all of this is going to be
determined in the dark, we are going to have a lot of questions
about this. Because, you know, we spent a lot of time looking
at politics at the IRS, and I think this area and the
Secretary's statement is fraught with opportunities for
political mischief, so this is not going to be the last time we
talk about it.
Now let me turn, if I could, to the implementation of the
new pass-through provision. The pass-through deduction, as you
know, enacted by the Republican tax bill has left small-
business owners tangled up and baffled by a web of complex
rules.
Multinational corporations enjoy assurance of their 14-
percent rate slash; the small-business owners struggle to
figure out if they even qualify for the pass-through deduction.
Within the very same provision, the complexity added by
Republicans leaves the door wide open to gaming and scheming by
the fortunate few. So there is an immediate need for guidance
here.
I would like you to confirm the timing of the guidance. And
will there be specific guidance for the small businesses?
In my State, we are overwhelmingly small businesses. You
can practically count the multinational corporations on the
fingers of both hands. We are overwhelmingly a small-business
State. So confirm the timing of the guidance on the pass-
through provision. And will there be specific guidance for the
small businesses, who certainly dominate my State? I have heard
Senator Cardin, a ranking member and very knowledgeable on
small-business issues, express concern about this, so if you
could respond to that question.
We will have some more on pass-throughs later in the
afternoon. But confirm the timing of the guidance, and will
there be specific guidance for small businesses?
Mr. Kautter. Sure. One of our top priorities is to get
guidance out on the new pass-through rules. We have not set a
target date for issuing that guidance, but we are focused on
getting it out as soon as we possibly can. And we will have a
focus on small business.
Senator Wyden. So where we are left on this, and hopefully
we will learn some more in the afternoon, multinational
corporations enjoy certainty with respect to their 14-percent
rate slash, and for small businesses it is, well, we are very
interested in it and we hope to do it soon--another clear
example of the double standard established in this bill. The
powerful and the most fortunate come first, the small-business
people, who are so important in Oregon and elsewhere, maybe
they will see some clarity sometime down the road.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Let us go to Senator Cantwell.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As the budget calls for a decrease of, I think, 1,784
employees, yet at the same time the IRS has received more than
150 million returns, individuals are facing new rates and the
withholding schedule. How can we be sure that they are
withholding enough in the face of this huge change? What is
going to happen? So can you describe the efforts that are
currently underway to ensure the transition from the old system
to the new system and how that impacts individuals and small
businesses?
Mr. Kautter. With respect to withholding, Senator?
Senator Cantwell. Yes.
Mr. Kautter. Sure. The withholding tables are adjusted
every year. This year we followed the same procedure that we
did in prior years, which is a joint effort between Treasury
and the IRS.
We have issued initial withholding tables. They have been
implemented by many employers. We urge employers to implement
them by February 15th.
We are planning to issue a revised withholding calculator
at the end of February, which people can find at IRS.gov. That
withholding calculator will allow individuals to enter their
information. They do not have to identify themselves; it is not
personal information. They will be able to enter their income,
the withholding year-to-date, number of dependents, and
calculate how much they are withholding, how many allowances
they should claim in order to have their withholding work out
pretty close to what is actually owed at the end of the year.
So that should be due in February. We are putting a lot of
effort into that and view that as a critically important
project.
Senator Cantwell. I know you are just dealing with the
aftermath of this, but for us in Washington and other States--
well, first of all, I still firmly believe in our deductibility
rights as a State to deduct from our Federal tax obligation,
but we will see what the courts have to say about that.
But nonetheless, for States like mine, which have been able
to deduct and also do not have an income tax, the complexity to
the taxpayer who has been using this as an analysis for what
they might be owing--I know a lot of people think they are
going to come out without owing, but I have news. There are
people, because of the change in the law, who are actually
going to see a tax increase. So I hope you will work
specifically with those States that have these issues so that
that calculator helps address some of that. Because I think of
it as a very big sea change for States like mine and others in
how they are going to be impacted.
Can I ask you about cybersecurity and are we taking enough
steps to make sure that we have upgraded our system of
protection from hacking of the IRS by outside entities?
Mr. Kautter. The focus on cybersecurity at the Internal
Revenue Service is constantly evolving. The sophistication of
the attacks that are directed to the IRS website continues to
grow. The criminals continue to grow in their knowledge and
sophistication and the amount of resources that they direct
toward the IRS websites.
We specifically asked this year in the budget for an
increase of 6.2 percent in the funds allocated to operations
support specifically to deal with this sort of an issue. We are
very concerned about what we are seeing.
Senator Cantwell. Do you have the people and the resources
then?
Mr. Kautter. One of the things we are asking for is
streamlined critical pay authority. I do not know if you have
dealt with that. But streamlined critical pay authority would
allow the IRS to hire people in these critical positions in a
fraction of the time it would otherwise take, and it would
allow us to pay them more than we would otherwise be able to
pay under the government pay scale.
Streamlined critical pay was part of the 1998 restructuring
act. We do not have anyone at this point in time under
streamlined critical pay, because our authority has expired.
That is a very important proposal.
Senator Cantwell. Well, I am happy to work with you on
that. I certainly believe that you should, and we should,
protect taxpayers with the best cybersecurity, technology, and
personnel that can be hired today.
So thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Let us see, who is next? I guess you are next.
Senator Cardin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Let me first follow up on Senator Wyden's point on small
business. Clearly, we all have a responsibility to be very
sensitive to small-business owners who do not have the same
capacity as large companies to understand and comply with laws.
We try to simplify things for small businesses, we exempt them
from some of the regulatory issues, because we recognize the
burden.
And quite frankly, the 20-percent deduction is going to be
a challenge for some small businesses, particularly when they
do not quite understand exactly how it operates and whether
they are using what type of structure for their income. And I
would hope that that would be a top priority.
And I can tell you that we want to work with you on that so
that the small-business community can have the least burden as
possible as they try to figure out these new tax laws.
Mr. Kautter. Well, Senator, one of our key areas of focus
is revising the forms, the instructions, and the IRS
publications. And we try to draft those forms and publications
and instructions in such a way that they could be understood by
the small-business person.
We are very focused on making those understandable, as much
as we can with a complicated tax law. So we are focused on it.
Senator Cardin. Good. Now, I look forward to working with
you then.
I was with my colleagues in the State legislature on
Monday. They are trying to wrestle with how to change the
Maryland tax code as a result of the Federal tax code. It is
very difficult.
You know, one of my principal objections on process is that
we have a federalism system where the income tax was allowed as
a result of the cooperation with the States on the
constitutional amendment. And now we have passed a bill without
fully understanding the impact on our State governments.
What services are you providing to our State tax collectors
so that they can figure out if they want to change policies,
but may not have the same capacity because they have relied
upon the pre-2018 tax law? Is there any way that you can work
with the State tax collectors so that they can get help in
trying to figure out how to now administer things that they
before did not have to administer?
Mr. Kautter. Sure. The IRS does work with State
administrators in a number of areas today. One of them is in
identity-related theft, so we do have an existing relationship
with all State administrators.
Senator Cardin. My concern is that, for example, in
Maryland, if you do not itemize at the Federal level, you are
not allowed to itemize at the State level. A lot less people
are going to be itemizing now. The State wants to consider some
State itemizations that were not allowed before, but they will
not have the same type of verifications that they had because
they were relying on the Federal Government. Are you prepared
to work with the States on that issue?
Mr. Kautter. Yes, sir.
Senator Cardin. Good. I will put them in touch with you
then. Thank you.
I am going to talk about private debt collection.
Mr. Kautter. Yes, sir.
Senator Cardin. The National Taxpayer Advocate just
recently issued a report showing that for every $3 that is
spent, we collect $1 in private debt collection. The total cost
of about $20 million collected $6.7 million. They go on to say
taxpayers' right to be informed, right to quality services,
right to pay no more than the correct tax, right to challenge
the IRS, right to finality, right to privacy, right to
confidentiality, all are compromised by private debt collection
by the IRS.
Now, I would hope that we would have learned our lesson
when we tried this in the past and it did not work, but here we
go again. So I have introduced some legislation, because it is
legislation-based, I understand that, to prevent this from
happening. There have been some letters written to you and to
the Inspector General on this issue by some of my colleagues.
The bottom line is, we all have a responsibility to protect
taxpayers' rights and to protect the taxpayers' dollars. And
this debt collection, as pointed out by the National Taxpayer
Advocate, violates all those conditions.
So when are you going to come in here with a recommendation
that we get rid of this thing?
Mr. Kautter. Well, Senator, the private debt collection
effort this time around is less than a year old. The first
cases that were assigned to private debt collection agencies
were last April. Up to this point, we have had no problems with
data security or data breaches.
Senator Cardin. Is the National Taxpayer Advocate wrong
when they say improper commissions have been paid for work not
performed?
Mr. Kautter. I am not familiar that those have been paid,
but I can look at it, Senator.
Senator Cardin. I am just reading from the report. And that
the warnings that taxpayers would normally get from the IRS are
not being given by the private debt collectors, are they wrong
on that issue too?
Mr. Kautter. Senator, I am not familiar with those sorts of
details on the private debt collection. I am aware of the
program overall, and overall it seems to be working well.
Senator Cardin. Working well? Twenty million dollars spent,
$6 million collected, and the ones that are collected are some
of which--we do not believe as a result of the private debt
collectors--would have been collected anyway?
Mr. Kautter. Well, the only cases that have been assigned
to private debt collectors so far are about 240,000 of the
toughest cases to collect.
The cost of setting up the program is the $20-million
number that you are citing. That investment will stand the
program up for several years. So what we are doing is comparing
sort of several years of investment with 1 year of collections.
As I said, the program is less than a year old; it is 10
months old. And I understand that the Taxpayer Advocate has
concerns. And I think those concerns are fair concerns, and I
need to look into them more closely.
Senator Cardin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Cassidy?
Senator Cassidy. Hey, sir, thank you for being here. Thanks
for serving our country.
You mentioned that the number of identity theft victims has
decreased, but has the amount of money dispensed in fraudulent
refunds, has that also decreased? And if so, by how much?
Mr. Kautter. Senator, I do not have the exact number, but
it has decreased. I mean, we have decreased the number of
fraudulent returns entering into the system, and we have
decreased the number of improper payments.
Senator Cassidy. I get that. I guess I want to know, is it
low-hanging fruit, you know, a relatively small value? And I am
not criticizing, I am just trying to get a feeling for it.
Mr. Kautter. Yes, sure.
Senator Cassidy. And if this is what it was a year or 5
years ago, is it roughly that or is that also down 40 percent?
Mr. Kautter. I can get you that number, Senator.
Senator Cassidy. Next, how much roughly are we dispensing
in fraudulent refunds?
Mr. Kautter. Well, at this point, we are in the process of
gathering that data for the latest year, so that is another
number I would prefer to get you a more specific number on than
what I have right now.
Senator Cassidy. And I am not trying to play ``got you,''
but if you are asking for $300 million in software or IT
systems to combat fraud, but we are losing $20 billion, then we
probably should give you more than $300 million. You know what
I am saying?
Mr. Kautter. Yes, sir.
Senator Cassidy. Lawyers, guns, and money--but let us
address this problem.
And what is--I mean, at some point, you are always going to
have a certain number of fraudulent returns. Do you have a
sense of what the acceptable rate of those returns are?
Mr. Kautter. Well, what we would say is, zero would be the
acceptable number of returns. We do not know that we will ever
get there.
But working with the State and local governments and the
tax return preparation software community, as well as tax
return preparers, we have made good progress. As I said, we
have gotten the number of claims down by about two-thirds in
the last 2 years. The number of improper returns at this point
is about----
Senator Cassidy. I heard that, so I am going to move on,
not just because I caught that; I listened to what you said
earlier.
Mr. Kautter. Yes.
Senator Cassidy. I would like to now change topics away
from tax returns and talk about something I have been
interested in vis-a-vis trade-based money laundering. And I
will start off with transfer pricing between subsidiaries of a
multinational corporation.
Now, it is easy to imagine that there could be arbitrage of
pricing so that gain is realized in a low-tax country and loss
is realized in the high-tax country.
And how does the IRS audit or monitor to make sure that
gain or loss is being declared appropriately?
Mr. Kautter. Sure. Well, first thing I would say, Senator,
is that we are hoping, we are hopeful that the new tax reform
legislation will decrease the desire for engaging----
Senator Cassidy. I accept that, but I am actually more
interested in--I am going to follow into trade-based money
laundering, but I want to start with something which is
legitimate, if you will.
Mr. Kautter. Sure. And so we have a division within the
Internal Revenue Service that focuses specifically on transfer
pricing controversy between U.S. companies and foreign-based
subsidiaries or related affiliates.
Senator Cassidy. Now, is there a standard invoice or
declaration form that you can look at and plug into a computer
and use analytics on as to whether it seems legitimate or not?
Mr. Kautter. Well, the transfer pricing calculation tends
to be very case-specific. And there are sort of general
guidelines, but it really is case by case.
Senator Cassidy. Now, case by case does not give itself to
big analytics. And it does seem as if--and I say this because,
allegedly, $110 billion a year is moving from the United States
down to Mexico related to drug trade. And Treasury has
confiscated, best we can tell, about $7 billion. Now, that is a
$103-billion delta, and some of that is trade-based money
laundering. So we are trying to figure out how to get at that.
And it is ultimately up to our Federal agencies to cooperate to
kind of go after this issue.
So let me ask, to what degree do you all, does IRS,
collaborate with Customs to make sure that that which is being
declared is actually being shipped as opposed to a double
invoice or is as presented on the invoice?
Mr. Kautter. Sure. So the IRS does work closely with the
Customs Bureau, as does the Treasury Department.
Senator Cassidy. Now, if you do an audit, I mean, what
percent of these transfers are audited?
Mr. Kautter. I do not know that number off the top of my
head.
Senator Cassidy. Okay. We will ask for a QFR.
Mr. Kautter. Sure.
Senator Cassidy. And to what degree are we sharing
information? You mentioned with other governments, but what
about with Mexico?
Mr. Kautter. We do have some agreements to exchange
information with Mexico.
Senator Cassidy. Is there a standard invoice that is filed
when someone declares the value of a traded object? Or is it,
you know, kind of up to their choice as to how to file the
information?
Mr. Kautter. Well, Customs does have forms, standard forms
that are filled out. But the numbers that go on the forms, of
course, are subject to the individual filers' view of the
value.
Senator Cassidy. But if you were to look at, say, a
multinational, you would look just at what they are declaring,
but not necessarily audit to make sure that it is correct?
Mr. Kautter. The audit selection criteria that the IRS uses
involve a fairly sophisticated formula which we feel is pretty
good, but it is constantly being refined. But it is a fairly
sophisticated analysis.
Senator Cassidy. We will follow up, because I hear the tap
and I know that I am over, so I will yield back. And I thank
you for your answers.
The Chairman. Well, thank you, Senator. Your time has
expired.
Senator Menendez?
Senator Menendez. Thank you.
Thank you, Commissioner.
Commissioner, prior to the passage of the Trump corporate
tax bill, was there any prohibition against deducting prepaid
State income taxes or local property taxes in the year that
they were paid?
Mr. Kautter. Yes, sir.
Senator Menendez. There was. And let me ask you this. Then
why did section 1142 of the Trump corporate tax bill
specifically prohibit the deduction of prepaid State income
taxes? Why would the bill prohibit something that was already
disallowed?
Mr. Kautter. Senator, I cannot answer that question. I do
not know the answer to that.
Senator Menendez. Well, it seems pretty illogical to me.
Let me ask you this. Is there anything in the tax bill that
prohibited the deduction of prepaid State and local income
taxes, in the legislation itself?
Mr. Kautter. In the legislation itself, no.
Senator Menendez. Okay. So you are saying that, before the
legislation, you could not deduct prepaid State income taxes as
well?
Mr. Kautter. Yes, sir.
Senator Menendez. Let me ask you this. Why is it that
corporations will be able to deduct? We hear a lot about them
issuing bonuses in 2017. But regardless of whether or not they
actually made the payment, they are going to be able to deduct
it in 2017. Why is it that a corporation can get the deduction,
but a middle-class taxpayer cannot?
Mr. Kautter. Sure. Well, under the Internal Revenue Code,
most corporations are accrual-basis taxpayers. Under the
accrual-basis rules, if an expense is accrued by the end of the
year and paid within 2\1/2\ months after the end of the year in
the compensation area, the corporation is allowed a deduction
in the year of accrual.
The real property tax deduction operates under a completely
different section of the code. And most of those deductions are
claimed by cash-basis taxpayers. So it is a different
accounting principle.
Senator Menendez. So the code is written in a way that
benefits corporations, but does not benefit middle-class
taxpayers.
Mr. Kautter. Well, there are two methods of accounting:
cash and accrual.
Senator Menendez. Well, can an individual taxpayer create
that accounting for themselves and then be subject to the same
availability?
Mr. Kautter. In certain circumstances, they could be on the
accrual basis if they were in a trade or business, but not just
as an----
Senator Menendez. But the average person is not in a trade
or business.
Mr. Kautter. Yes; no, not a----
Senator Menendez. So therefore, the code is written in such
a way that middle-class families cannot take the same advantage
that a corporation can take, saying, we are going to give you a
bonus, not pay that bonus in 2017, and get the deduction, but a
middle-class family wanting to pay their State income or
property tax in the year cannot get that deduction.
Mr. Kautter. Under the Internal Revenue Code, that is how
it works.
Senator Menendez. Well, something is wrong with that.
Let me ask you this. Several States have so-called
scholarship programs, some of which are nothing more than a
thinly veiled ruse designed to strip money from public schools
and funnel it to private religious schools. And in order to
avoid the separation of church and state constitutional issues,
some red States offer dollar-for-dollar State income tax
deductions for donations. That makes it appear that the funding
source is private, when in fact it is really coming from public
dollars.
How does this not violate the IRS's substance over form
principle?
Mr. Kautter. That practice has been allowed now for several
years.
Senator Menendez. Well, just because it has been allowed
does not mean--you are telling me I cannot get my property tax
payers in New Jersey, who just got screwed under this
legislation, to pay their taxes in the year that they wish to
and not get a deduction? But just because something has existed
does not mean it is right.
Mr. Kautter. Well, under the general principles for
charitable contribution, if the primary purpose of the
contribution is donative, which is a disinterested and detached
interest of generosity, then the taxpayer is allowed a
charitable contribution. If a State wants to allow a credit for
that against its tax liability, it can do that.
Senator Menendez. Well, 32 States already have programs,
many of which provide a full 100-percent credit for all
contributions. Because, even before the tax bill gutted the
State and local property tax deduction, high-paid tax lawyers
and accountants already figured out that these State-run
programs allow a person to avoid hitting the alternative
minimum tax by reclassifying their State income tax deductions,
which are limited by the AMT, to so-called charitable
contribution deductions, which they are not.
So it just seems to me that the code works against
individual families, but works for those who are either in a
corporate setting or those who are using this workaround, which
I would have thought the IRS would say, oh, wait a minute,
substance over form--substance over form, and you cannot do
that.
Mr. Kautter. Yes, I think the substance over form issue is
there, Senator.
Senator Menendez. Well, I do not see how it is not, when
they are getting their charitable deduction from Federal income
taxes as well, when in fact it is for a totally different
purpose.
The Chairman. Okay. Senator, your time is expired.
We will go to Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome. Thank you for your service. How many years of
service do you have at the IRS?
Mr. Kautter. At the IRS? Three months.
Senator Carper. Three months. How is it going?
Mr. Kautter. Good, good. I am very impressed with the IRS
and the people there.
Senator Carper. Is it challenging for the folks who follow
you, the folks on your team, to be asked to take a handoff in
terms of a major overhaul of the tax code? And we do it sort of
like, at the last minute, at the end of the calendar year, and
do not really provide the IRS with additional resources. We do
not even, you know, respond to your request for streamlined
critical pay authority. Is that demoralizing at all to the
folks who work there?
Mr. Kautter. One of the things that----
Senator Carper. It is like, we are going to make your job a
lot more difficult. We are not going to give you much time, and
we are not going to do this streamlined critical pay authority
which allows the IRS to draw on, I think, untapped private-
sector expertise in order to attract talent in critical areas.
That has to be demoralizing.
Mr. Kautter. It is challenging. The Internal Revenue
Service, Senator, has a very strong, can-do, positive culture.
And so----
Senator Carper. Well, they must.
Mr. Kautter. They do, and whatever is dealt out, they deal
with and do it in a forthright manner.
In trying to implement this tax reform legislation, IRS is
going about it in a very disciplined, project-managed fashion.
We do need the additional funds; the $397 million is critical
to be able to effectively implement.
Senator Carper. Give us some examples of what you could do
with that and why that makes sense. I have always heard that if
we provide the funding that is being sought by the IRS, they
could actually provide a return, $5, $6 on the dollar. Is that
true?
Mr. Kautter. In the enforcement areas, that is exactly
right.
Senator Carper. Yes.
Mr. Kautter. And under the President's budget, we do ask
for an increase in enforcement funds.
But the $397 million for implementation of the tax reform
act is to update the IRS systems. The IRS runs 140 integrated
software programs.
Senator Carper. That is a lot.
Mr. Kautter. That is a lot. And they are closely connected
and difficult to update.
And then, as I mentioned earlier, 19 percent is for
taxpayer assistance, outreach, and taxpayer education.
Interestingly, only 4 percent of the funds are to adjust
the forms, the regulations, and the guidance. It is interesting
to me how much technology takes of the total spend for
implementation these days compared to, say, 1986.
Senator Carper. Talk to us a little bit more. I know you
have already discussed a little bit this streamlined critical
pay authority. Just give us some examples of why that is
important.
Mr. Kautter. Sure. So under streamlined critical pay, the
IRS would be able to bring someone on in 6 weeks instead of 6
months. And they could pay someone up to probably a third more
than they could otherwise pay if they have brought them in on
the general government pay scale.
And when you get into the areas of technology and
cybersecurity, having that ability to hire someone in a hurry--
I have seen the IRS lose people because of the amount of time
it takes to get them onboard, people who were critical who
really wanted to serve the government.
So those two in particular--the amount of time it takes to
get somebody there and the amount we could pay to attract the
talent--are the two key components of why streamlined critical
pay matters.
Senator Carper. Can you think of any reasonable reason on
earth why we should not do that?
Mr. Kautter. No, sir.
Senator Carper. All right. You have, I think, another
request that does not involve extra funding, but it would
better ensure that some of the folks who are preparing tax
returns for people are actually knowledgeable, competent, able
to do that job well.
Mr. Kautter. Yes, sir. Well, about 400,000 paid tax return
preparers have no professional certification. And tax return
preparers prepare almost 60 percent of all the returns filed.
So having tax return preparers who have a minimum level of
knowledge and competency with respect to the tax law not only
is helpful to the taxpayers themselves, but to the
administration of the Internal Revenue Code in terms of
efficiency and errors that have to be corrected.
Senator Carper. All right. Mention one more issue, one more
area that you would like for us to focus our time and attention
on to enable you to do your job more effectively, more
efficiently, please.
Mr. Kautter. Well, I would say I would think the key issues
for us right now are streamlined critical pay and funding for
tax reform implementation.
I would say the increased funding for level of service----
Senator Carper. Increased funding for----
Mr. Kautter. Level of service, our ability to respond to
calls from taxpayers. This year in the budget we had to make
some choices, and the choice was to allocate a little bit more
toward enforcement, a lot more toward systems and
infrastructure. And level of service is very important.
And so, if the IRS were to be granted more funding by
Congress, I think that is the first place we would put it.
Senator Carper. Great, thank you so much.
Mr. Kautter. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Portman?
Senator Portman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I appreciate your being here, Mr. Kautter, to talk just
a little about implementation.
And we had a good hearing earlier today about some of the
positive aspects of the tax reform legislation, and
specifically that over 4 million people have now received a
bonus or a pay increase and that many people are seeing
benefits. And small businesses--the NFIB is reporting more
optimism among small businesses than ever in the history of
their taking that survey.
And of course, we have heard the announcements from so many
larger businesses. Over 350 of them have now come forward and
said they are doing something to reinvest in their business,
often investing in equipment to make their employees more
productive, which, of course, we all know is important to
economic growth and higher wages.
I do think that the IRS is under-resourced. And by the way,
I made this point, as did some of my colleagues, long before
this tax reform bill was even being considered. I think you
needed it with the old tax law. And certainly with the new tax
law, it would be helpful to have resources. So I agree with
what the chairman said at the outset about the fact that the
additional resources are necessary to ensure that our
constituents are properly taken care of; in other words, that
taxpayer service is there so the phone gets answered and that
there are capable people, as Senator Carper has indicated, to
be able to answer tough questions about a complicated tax code.
And it will always be complicated, because it is inherently
difficult to determine the appropriate income.
I do think it needs to be coupled with smart reforms. And
you have talked about a couple you would like to see. You
remember back in the 1990s, mid-1990s, there was an IRS concern
about technology. And you have focused on that today. You said
your software and your hardware are both out of date.
At that time, there was a concern about, in the 1990s,
when, as you indicate, technology was not as important as it is
today, that there were stovepipes not talking to one another
and there was, therefore, a lot of money that had been spent
and not spent effectively; some said wasted. I remember the
figure of $3 billion on technology because of inability to
communicate across lines in the department.
Do you think it is time for another review? At that time,
there was a commission which studied this issue for a year or
so. It was bipartisan, bicameral. It came out with the IRS
reforms that were then passed. Subsequently, the budget has
increased for the IRS, but in the context of reform.
There have also been concerns, as you know, on both sides
of the aisle about some of the IRS practices, in particular the
targeting of conservative groups, which occurred in the Obama
administration, I think, which also made it difficult for
people to stand up and support additional resources and a sense
that there maybe was not accountability.
So you are Acting Commissioner. I know there is discussion
of a nominee coming up here soon. And you have 40-some years of
practice with the IRS as a private practitioner working with
the IRS. Is it time for that kind of an overhaul, or is it just
time to say, let us increase the funding and allow the IRS to
determine where it goes? I mean, is there an opportunity here
to back up and look at your technology and look at your service
and look at how to make the IRS a first-rate service
organization responding to taxpayers?
Mr. Kautter. Thanks. Thank you, Senator. That is a terrific
question.
I think the time to back up and take a look at the IRS is
here. It has been 20 years since the last IRS restructuring
act. Within that act, certain structures were put in place with
respect to the IRS and its organization and how it operated.
There is not a private business today that has not revamped
itself in the last 20 years. And so for the IRS to have the
same operating organizational structure today as in 1998 does
not make a lot of sense to me.
I think we could make some changes that would facilitate
taxpayer service and efficiency within the IRS if we were to
take a step back and take a disciplined, thoughtful look at how
the IRS is structured and how it operates, I really personally
believe as a practitioner.
So I have been at the IRS 3 months. I do not have a vested
interest in how it was structured or why it works the way it
does. I am pleasantly surprised at the attitude and dedication
of the people who are there.
I am also disappointed that the structure sometimes gets in
the way of taxpayer service.
Senator Portman. Three hundred ninety-seven million dollars
you are requesting over the next 2 years outside of the budget,
as I understand it.
Mr. Kautter. Yes, sir.
Senator Portman. And 73 percent is for technology. Is that
correct?
Mr. Kautter. Yes, sir.
Senator Portman. So that seems to be your top priority in
terms of the funding. You also, though, mentioned taxpayer
service. Can you tell us, when someone calls the IRS and seeks
an answer to a question, a taxpayer question, do you know how
often that person gets a prompt and correct answer?
Mr. Kautter. So the answer this year--well, last year it
was around 75 percent, and this year it should be around 77
percent. Next year, under the budget, it would go down.
Senator Portman. So this means that somewhere between a
quarter and a third of the people who are calling in are not
getting an answer or not getting an accurate answer and maybe
not getting the phone answered----
Mr. Kautter. Not getting through.
Senator Portman. Just not getting through.
Mr. Kautter. Yes.
Senator Portman. So I think, Mr. Chairman, we are at that
point again.
And I hope, you know--I know you are, again, in an acting
capacity. And I know all of us are looking forward to the
nominee and having the opportunity to go through a hearing and
get someone confirmed. But can I make a request today that you
submit to the committee--and I hope on a bipartisan basis the
committee would follow up on this--what your recommendations
would be?
And if you find as you go back you are not able or
comfortable doing that, I would still like personally to have
that communication with you. Because I think it is time for us
to back up and take a look.
I think the chairman and ranking member have said it well
that, whether this tax bill had passed or not, it is time for
us to put the reforms in place and, with that, provide the
necessary resources to be able to allow our constituents to get
the kind of service that they deserve.
Mr. Kautter. I would very much like to work with you on
that.
Senator Portman. All right, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator McCaskill?
Senator McCaskill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do think
there is a lot of bipartisan support for us giving the IRS the
resources that it needs.
I mean, I cannot imagine that anybody in America thinks it
makes any sense that if we have an entity that is operating in
a sea of red ink, that the first thing we do is see if we could
not just cut and cut and cut the receivables department. I am
pretty sure that if a business was in debt, they would be
building up their receivables department, not tearing it down.
We have cut, against the objections of many of us, almost a
billion dollars from the IRS budget in the last 7 years. If we
adjust that for inflation, we have cut it by almost 20 percent.
And one of the things that stood out to me as I was
preparing for this hearing was that the worst-performing phone
line at the IRS in 2017--do you know what it was?
Mr. Kautter. No.
Senator McCaskill. Which phone line was the worst
performing? It was the one dedicated to taxpayers who want to
make a payment. The average length of time that someone had to
sit on the phone if they wanted to make a payment in 2017 was
46 minutes. So not only have we cut our receivables department,
we clearly are not paying attention to the most important place
that we can hope to, in fact, gain the revenue that would make
this a level playing field for all Americans, because so many
Americans are in fact doing the right thing. But as we all
know, right now they are having to, you know, wait a long time.
The line got 2,656,000 phone calls and change, and only
1,071,000 of those ever got to talk to a real person.
Mr. Kautter. You know, Senator, it is a terrific point. And
I think there are some simple things--they are not all that
expensive--that I think the IRS needs to do.
For example, I think when someone calls, there should be a
feature on the system that tells you how long the wait is. And
secondly, there should be a feature to opt for a call back.
So in many private businesses today, you can say, the wait
is 32 minutes. If you would like a call back, leave your
number. And we do not even have that feature right now, and I
think we need things like that.
Senator McCaskill. And in talking to the people who are on
the front lines at the IRS who work in Missouri, there is a new
phone system that has been put in. And there are a large number
of complaints about how efficiently it is working.
I do not know if you have had a chance to dig into that in
the short time that you have had the big job. But they say they
are so frustrated because someone will be sitting there, and a
call will not be dropping into their line, and yet the wait is
very, very long. So it is not working right.
And in fact, they used to be able to log in one place and
handle the phone call. Now they have to log in on the hard
line, then log in on the screen. And if the call drops, they
have to go back and log in both places again. So as usual, IT
procurement has not quite, I think, met the mark.
I wanted to complete my questioning by asking specifically
about Equifax. The IRS found out about the Equifax breach at
the same time the rest of America did, even though IRS had a
very large contract with Equifax involving an awful lot of
sensitive taxpayer data. Equifax claimed it did not need to
notify the IRS about the breach because IRS data was not
compromised.
In a follow-up in a site visit, IRS went to Equifax and
found that it was in fact mishandling and improperly storing
IRS data.
You know, I guess--are you all now making changes to your
contracting practices and requiring that any breach of one of
your contractors, whether it involves the IRS or not, is
reported to you?
Mr. Kautter. I will have to follow up to see if we include
that clause. But your description of the Equifax contract is
accurate. I mean, we were informed, and immediately we did a
site visit. None of the IRS data had been compromised. We did
find that they were storing some taxpayer data--it had not been
compromised--that should not have been stored. We have dealt
with that issue. That data no longer exists there. And the
Equifax contract has been terminated.
But your suggestion about a clause for future contracts is
a terrific suggestion.
Senator McCaskill. I would like to look into the
contracting practices. And in connection with that, very
briefly, you all had to do a bridge contract with Equifax. And
I will follow up with questions for the record.
I have some legislation on bridge contracts. I have seen
them all over the Federal Government, and they almost always
are a huge mistake. And so it is a lack of preparation, it is a
lack of preparedness for terminating a contract, because I
think too often everyone just assumes they are going to renew a
contract, which is, of course, the wrong mindset if we are
really trying to get the best value for our dollar.
But I will give you some of those questions for the record.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
Mr. Kautter. Thank you. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Whitehouse?
Senator Whitehouse. You are going to have to twist your
neck even more to get to me. [Laughter.]
Thank you for coming here.
Mr. Kautter. Yes, sir.
Senator Whitehouse. This morning, Mr. Mnuchin was in that
seat, and he and I spoke about the problem of income inequality
in our country and the role of the tax system as a progressive
system so that people who have much higher incomes are paying a
higher rate than people who have much lower incomes. I think
that has been a policy foundation of our country for a long
time. Do you agree?
Mr. Kautter. Yes, sir.
Senator Whitehouse. Yes. And one of the things that I asked
him was if the IRS, if he could instruct the IRS to go back to
publishing the consolidated tax information of the 400 top
taxpayers.
Until recently, the IRS took the 400 top taxpayers,
combined them into one so they were anonymized, and then took
their tax payments and combined that into one so it was
anonymized, but at least it gave America a look at how the
highest-income folks in America were doing as far as paying
income taxes into a progressive system.
What we found out when the IRS was collecting and
distributing this data, up until I guess 2014 was the last
public report, was that those extremely high-end income earners
were actually paying lower tax rates than most people.
And I think that is important information for Americans to
know, that the system is not serving them in terms of
delivering actual progressivity. I think the latest information
we have is that the highest 400 paid the same tax rate that you
would pay if you were making about $70,000 a year. So if you
are a moderately successful plumber or a local lawyer in a
small community, there you are, and on the other hand you have
people who are making hundreds of millions of dollars a year
and they are not paying a higher rate than you are.
So I will not put you on the spot right now, but I will ask
you, particularly if the Treasury Secretary agrees, to go back
to aggregating and publishing that information. Because I think
it is a warning sign of a failure in our tax system.
Mr. Kautter. Sure, Senator. And I will work with the
Secretary to get back to you on that. Thank you.
Senator Whitehouse. Great.
The other thing that I wanted to talk to you about is the
problem of foreign influence in our elections. We have been
warned repeatedly by law enforcement witnesses, national
security witnesses, and some of the very credible, experienced,
bipartisan think tanks here in Washington that the easiest way
for Russians, for instance, to manipulate our elections is to
put money into our elections.
It is a violation of Federal law for a foreign national
directly or indirectly to make a contribution in connection
with a Federal, State, or a local election or to a political
party, or to make an independent expenditure in our elections
or an electioneering communication.
Now, a lot of that activity takes place through IRS-
regulated 501(c)(4) organizations. What steps does the IRS have
in place to make sure that the donors to 501(c)(4)
organizations are not foreign nationals or cutouts for foreign
nationals or shell corporations hiding foreign nationals?
Mr. Kautter. Sure. So at the moment, Senator, 501(c)(4)
organizations submit a schedule with a list of donors attached
to it.
Senator Whitehouse. Correct.
Mr. Kautter. I would have to check to see at this point----
Senator Whitehouse. What do you do with that list?
Mr. Kautter. I would have to check to see what we do with
the list. I am not aware that we----
Senator Whitehouse. Do you know if you cross-reference with
FinCEN?
Mr. Kautter. I do not know, but I can check and get back to
you.
Senator Whitehouse. Okay. And do you know if there is any
secondary look at, say, phony baloney-seeming shell
corporations to take a look at who might be behind them?
Mr. Kautter. Yes, and----
Senator Whitehouse. Acme Russian Corruption, LLC in
Delaware might be a signal. [Laughter.]
Mr. Kautter. It could be, Senator. In the short time I have
been at the IRS, I have not gotten into that, but I will follow
up with you.
Senator Whitehouse. Okay. Do you agree that it is important
that we try to enforce that law and to do the investigative
work internally to determine whether or not Russian or other
foreign nationals are putting money into our elections?
Mr. Kautter. I know that it is important for the IRS, I
think, to make sure that people comply with the rules and
regulations. How this issue should be handled, which agency in
the Federal Government is best to handle it--I am not sure it
is the IRS.
Senator Whitehouse. But you at least have the information,
so you are--without you giving somebody else information, they
do not even get off the dime, do they?
Mr. Kautter. They would not. And we would have to, I mean,
think through that.
Senator Whitehouse. Okay. Well, we will keep working with
you on it. I think it is an important thing.
Mr. Kautter. Yes, sir.
Senator Whitehouse. I know my time has run out. And I thank
the chairman.
Mr. Kautter. Thank you.
The Chairman. Well, thank you, Senator.
I understand that Senator Wyden has a question or two.
Senator Wyden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to follow up on one other area. It relates to
that letter I sent to you, Mr. Kautter, about conflicts of
interest.
As you know, I have had concern about your dual roles as
Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy and Acting Commissioner of
the IRS. It seems to me there is essentially an inherent
conflict of interest that is going to make it tough for
somebody to navigate these two roles appropriately.
Secretary Mnuchin stated an intention to audit the real
estate taxes issue, which is something that inherently focuses
on blue States. We talked about that earlier as just kind of
one example.
Now, in December I sent you a letter asking about real and
potential conflicts. And I must say, I was concerned and
troubled by some of your responses. So let me just see, as we
wrap up, if we can get some answers to some of the questions
that were unanswered.
In your role as Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy, were
you party to any decisions intended to disfavor one political
constituency over another or disfavor particular States based
on the political constituency of those States? That is pretty
much a ``yes'' or ``no'' answer.
Mr. Kautter. No.
Senator Wyden. Okay. I am puzzled why you would answer
straightforwardly today, but we could not get it in the
response to my letter. So I am just going to leave it at that;
you have answered it straightforwardly today.
In your role as Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy, were
you involved in the decision to remove from the Treasury
Department's website the May 2012 Office of Tax Analysis
Technical Paper 5 which showed that owners of capital rather
than workers are the primary beneficiaries of corporate tax
cuts?
Mr. Kautter. No, sir.
Senator Wyden. Okay. Since you were elected to serve as
Acting IRS Commissioner, have you had any meetings with the
President or prepared any written memos, reports, or other
materials to be delivered to the President?
Mr. Kautter. I have not met with the President. Whether
something I have written has made its way to the President, I
do not know. But I have not prepared anything directly for the
President.
Senator Wyden. Okay. Now, in your response to my letter,
you included references to numerous policies intended to
prevent political interference with taxpayer-specific actions
like audits and investigations. But as we have seen in this
committee, the way tax laws are interpreted by the IRS can
affect public confidence.
As the IRS works to implement a $1.5-trillion tax bill, can
you tell us what you are doing there at the agency to make sure
it is understood that the decisions are going to be made free
of political bias?
Mr. Kautter. Well, the implementation of the tax reform act
at the Internal Revenue Service is being led by a career IRS
employee. All of the individuals on the leadership team are
career IRS employees, as are all of the individuals in the
business operating divisions.
So I have oversight at the IRS, but I am not directly
involved in making decisions with respect to which forms go
first or things like that, or even the----
Senator Wyden. Let me ask you this. As you know, when you
were in the private sector, there were some questions about
matters that were delegated. You and I had some talks about it,
pretty spirited talks. And one of the reasons that I felt that
I could support your going forward is that you would make sure
that on your watch there were not problems, because as we
talked about, in the private sector there were problems.
And you made the argument that you would delegate it. To
your credit, you said, you know, I have to be careful about
that in the future.
So how do you reconcile what you told me today with what we
were concerned about earlier?
Mr. Kautter. Well, Senator Wyden, delegation is a very
important tool, no question about it. But as we saw before,
what happens is, if it is delegation, you know, the buck still
stops, you know, with you.
Senator Wyden. Sure. Sure. So do you, like, review their
work or, I mean, how does that work?
Mr. Kautter. I do. I am constantly informed of what is
going on and how things are progressing. So it is a dialogue,
but I have delegated the responsibility for day-to-day
operations.
There are two outstanding Deputy Commissioners, and we are
in constant contact. We meet almost daily and discuss what is
occurring.
Senator Wyden. Okay. My time is up. And, Mr. Chairman, I
appreciate the additional round.
I just want to make it clear, I do not want to hear about
problems along the lines of what we saw in that private-sector
area, because I was very concerned about the delegation when
you were in the private sector. And your response--and you told
me it was going to be a new day, and that is why I felt that I
could advance your nomination.
I do not want to be back here in a few months and we see
political problems and you tell me, well, it was delegated to
all these career people and, you know, that was that.
So, I am just putting everybody on notice. And I appreciate
the chance to continue this discussion. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thanks, Senator.
Now, Senator Warner, we had not counted on you coming, but
you are going to be the last questioner.
Senator Warner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Commissioner,
I think you probably thought you were in the clear, but I do
have one set of questions.
As Acting Commissioner, you have about 70,000 employees who
work for you at this point, is that right?
Mr. Kautter. Yes, sir.
Senator Warner. And given the complexity of the tax code--
and I do not fully agree with the chairman's characterization
of the tax reform--but clearly there is a lot of work to be
done now to try to implement that.
You have really got to recruit good candidates and maintain
the quality of the workforce. Isn't that a top priority?
Mr. Kautter. Yes, sir.
Senator Warner. And you have been a tax practitioner most
of your life. That is correct, is it not?
Mr. Kautter. Yes, sir.
Senator Warner. And as a matter of fact, most of your
employees, I think, with that expertise could actually probably
make more money in the private sector, could they not?
Mr. Kautter. They could indeed.
Senator Warner. And to quote, actually, the budget:
``Federal employees with professional degrees are actually
undercompensated relative to private-sector peers in a CBO
analysis.''
Now, you have to make sure as well, obviously, that you
have a lot--are the majority of your employees college
graduates?
Mr. Kautter. Yes, sir.
Senator Warner. Okay. So we have notice that they are
underpaid; we know they could make more in the private sector.
But I look at the budget that was put out, and the budget cuts
retirement benefits for Federal employees, it increases the
amount Federal employees have to contribute to their pensions,
it increases the number of years tested for determining the
value of the pensions, and it eliminates the cost-of-living
adjustments once they retire.
So you have a tough job trying to recruit and retain
quality employees, and yet the budget that the administration
has put forward wants to cut back on their pensions, make it
harder for them to retire, not recognize the amount of
competition that they have with the private sector.
You know, how can the IRS, with the stress it is under, and
hopefully under your leadership the IRS gets back to the kind
of service--and I appreciate the chairman's comments earlier
saying the kind of wanton meat-axe cuts that have been made to
the IRS by Congress recently do not really help the matter--but
how are you able to do your job with this kind of budget, which
I think would undermine the ability to recruit and retain good
employees?
Mr. Kautter. Senator, one of the things I have been
exceedingly impressed by is the dedication of the people at the
Internal Revenue Service to serve the country. And their
commitment to excellence and to serving the public, I think, is
something any organization would be proud of.
And I think it is a challenge to recruit people into any
aspect of government these days for a whole variety of reasons.
We will do the best we can, and the IRS will get the job
done. I am confident.
Senator Warner. Well, one thing, Commissioner, I would just
say is that in another--we all sit on different committees. I
have another committee that has gotten a lot of attention these
days, that has brought up the President's constant request for,
you know, knowing people's political affiliation or asking
Federal employees to pledge their loyalty to him.
You know, with an agency that is independent and so
important as the IRS, I just want to make sure that you are
going to assure me that within the responsibilities that you
have--and obviously no one dictates what the President says or
tweets--that you are going to do your utmost to make sure that
the President and this sense of loyalty requirement, political
affiliation requirement, which I believe, and hopefully you do
as well, flies in the face of what the IRS should be all about
in terms of its independence, regardless of who is President,
that you will do all you can to combat any impressions that
that kind of loyalty test or political affiliation test would
become part and parcel of your administration of the IRS.
Mr. Kautter. Well, Senator, I take my responsibilities as
Acting Commissioner very seriously, including the
responsibility to administer and enforce the tax laws in a fair
and equitable manner, and in a way that is free from political
influence.
And I will give you my assurance that both myself and, to
the best of my ability, the IRS will live up to the letter and
the spirit of those obligations.
Senator Warner. Well, thank you. And my time is running
out, but I just want to say doing your job well is so important
since, on even the administration's current projections, we are
going to bring our revenue run rate down to slightly over 16
percent of GDP when we have had historic averages more between
17 and 18. And we will see whether the growth comes about that
some have predicted.
I was not supportive of the tax bill, but I hope it does
come about. But boy, if it does not, we are going to need to
make sure those employees are loyal, dedicated, and can collect
every bit of that revenue that is owed the United States
Government.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for letting me come in late.
And thank you, Acting Commissioner, for answering my
questions.
The Chairman. Well, thank you, Senator. I would like to
respond to the comments of some of my friends on the other side
regarding the new pass-through deduction known as section 199A.
I want to put this new tax policy in context. It is a newer
and more expanded version of former section 199. Millions of
small businesses will benefit from the deduction. It is
important to note the deduction is simplified for small service
providers.
When we passed section 199 in 2004, it was a bipartisan
success. There were some glitches, and we fixed them over time.
No one defined the policy in section 199 as a loophole because
of glitches. Some criticized it as complex, but the businesses
it was targeted to, largely manufacturers, grew accustomed to
it. I expect we will see the same development with new section
199A.
In the case of section 199A, we need to define it for what
it is, a meaningful deduction for pass-through businesses.
The National Federation of Independent Business, NFIB, on
December 22nd, 2017 stated, quote: ``NFIB fought for decades
for a real tax cut for small-business owners. The Tax Cuts and
Jobs Act dramatically improves the way small businesses are
treated, delivering hundreds of billions of dollars in tax
cuts,'' unquote.
So I will, by unanimous consent, insert in the record a
copy of the NFIB statement.
[The statement appears in the appendix on p. 32.]
The Chairman. And I will note, NFIB represents 325,000
small-business owners in this country.
And what I am hearing from small businesses in my State is
consistent with what NFIB said. They welcome the tax relief.
Now, I want to tell you personally how much I have
appreciated you appearing here today and the forthrightness
with which you testified.
And I will just add this. Since it appears that we will not
obtain a quorum here, we will have to postpone the markup
scheduled for today to occur during a rollcall vote of the
Senate at a location to be determined that will be off the
floor. So we will schedule that.
And I want to thank Acting Commissioner Kautter for
attending today and being as patient as he has been.
And I want to thank all of my colleagues for their
participation in today's hearing.
For any of my colleagues who have written questions, I ask
that you submit them by close of business next Wednesday,
February 21st.
We are grateful to you, Mr. Kautter. We are grateful for
your service to this country. We are grateful for your
intelligence and the way you have helped this committee time
after time. And we are grateful for the future work that you
are going to be doing for us.
So with that, we will just adjourn this hearing. And I
think it has been a good hearing, and we will go from there.
Thanks so much. I appreciate it.
Mr. Kautter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[Whereupon, at 4:10 p.m., the hearing was concluded.]
A P P E N D I X
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
----------
Prepared Statement of Hon. Orrin. G. Hatch,
a U.S. Senator From Utah
WASHINGTON--Senate Finance Committee chairman Orrin G. Hatch (R-Utah)
today delivered the following opening statement at a Finance Committee
hearing to consider the administration's fiscal year (FY) 2019 budget
request for the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). The hearing will
include discussions about the agency's critical role in implementing
tax reform.
We're gathered here for the second time today to talk once again
about the President's proposed budget for fiscal year 2019. We are
grateful to have Mr. David Kautter, the acting IRS commissioner here
today to talk specifically about the President's proposed budget for
the IRS.
Mr. Kautter has served admirably in this capacity. He's filled two
critical roles with the administration during the busiest time the tax
policy world has seen in decades.
This is no easy task.
Mr. Kautter deserves our thanks for serving with such distinction.
Now, some of my colleagues may tune me out for the next several
minutes, as they've already heard me talk effusively about the success
of the new tax reform law. But, I hope people are listening, because
there's been quite a bit of good news lately. Any major change to the
tax system should be evaluated on the merits, whatever they may be.
And, by and large, we are seeing great things from tax reform.
Some have argued that our tax reform bill, which provides middle-
class tax relief and lowered taxes on job creators, benefits only the
rich or the high-ranking officers of greedy corporations. Others tend
to vilify companies' statements about their capital structure,
including dividend payments, indebtedness, or share buybacks, as things
that benefit only the wealthy stockholder or investor.
Yet, quite often, a business's success or bottom line results in
increased valuations of middle-class retirement accounts and pensions.
In fact, our private retirement system has been the biggest generator
of middle-class wealth in our Nation's history. And, because more than
one-third of all corporate stock holdings in the United States are in
various forms of retirement accounts, growing businesses contribute
directly to the expansion of that middle-class wealth.
So yes, with lower corporate tax rates and other reforms to our
business tax system, we have seen some immediate success as hundreds of
major companies have publicly announced their plans to raise wages,
distribute bonuses, or boost employee 401(k) contributions. At the same
time today's success is helping to improve the retirements and
investments of millions of middle-class Americans.
I'd say that's a good thing.
That said, despite all of this good news, we still have a great
deal of work to do to ensure that the tax law is implemented correctly.
The Treasury Department, IRS, and Congress--especially the tax writing
committees--have to work together to ensure that the law is implemented
and administered as Congress intended.
We look forward to working with the administration, and with IRS
specifically, as they continue to implement this law and issue
guidance.
This committee will also be examining possible administrative
reforms at the IRS, giving the IRS greater flexibility and bringing it
into the 21st century. I look forward to continued feedback from the
IRS and Treasury on ways we can work to improve taxpayer services and
administration.
That said, I've made no secret about my disagreements with the
Internal Revenue Service over the years. I led--along with my good
friend, Ranking Member Wyden--the most thorough and comprehensive
bipartisan investigation of the IRS in decades. I've gone after the IRS
for everything from wasteful spending to political targeting to
questionable enforcement practices.
No one here needs to remind me about IRS missteps, regardless of
which President or Commissioner has been at the helm. But personally, I
think it's high time that Congress reexamines its approach to the
agency.
Because IRS will bear the brunt of the burden in implementing and
administering the tax code and the new tax provisions, it needs
sufficient personnel and resources to carry out its important mission
at this critical juncture.
Let's keep in mind that the IRS is the only agency in the
government that touches every single American every single year. And
that's why I've pushed for such robust oversight over the years. It is
also why the IRS should get the resources it needs to do its job right.
For example, the IRS is still using computer software that is older
than most of my committee staff. And, you can take a look at them--
they're not all millennials.
The agency is shedding staff and resources. Agency reductions might
be a good thing in some cases, but it should be done through thoughtful
reforms, not the blunt axe of blind budget cuts.
The administration, in its budget, has proposed additional cuts to
funding for the IRS. I think that is a mistake. While I've had quite a
bit to say over the years about the allocation of resources at the IRS,
now, directly after passage of a major overhaul of the tax system, is
not a great time to further reduce the taxpayer services budget of the
agency that will do most of the work in implementing the updated tax
code.
We need to take a close look at this issue and be fiscally
responsible with any solutions, but, as we do this, we should also
consider what is in the best interest of proper and effective
administration of our recently reformed tax code.
Before I close, I do want to note that we've noticed an executive
business meeting for this time. If, at any point during the hearing, a
suitable quorum is present, I intend to pause the hearing and move to
votes on the nominations of Mr. Dennis Shea and Mr. C.J. Mahoney.
Thereafter, we'll resume our hearing.
______
NFIB Celebrates Hard-Fought Victory on Historic Tax Law
December 22, 2017
President's signature marks the end of a decades-long fight for small
business tax reform and paves the way for robust growth.
Washington, DC (December 22, 2017)--The National Federation of
Independent Business (NFIB) issued the following statement today on
behalf of the president and CEO Juanita Duggan on the Tax Cuts and Jobs
Act becoming law:
NFIB fought for decades for a real tax cut for small business
owners. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act dramatically improves the way
small businesses are treated, delivering hundreds of billions
of dollars in tax cuts.
Small business optimism has been near record highs all year
long in anticipation of this moment. Starting in 2018, millions
of small businesses will have substantially more money to
convert their optimism into investments. They can buy new
equipment, increase inventory, pay workers more, create new
jobs, and engage in the economic activities that drive the U.S.
economy.
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act is a once-in-a-generation
achievement. This is a historic day for small business and the
country. We are grateful to President Trump for his leadership
on this issue, which started even before he took office. Today
he fulfilled his promise to cut taxes for American small
businesses.
For more information about NFIB, please visit www.nfib.com.
______
Prepared Statement of Hon. David J. Kautter, Acting Commissioner,
Internal Revenue Service, and Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy,
Department of the Treasury
INTRODUCTION
Chairman Hatch, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the committee,
thank you for the opportunity to discuss the IRS's budget and current
operations, including efforts to improve taxpayer service.
In allocating resources, the IRS strives to balance three competing
and overarching priorities: basic tax administration, sustaining our
information technology (IT) systems and modernizing our operations. The
President's fiscal year (FY) 2019 budget request attempts to balance
these priorities by investing in key mission-
critical requirements and build on the work the IRS has already begun
in FY 2018 to implement the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
This piece of legislation was the first major tax reform
legislation in more than 30 years. With hundreds of provisions intended
to provide relief to American families and make America's businesses
more competitive, the new law will require extensive work by the IRS in
calendar years 2018 and 2019 to serve the needs of both taxpayers and
tax professionals. It is crucial that the IRS receive additional
funding this fiscal year to avoid any disruptions during next year's
tax filing season.
The IRS remains mindful of the need to do everything possible to
provide taxpayers and their representatives with secure, high-quality
assistance and services, through every available channel. The agency
spends a significant amount of time and resources each year working to
fulfill this critical part of our mission, and our workforce remains
dedicated to helping taxpayers understand and meet their filing
obligations. Taxpayer needs have been evolving, with more taxpayers
conducting their business using digital tools at the time and place of
their choosing. The FY 2019 budget invests resources to meet these
needs by reducing dependency on a single point of entry and ensuring
the IRS meets the needs of all taxpayers.
The most visible service the IRS provides each year is delivery of a
smooth tax filing season. I'm pleased to report that the 2018 filing
season began on schedule on January 29th and is going well so far.
During calendar year (CY) 2017, the IRS received more than 150 million
individual income tax returns, 87 percent of which were filed
electronically. We issued more than 111 million refunds for a total of
approximately $320 billion, with the average refund totaling
approximately $2,800.
THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2019 BUDGET
The President's FY 2019 budget request of $11.135 billion includes
savings and reductions of $23.7 million and 2,163 full-time equivalent
equivalents (FTE) compared to the FY 2018 Annualized Continuing
Resolution level.
The budget invests in high-priority programs to allow the IRS to
assist more taxpayers by becoming more efficient and effective. The
budget also invests in technology and data analytics, to increase the
use of ``lighter touch'' compliance contacts and focus enforcement on
closing the tax gap, and to protect taxpayer refunds from fraud.
Importantly, the budget increases funding for security and replacing
obsolete hardware to protect taxpayers' sensitive data from growing
cyber threats. In addition, the budget requests modest changes to the
IRS transfer and reprogramming authority to provide the IRS with the
flexibility necessary to manage its resources more effectively.
Operations Support. The President's budget request includes $4.16
billion for operations support programs including rent, cyber and
physical security, IT services for all IRS employees, and core tax
processing and compliance systems. Within that total, $2.29 billion is
allocated for information services, which is $217.8 million, or 10.5
percent, above the FY 2018 annualized continuing resolution level.
The management, maintenance, and ongoing enhancement of the IRS's
information technology systems are central to the reliability of its
operations, and to the successful accomplishment of its mission. The
2019 budget includes dedicated funding to refresh IRS hardware and
software to provide a stable foundation for delivering technology
services required for day-to-day operations, transforming the taxpayer
experience, and modernizing IRS operations.
At the end of FY 2017, more than 59 percent of IRS hardware was
past its useful life compared to 64 percent at the end of FY 2016, and
32 percent of software was two or more releases behind the most current
commercially-available version. The FY 2019 budget provides $187.8
million to enable the IRS to implement critical hardware and software
upgrades and reduce system outages and failures.
Sustained investments in IT are also required to improve
cybersecurity and ensure the IRS can continue to safeguard taxpayer
data. The IRS combats more than 1 million cyberattacks daily, and
operates strong network perimeter defenses to mitigate threats, detect
vulnerabilities and monitor network security. The 2019 budget includes
$303.7 million for these critical activities.
Taxpayer Services. The President's budget request includes $2.24
billion for taxpayer services, which is $108.7 million, or 4.6 percent,
below the FY 2018 annualized continuing resolution level. The IRS is
mindful of the need to continually improve our efforts to ensure
taxpayers can file their taxes as quickly and easily as possible. We
will continue expanding opportunities for taxpayers and their
representatives to complete service and compliance interactions through
their preferred channel, be it online, over the phone, or in-person at
one of the IRS's many Taxpayer Assistance Centers (TACs).
At the same time, we will continue our investments in improving the
use of online tools and offerings and modernizing the taxpayer
experience. Over the last several years the IRS has launched a number
of digital applications that allow taxpayers to conduct various
transactions online, such as paying their tax bill, having access to
certain return information, and requesting an online payment agreement.
Our work in this area also includes continuing the development, over
time, of online accounts at the IRS where taxpayers can log in
securely, obtain the information they need about their account and
interact with the IRS as needed.
Effectively serving taxpayers who prefer to be served through
electronic channels allows the IRS to reduce costs, increases taxpayer
satisfaction and frees up funds to serve those taxpayers who prefer to
be served differently. Not only that, efforts to continue improving our
online offerings will allow the IRS to simplify return filing for the
vast majority of taxpayers. Enhancing taxpayer service in this way will
in turn increase voluntary compliance, improve tax administration, and
increase taxpayer satisfaction.
Enforcement. The President's FY 2019 budget includes $4.63 billion
for enforcement programs, which is $21.2 million, or 0.5 percent, above
the FY 2018 annualized CR level. In addition, the budget also includes
a program integrity cap adjustment for improving the effectiveness and
efficiency of the IRS's overall tax enforcement program.
The IRS remains committed to increasing compliance by assisting
taxpayers in fulfilling their tax obligations and enforcing the tax
laws. As a result of these efforts, the agency remains one of the most
cost-effective investments within the Federal Government. In FY 2017,
the IRS collected $3.4 trillion in revenue to fund the Federal
Government, which represents more than 90 percent of all Federal
receipts, and resources invested in the agency lead to significant
revenue increases for the Nation.
One of the IRS's highest priorities in the enforcement area remains
the effort to combat tax-related identity theft and refund fraud.
Protecting taxpayers and their personal data from identity theft is a
critical aspect of taxpayer service, and the IRS has worked to improve
its efforts in this critical area. During FY 2017, the IRS continued
increasing taxpayer protections to make filing a tax return as safe and
secure as possible. As a result, the number of fraudulent refunds
declined and the number of taxpayers reporting to the IRS that they
were victims of identity theft has also declined. The number of victim
reports declined from 401,000 in CY 2016 to 242,000 in 2017, a drop of
40 percent.
Business Systems Modernization. The President's budget includes
$110 million for business systems modernization, which is $178.0
million, or 61.8 percent, below the FY 2018 annualized continuing
resolution level.
To gain efficiencies, secure and protect data, and reduce the
resources necessary to maintain existing systems, the IRS will continue
efforts to modernize its systems. Our main initiatives in this area
are: expanding the digital conversion of paper case files, automating
repetitive manual processes, leveraging existing data to detect tax
noncompliance earlier, and enabling a strong and secure systems
platform for
taxpayer-facing applications.
FUNDING REQUEST TO IMPLEMENT THE NEW TAX LAW
Implementing the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act is one of the IRS's highest
priorities. The IRS has established a Tax Reform Implementation Office,
led by one of its most senior leaders, to ensure its successful
administration. Preliminary efforts to implement this new law are
already underway, and two important pieces of guidance related to the
new law have already been issued: on December 29, 2017, the IRS issued
notices that address amended section 965 of the Internal Revenue Code
and the new section 1446(f).
Additionally, the IRS and the Treasury Department released new
withholding guidance indicating that employees should see the tax
reform changes reflected in their paychecks as early as this month.
Additional published guidance on the new tax law will be provided
as the IRS continues to analyze the law and its impact on tax
administration. On February 7th, the IRS and the Treasury Department
issued a revised Priority Guidance Plan that includes projects related
to the law.
To ensure successful implementation, the IRS will need additional
resources in FY 2018. After considering FTE staffing needs and non-
labor costs, preliminary estimates indicate the IRS would need at least
$397 million to implement tax reform. This funding is needed
immediately to ensure that the IRS can start critical implementation
activities on time. The funding should be available for 2 years to
ensure contracts can be let appropriately and resources are available
throughout the critical testing period of September through December of
the calendar year, the first quarter of FY 2019.
Activities to implement tax reform will include: re-programming
approximately 140 interrelated return processing systems in conjunction
with creating or revising approximately 450 tax forms, publications and
instructions; publishing guidance, notices, and Frequently Asked
Questions (FAQ); preparing the IRS workforce to help taxpayers
understand how the new law applies to them; and importantly, providing
taxpayer assistance and outreach.
These estimates reflect one-time costs associated with updating
major systems and enabling the IRS to quickly respond to the new tax
law changes and anticipated higher taxpayer demand for assistance in
2018 and 2019. As with other major investments, the IRS expects some
recurring operations and maintenance costs which will be funded within
base appropriations.
The $397 million funding request for tax law implementation
includes the following:

$291 million for updating information technology systems;

$75 million for taxpayer assistance, education and outreach;

$3 million for creating and revising tax forms, instructions and
publications;

$15 million for developing and issuing published guidance and
notices;

$8 million for tax and information returns processing; and

$5 million for program management.
LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS IN THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2019 BUDGET
Along with the funding requested in the President' FY 2019 budget,
we are also asking for Congress's help legislatively, particularly in
four important areas that would improve tax administration and support
the IRS in fulfilling its mission:
Program Integrity Cap. In addition to the base appropriations
request of $11.135 billion, the FY 2019 budget proposes a $362 million
program integrity cap adjustment to fund new and continuing investments
in expanding and improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the
IRS's overall tax enforcement program.
The budget also proposes additional cap adjustments to fund new
initiatives and inflation. The investments will generate about $44
billion in additional revenue over 10 years and will cost about $15
billion for net savings of $29 billion. Notably, the return on
investment (ROI) likely is understated because it does not reflect the
effect that enhanced enforcement has on deterring noncompliance.
Streamlined Critical Pay Authority. The IRS Restructuring and
Reform Act of 1998 increased the IRS's ability to recruit and retain a
small number of key
executive-level staff by providing the agency with streamlined critical
pay authority. This allowed the IRS, with approval from Treasury, to
move quickly to hire well-qualified individuals to fill positions
deemed critical to the agency's success, and that required expertise of
an extremely high level in an administrative, technical, or
professional field. Executives hired under this authority included our
former Chief Information Officer, a senior cybersecurity expert, our
system architect, the director of our online systems development team
and other senior IT executives. This authority expired at the end of FY
2013. The last appointment made under Streamlined Critical Pay
authority expired on September 29, 2017. Without this authority, the
IRS continues to face challenges recruiting and retaining top-level
talent, especially IT professionals who can help modernize our IT
systems and protect taxpayer data from cyberattacks. The President's FY
2019 budget request proposes reinstating this authority through FY
2022.
Correction Procedures for Specific Errors. Under current law, the
IRS has authority in limited circumstances to identify certain
computation mistakes or other irregularities on returns and
automatically adjust the return for a taxpayer. At various times,
Congress has expanded this limited authority on a case-by-case basis to
cover specific, newly enacted tax code amendments. The IRS would be
able to significantly improve tax administration--including reducing
improper payments and cutting down on the need for costly audits--if
Congress were to enact a proposal in the President's FY 2019 budget to
provide the IRS with greater flexibility to correct specific errors on
taxpayer returns. This proposal would allow the IRS to correct errors
in cases when the information provided by the taxpayer does not match
the information contained in government databases, or when the taxpayer
has exceeded the lifetime limit for claiming a deduction or credit.
Authority to Require Minimum Qualifications for Return Preparers.
The President's budget request proposes providing the Secretary with
explicit authority to require that all paid tax return preparers have a
minimum knowledge of the Code. This is especially important to ensure
that the estimated 400,000 tax preparers without credentials can meet
minimum standards for competency. Incompetent and dishonest tax return
preparers harm taxpayers by subjecting them to potential audits and by
potentially subjecting them to penalties and interest as a result of
incorrect returns. Requiring all paid tax preparers to keep up with
changes in the code would help promote high-quality service from
preparers, improve voluntary compliance and foster taxpayer confidence
in the fairness of the tax system.
Chairman Hatch, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the committee,
that concludes my statement. I would be happy to take your questions.
______
Questions Submitted for the Record to Hon. David J. Kautter
Questions Submitted by Hon. Chuck Grassley
Question. Acting Commissioner Kautter, I have concerns with the
slow roll-out with the IRS private debt collection program. Several
times in 2017, I raised concerns that the number of accounts the IRS
planned to release for private collection were woefully inadequate,
guaranteeing the program would fall far short of collecting the
hundreds of millions in revenue JCT estimates is possible.
Unfortunately, this is exactly what has occurred. I understand the need
for a testing period to ensure all systems are go, but what concerns me
is that we are nearly a year in and the IRS is still placing accounts
at little more than a trickle. I am told the program has the capacity
to do more than 10 times the volume it is presently operating at.
Why hasn't the IRS implemented the program to the full extent
required under the law?
Answer. The IRS takes its obligations under the Private Debt
Collection program seriously and is working diligently toward a fully
engaged Private Debt Collection program that will endure for years to
come. The IRS delivered the first Private Debt Collection accounts to
the Private Collection Agencies on April 10, 2017. The initial number
of assigned cases was small to ensure the protection of taxpayer rights
and the secure transmission of sensitive information. Over the next
nine months, we increased the number of assigned cases and by the end
of calendar year 2017, the IRS had delivered over 240,000 cases with a
total of $1.7 billion outstanding tax debt to the Private Collection
Agencies. In 2018, IRS will assign an additional 700,000 to 800,000
individual taxpayer cases. Business cases will be assigned beginning in
2019. By 2019, we expect to have begun assigning all of the various
types of cases to Private Collection Agencies.
Question. Are there plans to increase the volume of accounts placed
with private debt collectors going forward? Please provide information
on the planned placement volumes for 2018, including types and a
breakdown of dollar sizes of the accounts placed.
Answer. In calendar year 2018, the IRS plans to deliver between
700,000 and 800,000 cases totaling approximately $5 to $5.5 billion in
total debt. The planned breakdown by dollar (balance due) level is as
follows:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dollar Levels
--------------------------------------------------------------------
$500-$10k
$10k-$50k
$50k-$100k
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# Cases
512-585k
166-190k
20-24k
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question. In its 2017 annual report to Congress, the Taxpayer
Advocate raised concerns that commissions may be being paid to private
debt collectors for work done by the IRS. Could you please explain the
rules and procedures for determining whether commissions are payable?
Answer. The contract with the Private Collection Agencies outlines
the rules and procedures for determining whether commissions are
payable.
The IRS is contractually obligated to pay commissions on any
payment received 11 calendar days or more after the date the account is
transferred to the Private Collection Agency, and up to 10 calendar
days after the date the account is returned to the IRS.
When the Private Collection Agency Contractor collects less than
the total amount of the debt referred, the commission fee is calculated
based on eligible dollars collected and applied to accounts. When the
debt is collected in installments, the commission rate will be paid to
the Private Collection Agency Contractor based on the eligible dollars
collected and applied to accounts for each installment payment.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. John Thune
Question. Thank you for making sure the revised withholding tables
were issued so promptly last month and for doing so in an impartial
manner. Employees are starting to see the benefits of the new law in
their paychecks this month, and that's a very good thing. When the new
tables were released, the IRS announced that the agency is also working
on revising the W-4 form, which employees use to set their paycheck
withholding. Can you talk about those revisions and specifically
whether they will include a way for employees to take into account the
$2,000 child tax credit or the new $500 non-child tax credit? It would
be ideal if parents and those who care for adult dependents could see
the benefit of these credits in their paychecks without having to wait
until they file their tax return.
Answer. Yes, the 2018 Form W-4, which was released on February
28th, does allow employees to take into account the expanded child tax
credit, as well as the new non-child tax credit. The IRS also released
the updated withholding calculator on the same day. This provides a
simple and accurate way for employees to check whether they should
adjust their withholding to avoid having too much or too little
withheld.
Question. Mr. Kautter, in your prior life, you focused extensively
on taxes and small businesses. With the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act only in
effect for 45 days, I suspect many small businesses are still factoring
the new rules and tax relief into their business plans. Can you share
with us how you expect small businesses to react to changes like the
expanded expensing for equipment and inventory under the new law and
the broader application of cash accounting for small enterprises?
Answer. Treasury and IRS are working to provide guidance on these
(and other) provisions as expeditiously as possible so that small
businesses and their tax advisors are aware of the changes in the new
law and can plan accordingly. We also expect small businesses to react
positively to expanded expensing and broader application of cash
accounting under the new law.
Question. One of the biggest issues facing South Dakotans when it
comes to their Federal taxes is the problem of tax-related identity
theft. This not only affects those who have their identity stolen, but
also those who find their refund delayed while the IRS verifies their
identity. I was pleased to see reports that incidences of tax-related
identify theft have fallen, but we need to stay vigilant. Can you talk
about the steps the IRS is taking to prevent identity theft and help
resolve identify theft cases faster, especially for taxpayers who are
entitled to a refund?
Answer. Refund fraud caused by identity theft (IDT) continues to be
one of the biggest challenges facing the IRS today. As identity thieves
continue to become more sophisticated, the IRS has tightened its
security in response to the increased threat. We are making it harder
for identity thieves to successfully masquerade as taxpayers and file
fraudulent refund claims on behalf of these taxpayers. Over the last
several years, the IRS IDT fraud filtering processes has been effective
in stopping misuse of information even when data breaches resulted in
release of personally identifiable information (PII). Under recently
enacted legislation, the due date for filing Forms W-2 and W-3 with the
Social Security Administration (SSA) and Forms 1099 reporting
nonemployee compensation with the IRS has been accelerated to January
31st, beginning in calendar year 2017. Enhancements to IRS systems that
allow income information received from SSA to be processed and, in
turn, leveraged for systemic income and withholding verification enable
the IRS to identify and stop fraudulent returns and release refunds
related to compliant returns quicker.
To help taxpayers resolve IDT cases faster, we centralized our IDT
victim assistance policy, oversight, and campus case work in a new
Identity Theft Victim Assistance (IDTVA) organization. Benefits to this
centralized approach include a common inventory system, reducing hand-
offs between multiple IRS functions, improved case processing through
streamlined, consistent procedures, and improved communication.
In the victim assistance area, we have reduced the time it takes to
resolve a case. For most cases, the average time is now less than 120
days, which is substantially less than 2012, when cases could take over
300 days to resolve. Centralization of IDTVA work significantly reduced
case resolution time. Since implementation, we resolve those cases in
less than 120 days 75 percent of the time, compared to 34 percent prior
to implementation.
We are continuing to develop and implement new procedures to
improve the service we provide to IDT victims such as:

New IDTVA telephone process allowing a taxpayer to make
direct contact with the employee assigned to the case (August
2017).

New procedures to achieve a single point of contact when
more than 1 year is open within IDTVA.

Removing requirement to attach proof of identity
documentation, to Form 14039, Identity Theft Affidavit e.g.,
driver's license, passport, etc., (reducing taxpayer burden).

Utilizing multiple methods to obtain required information to
resolve the taxpayer's IDT complaint (often avoiding requesting
additional information or documentation).

Automatic case assignment (reducing time to resolve the
cases).

Standardizing procedures in the Internal Revenue Manual to
allow cross-
functional casework.

Using Correspondence Imaging System for IDT cases with
current or past compliance activity (resulting in quicker case
resolution).

Improving the way we track and report the status of IDT
cases to quickly identify and make any improvements in the
process.

Revising taxpayer letters to provide more information on
case status and actions taxpayers can take to facilitate
resolution.

Cross-training IDTVA assistors enabling additional
flexibility to assign cases to assistors with the appropriate
skills (reducing transfers and expediting case resolution).
______
Question Submitted by Hon. Johnny Isakson
Question. A provision in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act deals with stock
attribution rules as they pertain to inbound companies as well as U.S.-
headquartered companies with investments in foreign companies. As the
Treasury Department and the IRS issue guidance on the new tax law, I
urge its implementation in a manner that is consistent with the
provision's historical application and the intent of Congress.
Specifically, prior to its repeal in the new tax law, Internal Revenue
Code section 958(b)(4) prevented the ``downward attribution'' of stock
ownership from a foreign person to a related U.S. person for purposes
of determining the status of a corporation as a controlled foreign
corporation (CFC).
The new law's legislative history--the Senate Finance Committee
report; a colloquy between Chairman Hatch and my colleague from
Georgia, Senator Perdue; and the Conference Report--shows that Congress
intended the modification of CFC rules should not result in income
inclusions to a U.S. shareholder of a foreign corporation in cases
where the U.S. shareholder is neither in control of the foreign
corporation nor related to an affiliated group of which the foreign
corporation is a part. The treatment outlined throughout the
legislative process is also consistent with the purpose and historical
application of the CFC rules over their 55-year history.
Given this clear legislative intent and the grant of regulatory
authority to implement such intent, will the Treasury Department and
the IRS issue administrative guidance to ensure that the modification
of the stock attribution rules is implemented in a manner that is both
consistent with its historical application and the intent of Congress?
Answer. We are aware of the legislative history of this provision,
and we continue to evaluate how best to implement this provision
consistent with the statutory text and other indications of legislative
intent.
______
Question Submitted by Hon. Pat Roberts
Question. The IRS has for many years sought to collect the Federal
air transportation excise tax, also known as the airline ticket tax,
from aircraft management services (AMS) companies that manage and
maintain fractional and wholly owned aircraft programs even though they
provide private, non-commercial transportation. The IRS has pursued
enforcement action for the ticket tax from AMS companies despite
lacking statutory authority to do so. In addition, the agency's
collection efforts against AMS companies has been inconsistent and
arbitrary, effectively picking winners and losers and resulting in
confusion within the AMS industry and an uneven playing field. Along
with Senator Portman, I championed a fix for this issue in the recently
passed Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (section 13822, H.R. 1) that was included
in the final bill and states clearly that AMS companies are not subject
to the ticket tax. Our view is that Congress has spoken and that the
IRS should respect the law and stop trying to collect the ticket tax
from AMS companies. Unfortunately, I understand that the IRS is still
pursuing collection of the tax against certain AMS companies for past
tax years, undermining the law and creating additional confusion and
instability within the AMS industry.
Will you follow the law and the clear intent of Congress by ceasing
all ongoing and future collection activity of the air transportation
ticket tax against aircraft management services companies?
Answer. Guidance was provided to examiners to not pursue this issue
on audits in June 2017 and the IRS is no longer pursuing the air
transportation excise tax under Internal Revenue Code section 4261 on
fees paid by an aircraft owner to an independent aircraft management
company for whole aircraft management services. Audits of this issue
were suspended and closed as a no change in 2017. We are also working
with aircraft management companies to resolve any claims filed for
taxes previously paid on whole aircraft management service fees.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sheldon Whitehouse
Question. United States Code 26 U.S.C. Sec. 7206(1) makes it a
felony punishable by up to 3 years of imprisonment and $100,000 in
fines for a person who: ``[w]illfully makes and subscribes any return,
statement, or other document, which contains or is verified by a
written declaration that it is made under the penalties of perjury, and
which he does not believe to be true and correct as to every material
matter.''
Why is it important to ensure that taxpayers are providing accurate
information?
Answer. It is important for taxpayers to provide accurate
information to the IRS because our tax system is based on voluntary
compliance. Voluntary compliance is essential in ensuring that all
taxpayers pay their fair share. If taxpayers could provide false
information, without concern about the consequences, compliance with
the tax law would likely suffer.
Question. Are persons also subject to penalty under the criminal
false statement statute, 18 U.S.C. Sec. 1001, if they knowingly make
material false statements to the IRS?
Answer. Section 1001 is generally not used in the case of a false
statement on a return because, if the return is signed under the
penalties of perjury, as most are, section 7206(1) of the Internal
Revenue Code is considered a more appropriate charge. Because section
1001 is normally used in criminal tax cases involving a defendant's use
of false statements or documents, the elements of the offense focuses
on false statements or documents, rather than on concealment.
Question. What steps does the IRS take to ensure that statements
made to the IRS are true?
Answer. IRS ensures the accuracy of tax returns by comparing, among
other things, filed tax returns with other information received from
outside sources submitted on various IRS forms to include Forms W-2, K-
1, 1099, etc. IRS Criminal Investigations (CI) also verifies the
accuracy of returns by obtaining records from taxpayers and contacting
third parties such as banks, witnesses, and payroll companies as part
of the criminal investigation process.
Question. Does the IRS review other filings and statements the
person has made to the IRS to verify that the information regarding
material matters is consistent?
Answer. Yes, see response to (c) above. IRS-CI also reviews other
tax years for consistency and patterns, and if applicable, coordinates
with the other IRS divisions to obtain any documents or statements that
the taxpayer may have provided.
Question. Does the IRS review other filings the person has made to
other Federal agencies to verify the information regarding material
matters is consistent?
Answer. Depending on the facts and circumstances of the
investigation, IRS-CI may review filings or documents submitted by the
taxpayer to other Federal agencies to either confirm or refute their
statements, as permitted by law. For instance, title 12 U.S.C.
Sec. 3412(f), Use of Information, allows agencies to disclose certain
financial records to the Attorney General or the Secretary of the
Treasury when there is reason to believe that the records may be
relevant to a violation of Federal criminal law.
Question. At the hearing, I asked you to provide information about
why the IRS stopped publishing the ``The 400 Individual Income Tax
Returns Reporting the Largest Adjusted Gross Incomes'' data.
Why did the IRS stop publishing this information?
Knowing that this information is useful to the public and to
members of Congress, will you commit to reviving this annual report?
Answer. The IRS eliminated the Top 400 table for two reasons.
First, it posed a number of analytical challenges. Since the number of
tax returns filed changes from year to year, based on economic
conditions and tax law requirements, changes in the data over time are
difficult to interpret. For example, in 1992 the top 400 represented
.00035 percent of all returns filed, but this declined to .00027
percent by 2014 because the number of returns filed increased over this
period by more than 35 million. Thus, increases or decreases in the
share of reported income or tax liability attributed to the top 400
cannot be meaningfully connected to actual economic trends. Nor is the
400 a static group. In addition, over an 18-year period, more than 71
percent of individuals included in the top 400 were present for just 1
year and only 3 percent were present for 10 or more years. This means
that the top 400 also cannot be used as a panel to study the changes in
income for a fixed group of taxpayers over time. Second, there are
disclosure concerns created by producing detailed statistics on such a
small group of highly visible taxpayers. The risk that presence or
absence of particular data items in the annual table could be exploited
by an intruder with access to other information on top earners to
generate a credible claim of re-identification has increased over time
as the amount of personal information in the public domain increased
and the power of computers and analytic capabilities grew.
Beginning with Tax Year 2014, the annual October release of
Individual Income Tax Return percentile data was expanded to include a
new table (Individual Income Tax Rates and Tax Shares, Table 3). This
table contains all of the item content found in the top 400 data
release and groups this information by percentiles of the income
distribution. This new table shows data for filers at the .001
percentile level--which in 2014 represented the top 1,396 returns. We
believe, this is a more analytically useful tabulation compared to the
top 400 tabulation, in that it provides a longitudinally consistent
data point relative to the entire percentile distribution. As the
number of returns increases with the growth of the economy, the number
of returns in the .001 percentile will increase proportionally as well
thus allowing for a consistent high-income data series. As a
consequence, the top 400 data series was discontinued after Tax Year
2014.
The IRS Statistics of Income Division (SOI) discussed this change
with the professional staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation in
October 2014 and this change was endorsed for providing both more
useful information to the public and better privacy protection than the
Top 400 table. SOI presented the plan and proposed new tabulations at a
public meeting, hosted by the Committee on National Statistics at the
National Academies, that included more than 90 external stakeholders
representing nonprofits, research facilities, and academia, as well as
more than 19 Federal agencies. Again, there was universal agreement
that the new detailed table on tax returns in the top .001 percent of
filing population was a much more analytically useful tool than the Top
400 table.
Question. According to the IRS, the net tax gap, the difference
between what people and companies owe in taxes and what the IRS
ultimately collects exceeds $400 billion per year. This should be the
low-hanging fruit of deficit reduction; this is money owed under the
law. The budget request notes that an additional $15 billion for
enforcement over 10 years will generate $44 billion in collections,
``yielding a net savings of $29 billion.'' In other words, every dollar
spent on enforcement brings in three.
Do you agree that additional enforcement dollars would produce a
positive return and help reduce the deficit?
Answer. Yes, we agree additional enforcement dollars along with the
associated Operations Support dollars would better support the IRS tax
enforcement and compliance programs and would produce a positive return
and reduce the deficit. The IRS FY 2019 budget includes, as part of the
proposed Program Integrity Cap Adjustment, $362 million in additional
investments to expand and improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
the IRS's overall tax enforcement programs in 2019 as well as
additional investments in future years. These investments will generate
about $44 billion in additional revenue over 10 years and will cost
about $15 billion for an estimated net savings of $29 billion. Of these
investments, $290.1 million are in investments for traditional
enforcement and strategic revenue programs, and those investments are
projected to generate $2 billion in revenue once the investments reach
full potential in FY 2021 an expected total ROI of $5.2 to $1. Notably,
this return likely is understated because it includes only amounts
directly recovered; it does not reflect the effect that enhanced
enforcement has on deterring non-
compliance.
Question. Are you aware that the FY19 request for the IRS
enforcement budget is nearly $1 billion lower than Congress
appropriated for it in 2011?
Answer. The funding level for the enforcement account is not the
only indicator of the IRS's tax enforcement efforts. Technology plays
an increasingly important role in the IRS's enforcement strategy and
has increased our capacity to identify and prevent non-compliance while
also making it easier for taxpayers to comply voluntarily. The proposed
investments in the Return Review Program, expanding online payment
applications, and hardware and software for enforcement personnel--
activities funded from the Operations Support and Business Systems
Modernization accounts--also increase enforcement productivity and
revenue.
Question. With the potential for enforcement dollars to cut the
deficit, why hasn't the President requested more?
Answer. The 2019 budget includes funding to ensure our
infrastructure can sustain our programs, including filing season; that
taxpayers are provided the services they need to comply with tax laws;
that modernization efforts remain on track to provide taxpayers with
the tools they need to interact with the IRS; and that enforcement
efforts continue. The FY 2019 request also includes a Program Integrity
Cap adjustment of $362 million in 2019 (as well as additional cap
adjustments for new investments in future years) to fund new and
continuing investments in expanding and improving the effectiveness and
efficiency of the IRS's overall tax enforcement program.
Question. United States Code 2 U.S.C. Sec. 441(e) makes it unlawful
for a foreign national to ``directly or through any other person to
make any contribution of money or other thing of value, or to promise
expressly or impliedly to make any such contribution, in connection
with an election to any political office or in connection with any
primary election, convention, or caucus held to select candidates for
any political office; or for any person to solicit, accept, or receive
any such contribution from a foreign national.''
What role does IRS play in ensuring foreign money does not enter
our political system through outside organizations like LLCs and tax
exempt organizations?
Answer. This questions appears to refer to 52 U.S.C. Sec. 30121
(previously 2 U.S.C. 441(e)), which the Federal Election Commission--
not the IRS--is responsible for enforcing.
With respect to tax exempt organizations and LLCs, the IRS ensures
compliance with the Internal Revenue Code and implementing regulations.
We note that a section 501(c)(3) organization is not operated
exclusively for one or more exempt purposes if it is an organization
that participates or intervenes, directly or indirectly, in any
political campaign on behalf of or in opposition to any candidate for
public office. The term candidate for public office means an individual
who offers himself, or is proposed by others, as a contestant for an
elective public office, whether such office is national, State, or
local. Activities which constitute participation or intervention in a
political campaign on behalf of or in opposition to a candidate
(political campaign intervention or ``PCI'') include, but are not
limited to, the publication or distribution of written or printed
statements or the making of oral statements on behalf of or in
opposition to such a candidate. Treas. Reg. Sec. 1.501(c)(3)-
1(c)(3)(iii).
Question. Section 501(c)(4) organizations are required to disclose
their donors to the IRS. What does IRS do with that information?
Answer. Treasury Regulations require section 501(c)(4)
organizations to include Schedule B, Schedule of Contributors, with
annual information returns on Forms 990/990-EZ. The IRS maintains this
information for use, as needed, in compliance matters.
Question. Does IRS review the donor lists to ensure that foreign
actors are not funneling money into our elections through 501(c)(4)
organizations?
Answer. As noted above, this questions appears to refer to 52
U.S.C. Sec. 30121 (previously 2 U.S.C. 441(e)), which the Federal
Election Commission--not the IRS--is responsible for enforcing.
Question. Does the IRS coordinate with FinCEN in these efforts?
Answer. The IRS has procedures to provide for referrals to the
Exempt Organizations Financial Investigation Unit (FIU) if, during the
course of an audit, donor information is necessary to determine if an
organization is in compliance with section 501(c)(4). Any requests
relating to Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN)
are performed by the FIU.
Question. Does the IRS coordinate with any other Federal agencies
to ensure foreign nationals are not prohibited from election activity?
Answer. On a case by case basis, IRS coordinates, through its
Criminal Investigation Division, with other Federal agencies, including
FBI.
Question. Are the current disclosures to the IRS by such groups
sufficient to ensure that foreign actors are not funneling money
through cutouts or domestic organizations?
Answer. There is no requirement that the nationality of the
contributor be shown on the Schedule B, or that an exempt organization
request the nationality of its contributors.
Question. Does the IRS have sufficient resources to enforce
501(c)(4) rules?
Answer. The IRS administers and enforces the tax laws as in effect
with the resources available. The TE/GE FY 2018 Work Plan, dated
September 28, 2017, sets forth the Exempt Organizations Division's FY
2017 accomplishments and its plan for FY 2018 to continue to be an
organization whose key elements are ``efficiency, effectiveness, and
transparency.''
Question. Currently the IRS has an 11-factor test to determine if a
501(c)(4) social welfare organization is engaging in political
activity.
Would the IRS and social welfare organizations benefit from more
clarity regarding what types of activities constitute under the rules
and what amount of money groups are able to spend on ``political
activity''?
Answer. The IRS administers and enforces, and taxpayers are
required to comply with, the tax laws as in effect. Section 501(c)(4)
provides exemption, in part, for ``[c]ivic leagues or organizations not
organized for profit but operated exclusively for the promotion of
social welfare.'' An organization ``is operated exclusively for the
promotion of social welfare if it is primarily engaged in promoting in
some way the common good and general welfare of the people of the
community.'' (Treas. Reg. Sec. 1.501(c)(4)-1(a)(2)(i).) The promotion
of social welfare does not include direct or indirect participation or
intervention in political campaigns on behalf of or in opposition to
any candidate for public office (political campaign intervention, or
``PCI''). (Treas. Reg. Sec. 1.501(c)(4)-1(a)(2)(ii).) Accordingly,
although engagement in PCI is not prohibited for these organizations,
the primary activities of organizations described in section 501(c)(4)
must be the promotion of social welfare.
In addition, section 501(c)(4) organizations that engage in PCI may
be subject to tax under section 527(f) on their exempt function
expenditures. Whether an organization is engaged in PCI depends upon
all the facts and circumstances of each case. The IRS has provided
examples illustrating facts and circumstances to be considered in
determining whether activities are PCI. See, e.g., Rev. Rul. 2004-6;
Rev. Rul. 2007-41. The analysis reflected in these revenue rulings for
determining whether an organization has engaged in PCI, or has expended
funds for a section 527 exempt function, is factual in nature.
Question. Does the absence of bright-line rules for political
spending by 501(c)(4) groups make prosecutions more difficult?
Answer. As stated above, PCI is a factual determination made during
the examination process. PCI are generally not subject to criminal
prosecutions.
Question. Do you think there should be a bright-line rule?
Answer. Given the limitations imposed in the recent appropriations
acts, the IRS currently cannot issue guidance relating to the standard
used to determine whether an organization is operated exclusively for
the promotion of social welfare for purposes of section 501(c)(4). The
IRS will administer any further statutory direction from Congress on
this matter.
Question. Do the existing 501(c)(4) rules, and the way that they
are interpreted within the IRS, hamper your ability to investigate and
prosecute cases?
Answer. The IRS administers IRC section 501(c)(4) as currently in
effect, processing requests for recognition of exempt status and
auditing section 501(c)(4) organizations using existing procedures and
applying existing legal guidance. The IRS uses the historical rules
that focus on the facts and circumstances in determining whether an
organization is engaged in activities that primarily promote social
welfare. The IRS provides appropriate training to its employees for
this purpose, including mandatory PCI training before each Federal
election cycle comprised of written materials, virtual e-learning
sessions, and face-to-face, small group technical workshops.
Question. Currently no jurisdiction in the United States requires
shell companies to disclose their beneficial ownership. Jennifer
Fowler, the Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office of Terrorist Financing
and Financial Crimes at Treasury recently told the Judiciary Committee
that the lack of beneficial ownership information for shell companies
is ``a vulnerability.'' John Cassara, a former Treasury Special Agent
and FinCEN Agent, agreed saying, ``[R]equiring the real owner of a U.S.
company to be named during the incorporation process will cut down, in
dramatic fashion, the ability of criminals to finance their crimes.''
Do you agree that the United States' lack of beneficial ownership
collection presents a serious shortcoming in our anti-money laundering
regime?
Answer. The IRS has recently made some progress in the area of
transparency of entity ownership. Newly effective rules that provide an
information reporting requirement for foreign-owned LLCs and revisions
to the form used to apply for taxpayer identification numbers all will
increase availability of beneficial ownership information.
Question. How can shell companies be used by criminals to avoid
paying taxes?
Answer. Shell companies are sometimes a vehicle used in business
transactions to avoid disclosing the identity of the beneficial owner
of an entity and thus allow the entity to operate anonymously. Shell
companies are used in lawful activities and in illegal activities.
Question. Would having access to beneficial ownership information
make it easier for the IRS to investigate tax evasion and other crimes?
Answer. Yes, identifying the beneficial ownership of the assets and
the income generated by these activities is essential in determining
the correct tax liability and identifying related criminal offenses,
both domestically and in assisting our foreign tax treaty partners
through exchange of information. Noncompliant taxpayers often spread
parts of a transaction among multiple countries and layers of entities
to confound determination of ownership and income with respect to the
transaction. Robust collection of beneficial ownership information
would ease tax examinations by enabling the IRS to look through
artificial structures and more clearly determine if the taxpayer was
compliant with the tax laws as well as laws related to money
laundering.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Rob Portman
Question. Mr. Kautter, my first question relates to a back-and-
forth that we have had on the production tax credit for refined coal
facilities. Two years ago, the IRS Chief Counsel's office issued a
memorandum that raised issues about the ability to claim the credit
depending on the refined coal facilities' ownership structure. A
similar memorandum was issued a year later. The analysis used in these
memoranda appear to contradict prior rulings and guidance from the IRS,
creating uncertainty for investors as to whether the ownership
structures of such refined coal facilities would prohibit them from
claiming the tax credit. This uncertainty resulted in many facilities
being shut down, bringing with them a substantial loss of jobs and
benefits within the industry.
Approximately 10 months ago, six Senators--including Senator Enzi,
Senator Cassidy, and myself--requested the IRS to issue immediate
guidance to the refined coal industry so that investors could structure
their investments to comply with the guidance, thereby preventing
further harm to the industry. I understand that the office of Chief
Counsel agreed to be responsible for this guidance in order to expedite
its issuance. It has now been almost a year and, although the Chief
Counsel's office has been telling the industry for the past 6 months
that issuance of the guidance is imminent, to date this guidance has
not been issued. This delay is continuing to be harmful to an industry
that Congress intended to incentivize.
Can you commit to have the Chief Counsel's office issue this
guidance within the next 30 days?
Answer. The IRS issued this guidance on March 9, 2018.
Question. My second question pertains to Notice 2018-13, which was
issued by the Treasury Department and the IRS on January 19th to
address the rules surrounding the ``deemed repatriation'' tax.
Generally, the new rule requires taxpayers with foreign operations to
pay tax on their net CFC earnings, with different applicable tax rates
depending on whether those earnings are held in cash or in permanently
reinvested assets. I'd like to touch on the ``net'' part of this
calculation.
For the purposes of the rule, businesses are allowed to subtract
the losses of CFCs with deficits from the earnings of CFCs with income
to calculate an overall number on which tax is owed. Section 3.01 of
the Notice provides rules for the treatment of income that has been
previously taxed, or PTI. As one would think, PTI is not added to the
earnings of earnings CFCs, as it is income that has already been taxed
by the United States. However, the Notice states that companies must
net PTI from loss CFCs. This leads to a strange result where, for
economic purposes, this income is essentially taxed twice: once under
subpart F, and again under the deemed repatriation rules. It also leads
to strange results, where similarly situated companies that have
similar amounts of overall CFC earnings, losses, and PTI have different
tax results because of where their PTI is located.
Can you commit to resolving the above-stated issues of double
taxation and location-based disparity in the current rules governing
PTI?
Answer. Section 965 provides different definitions that apply for
measuring positive earnings and for measuring deficits. The definition
for measuring positive earnings specifically excludes earnings that
were previously taxed under subpart F (referred to as ``previously
taxed income,'' or ``PTI''), while the definition for measuring
deficits does not. In section 3.01 of Notice 2018-13, the Treasury
Department and the IRS provided our interpretation of the statute that
in determining the amount of a deficit, PTI is taken into account. That
is, PTI can reduce the amount of deficits otherwise available to reduce
earnings subject to the transition tax.
The Treasury Department and the IRS requested comments on these
provisions described in Notice 2018-13, including the rules described
in section 3.01. The Treasury Department and the IRS will consider all
comments before issuing final regulations under section 965.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Debbie Stabenow
Question. I often say that we don't have an economy unless we are
growing things and making things here. Small businesses are the ones
willing to take the risks that grow the economy to create new jobs and
innovations.
I am concerned that the tax bill passed last year was not focused
on helping small businesses and instead added new complications for
them on their taxes. For instance, there is now a 20-percent pass-
through deduction, but a small business is not allowed to take the
deduction if the ``principal asset of the trade or business is the
reputation or skill of one or more of its employees or owners.'' If I
owned a small business, I would be pretty confused as to whether I
qualify for that deduction. One of the reasons most people decide to
open a small business is because of their reputation and/or skill.
Is the IRS prioritizing releasing guidelines for small businesses,
to help them figure out if they can take the pass-through deduction?
What is the IRS's plan to get that information out to small
business owners?
Answer. Guidance in this area is one of our top priorities. This is
reflected in the Second Quarter Update to the 2017-2018 Department of
the Treasury Priority Guidance Plan published on February 7, 2018, that
includes section 199A guidance. This guidance will address the issue of
when the principal asset of a trade or business is the reputation or
skill of its employees or owners. We are also working with Treasury on
various communications, including revisions to Forms, Instructions, and
Publications to assist taxpayers, including small businesses, in
determining whether they are eligible to claim this deduction for small
businesses.
Question. What I am hearing out of the IRS currently is not
reassuring me that the changes to the tax code are going to make it
easier for families to understand their taxes.
The IRS has given employers new withholding tables, but has also
said that families need to go to the IRS's website to make sure the
amount of taxes being taken out of their paychecks is correct. Under
the previous tax law, more than four times as many Michigan families
received a tax rebate compared to those who owed additional taxes.
If an individual or family does not have sufficient taxes withheld,
what are the consequences?
Answer. In January, we released new withholding guidance under the
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. The withholding guidance was designed to work
within the constraints of the existing payroll withholding system in
order to minimize the burden on taxpayers and employers. We have
encouraged taxpayers to use our withholding calculator to ensure they
have the correct amount of withholding. The results of the calculator
can be used to determine if they should file a new Form W-4 with their
employer.
If individuals or families do not have sufficient taxes withheld,
they will owe the additional tax at the time they file their tax
return. Payment of the tax with a return filed by the due date will not
result in interest being due. However, an underpayment tax penalty
might be owed unless the taxpayer qualifies for an exception.
If taxpayers discover their withholding will not be sufficient to
pay their tax obligation during the tax year, they may increase their
withholding or make estimated tax payments throughout the year.
Estimated taxes are generally calculated using the Form 1040-ES, which
may be found on IRS.gov, along with in-depth information on estimated
taxes.
If the taxpayer cannot pay the tax with the return, we encourage
taxpayers to request an installment agreement by using our on-line
payment application on IRS.gov. Interest and failure to pay penalty
will apply to late tax payments.
Question. What data can the IRS provide about how many taxpayers
will be receiving a smaller refund check for their 2018 taxes compared
to the one they received for their 2017 taxes, based on the withholding
changes?
Answer. The Treasury Department's Office of Tax Analysis research
suggests that if people do nothing, about the same number will receive
refunds for 2018 as would have under prior law. However, because
individual circumstances will vary and because many taxpayers receive
large refunds (and some owe tax) when they file for any given year, the
IRS is encouraging all workers to do a ``paycheck checkup'' to ensure
that they are not having more or less tax withheld than they intend.
The withholding calculator found at IRS.gov is designed to assist
taxpayers in making sure they have the proper amount of tax withheld
from their paychecks.
Question. Two years ago, the IRS Office of the Chief Counsel issued
a memorandum calling into question the eligibility of investors
participating in some types of ownership structures for production tax
credits for refined coal facilities.
Both the Department of the Treasury and the IRS stated their
commitment to quickly issuing guidance to provide certainty to the
industry and avoid further shutting down of facilities and losses of
jobs. Thus far, the promised guidance has not been forthcoming, even in
light of assurances that its issuance was imminent.
Congress created the refined coal production tax credit to
encourage the production of coal that is less polluting. However, the
uncertainty surrounding the eligibility of this tax credit has led to
less investment and shuttering of facilities--the opposite of the
legislative intent of this provision.
Can you commit to a firm timeline for releasing guidance on the
refined coal production tax credit to provide certainty to the industry
moving forward?
Answer. The IRS issued this guidance on March 9, 2018.
Question. Michigan families are extremely charitable. Eighty-five
percent of Michigan families make charitable donations to help their
community and those in need. Charitable giving helps feed families that
do not have enough to eat, delivers education and support to children,
and provides housing to those who are not fortunate enough to have a
roof over their head.
However, the tax bill passed last year has caused great concern
among charitable organizations. There are countless estimates that the
recent tax legislation could reduce charitable giving by billions of
dollars every year. As charitable organizations scramble to try to make
up the difference, corporations are projecting record profits.
What data will the IRS and/or Treasury be collecting about how this
new tax law is impacting charitable giving?
Answer. The IRS will continue to collect and publish detailed data
from Form 1040, Schedule A filers, including lines 16-19. This data
will continue to be reported in detailed tables further disaggregated
by filing status, AGI class, etc. IRS will also continue to produce
regular statistics on the types of non-cash contributions claimed on
Schedule A. In addition, during the 2019 filing season, the IRS will
augment current filing season reports (released in late May, mid-July
and mid-November on IRS.gov) to provide high-level, early statistics on
the impact of tax law changes on filing behavior, including for example
changes in the number of taxpayers electing the standard deduction.
However, it is important to remember that we can only observe
charitable contributions claimed as a deduction using data from Form
1040 Schedule A; we will not have any information on charitable gifts
made by individuals who claim the standard deduction.
The IRS will also continue producing statistics on the income and
balance sheets of charities (that file Forms 990 and 990-EZ) and
private foundations (that file Form 990-PF). About 24 percent of all
active, IRS-recognized charities file these information returns, and
for them, we will be able to track changes in reported contributions
over time. The remaining 76 percent, which include churches, religious
organizations and organizations with annual gross receipts less than
$50,000 are not subject to detailed filing requirements. It is also
important to note that donations received by charities during calendar
2018 will be reported on information returns filed in 2019 or 2020,
depending on the accounting period adopted by each charity. This means
that complete data on the potential impact of tax reform on charitable
giving to organizations that have a Form 990 filing requirement will
not be available for several years.
Question. What percentage of people do you estimate will take the
charitable deduction after the changes to the tax law passed at the end
of last year?
Answer. The IRS does not have a projection of the percentage of
individual income taxpayers who will claim a charitable deduction for
tax years 2018 and beyond.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Bill Cassidy
identity theft
Question. While your testimony noted that IRS has reduced the
number of fraudulent returns, has the amount of improper payments
related to those fraudulent returns also decreased? If so, by how much?
Answer. The number of tax returns with confirmed identity theft
declined to 597,000 in 2017, compared to 883,000 in 2016--a 32 percent
decline. The amount of refunds protected from those fraudulent returns
was $6 billion in 2017, compared to $6.4 billion in 2016. In 2015,
there were 1.4 million confirmed identity theft returns totaling $8.7
billion in refunds protected. Overall during the 2015-2017 period, the
number of confirmed identity theft tax returns fell by 57 percent with
more than $20 billion in taxpayer refunds being protected.
Question. How much did Treasury dispense in improper payments
related to fraudulent returns for the most recent year available?
Answer. The IRS monitors the extent of identity theft refund fraud
through our Taxonomy. This research-based effort aims to report on the
effectiveness of IRS's identity theft defenses to internal and external
stakeholders, help us identify identity theft trends and evolving
risks, and refine identity theft filters to better detect potentially
fraudulent returns, while reducing the likelihood of flagging
legitimate tax returns.
For 2016, refunds attributable to identity theft that were paid are
estimated to be between $1.68 to $2.31 billion whereas identity theft
refunds protected are estimated to be between $10.56 to $10.61 billion.
Both estimates are lower than they were in 2015 ($2.24 to $3.34 billion
unprotected refunds and $12.35 to $12.88 billion protected refunds).
trade-based money laundering
Question. What factors does IRS consider in determining whether to
pursue a transfer pricing audit? Is potential involvement in a trade-
based money laundering scheme considered?
Answer. Transfer pricing audits determine whether transactions
between related parties comply with Internal Revenue Code 482 and meet
the arms-length standard of the section 482 regulations. Factors
considered in determining whether to pursue a transfer pricing audit
include the volume and type of intercompany transactions, and the risk
for income shifting. Transfer pricing cases require a thorough analysis
of functions, assets, and risks, and an accurate understanding of the
related financial information. Because trade-based money laundering
involves a process of disguising criminal proceeds through trade to
legitimize their illicit origins, it is not the focus of transfer
pricing audits. The IRS has, however, studied the use of trade data in
the past to identify transfer pricing issues based on anomalies in such
data.
Question. What percentage of cross-border transactions are subject
to a transfer pricing audit?
Answer. As of February 28, 2018, approximately 1,600 out of 8,000
open examination cases in the Large Business and International (LB&I)
division involve transfer pricing issues. For Tax Year 2015 (returns
filed in calendar years 2016 and 2017), the most recent year for which
complete statistics are available, there were more than 6 million Form
1120 series returns filed. Based on the attachment of certain
international forms, an estimated 1.9 percent of them have the
potential for transactions subject to transfer pricing. It is not
possible to precisely estimate how many of these returns have cross-
border transactions because these transactions can include a wide range
of activities, including sales of tangible and intangible property,
certain interest payments, managerial or service fees, commissions,
rents, royalties, and other types of payments, not all of which can be
identified from tax data without an audit.
Question. Please describe the extent to which IRS exchanges
transfer pricing or other data with FinCEN, CBP, DHS, DOJ, and other
Federal agencies to assist with their anti-trade-based money laundering
activities.
Answer. IRS generally does not exchange transfer pricing or other
trade-based money laundering (TBML) data due to the restrictions
imposed by 26 U.S.C. Sec. 6103; however, the IRS-Criminal Investigation
(IRS-CI) special agents that are detailed to law enforcement and
intelligence community partner agencies do at times encounter TBML-
related data and may share this data with other sections within IRS-CI.
In addition, IRS-CI participates with other Federal law enforcement
agencies in significant, impactful money laundering investigations
which often have a TBML component.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Claire McCaskill
Question. The recent changes to our tax laws may create new avenues
for tax fraud. Does the IRS have the tools needed to identify new and
emerging threats?
Answer. IRS uses several tools to assist in combating tax-related
identity theft and fraud. This includes tools that are specific to
addressing taxpayers who have been victims of a data loss of Federal
tax information (FTI). Because the data losses involving Federal tax
related data can be used to file returns that appear to be coming from
the true taxpayer, IRS has implemented measures to address this. IRS's
existing models and filters have been updated to address the level of
sophistication used to file these fraudulent returns. We have
implemented the use of Dynamic Selection Lists that allow IRS to
monitor accounts of specific taxpayers who have been victims of an FTI
data breach when the data compromised would have a direct impact on
Federal tax administration. This allows the IRS to more effectively
identify these suspicious returns and results in better protection for
taxpayers' Federal tax accounts and increased revenue protection. In
addition, there are multiple points in the processing life cycle to
identify, prevent, and assist possible IDT victims: pre-filing, at
filing, and post-filing.
To prevent IDT returns from even coming in the door (pre-filing),
we have worked with tax software providers to improve the procedures
that new and returning customers must use to identify themselves in
order to minimize the chance that the taxpayer's online account can be
taken over by identity thieves. This additional security is one of the
most visible signs of increased protection to taxpayers because they
will notice password requirements and other website security features.
In addition, we have implemented a variety of mechanisms to prevent
criminals from using a deceased individual's identity information to
perpetrate fraud. We routinely lock the accounts of deceased taxpayers
and have locked more than 30 million accounts so far.
At filing, our IDT and fraud detection systems contain complex
models and filters developed from historical and newly emerging known
fraud characteristics. Address and bank account changes as well as
historical taxpayer filing data are characteristics that are used in
conjunction with other filters to identify potentially fraudulent/IDT
returns. When returns are selected by a filter, the refunds are frozen
until additional reviews verify whether the refunds are legitimate.
Question. In 2009, the IRS changed longstanding rules for the St.
Louis Carpenters Pension Plan, preventing members from receiving
pension payments while remaining in covered employment. The Vested
Employee Pension Benefit Protection Act (S. 1080) would allow for the
IRS to reinstate this practice for some workers. Will you commit to
reviewing and reconsidering this earlier IRS ruling?
Answer. Code section 6103 generally precludes us from commenting on
questions relating to particular taxpayers. However, please let us know
if we can provide any other information that is not subject to section
6103.
Question. If you recall, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) found
out about the Equifax breach in the news, as the rest of America did.
Equifax claimed it didn't need to notify IRS about the breach because
IRS data wasn't compromised. Does the IRS now require that contractors
notify the IRS if they suffer breaches exposing data, regardless of
whether IRS data is specifically breached? Are there other requirements
in place for what a contractor must do if they experience a
cyberattack?
Answer. No, the IRS only requires contractors to notify the IRS if
they suffer breaches exposing IRS data. However, the IRS extensively
updated requirements (i.e., Publication 4812) to strengthen contractor
security controls and reduce the agency's exposure to risk as a direct
result of the Equifax data breach.
The IRS inserts clause IR1052.224-9008--Safeguards Against
Unauthorized Disclosure of Sensitive But Unclassified (SBU) Information
(November 2015)--in all solicitations and resulting contracts,
agreements and orders, if the contractor (or subcontractor) will have
access to SBU information. This clause requires contractors who perform
work at contractor (including subcontractor) managed sites using
contractor or subcontractor managed IT resources to adhere to the
guidance, requirements, and specific security control standards
contained in Publication 4812, Contractor Security Controls; IRM
10.23.2--Personnel Security, Contractor Investigations; and IRM
10.8.1--Information Technology (IT) Security, Policy and Guidance.
Below is some relevant language that describes specific reporting
requirements in these documents:
Excerpt from Clause IR1052.224-9008--Safeguards Against
Unauthorized Disclosure of Sensitive But Unclassified Information
(November 2015):

Publication 4812, IRM 10.8.1 and 10.23.2 provide
comprehensive lists of all security controls and guidance.

In addition, if the SBU information is or involves returns
or return information, or threatens the safety or security of
personnel or information systems, the contractor shall report
the incident/situation to the Treasury Inspector General for
Tax Administration (TIGTA) hotline.

The contractor (including subcontractor) shall report any
incident/situation in accordance with IRM 10.8.1.4.8.5--
Incident Reporting--to the COR. This includes a variety of
different levels of incidents such as the installation of
malicious code, unauthorized access to a system, or denial of
service attacks, when IRS data is breached.
Excerpt from Publication 4812--Contractor Security and Privacy
Controls; Section 18--Incident Response:

A data breach is the loss of control, compromise,
unauthorized disclosure, unauthorized acquisition, or any
similar occurrence where (1) a person other than an authorized
user accesses or potentially accesses personally identifiable
information or (2) an authorized user accesses or potentially
accesses personally identifiable information for an other than
authorized purpose.
Whenever there is a compromise of IRS information, it is important
to contact the IRS within one (1) hour if an incident or potential
incident has been detected. The IRS shall work closely with IRS
contractors to quickly respond to a suspected incident of unauthorized
disclosure or inspection.
Excerpt from IRM 10.8.1--Information Technology (IT) Security,
Policy and Guidance; Section 10.8.1.4.8.5 (July 8, 2015)--Incident
Reporting:

All IRS employees and contractors shall be responsible for
reducing the impact and severity of security-related incidents
by immediately reporting suspicious or anomalous (e.g.,
uncharacteristic, atypical, inconsistent) events, all losses
and thefts of assets, and any disclosures of personally
identifiable information (PII) in accordance with policy and
procedures specified in the IRS CSIRC organization's Computer
Security Incident Reporting Procedures. (IRS-defined)
In keeping with OMB directives, any incident that involves
compromised PII must be reported to US-CERT (via the Treasury Computer
Security Incident Response Center (TCSIRC)) within 1 hour regardless of
the incident category reporting timeframe (TD P 85-01 App G).
Question. Using site visits, IRS found that Equifax was mishandling
and improperly storing IRS data, although IRS determined that none of
the data was exposed. How did the discovery that IRS was mishandling
data change the way IRS conducts oversight of contracts or how the IRS
develops requirements for future contracts? What changes has the IRS
made to its contracting practices?
How did the discovery that IRS was mishandling data change the way
IRS conducts oversight of contracts.
Answer. NOTE.--The IRS was not mishandling data. Equifax was
improperly storing IRS data in transaction log files in violation of
contractual requirements.
The IRS continues to use Publication 4812, Contractor Security
Controls, as the framework and guiding principles and processes for
conducting security assessment to monitor compliance and assess the
effectiveness of a contractors' security controls. The Offices of
Information Technology (IT) and Procurement collaboratively identify
and prioritize which contracts align with critical applications
supporting filing season. If new information technology is being
developed in support of an IRS program, a review is conducted before
data is shared and then included in the annual prioritization process.
IRS IT will conduct on-site Contractor Security Assessments (in
accordance with Publication 4812) to assess and validate the
effectiveness of security controls established to protect IRS
information and information systems. These assessments help to
determine if, and when, additional controls or protections are
necessary to protect returns and return information or personal
privacy, or other SBU information, and organizational assets and
operations.
Question. How did the discovery that Equifax was mishandling data
change how the IRS develops requirements for future contracts?
Answer. The IRS is undertaking various initiatives to improve
requirements definition and the procurement process, as well as
strengthen contract administration by the Contracting Officers
Representative. For example, we have instituted an innovative method
for bringing the entire acquisition team together early in the
procurement process to discuss and define requirements, adjudicate
issues/concerns, leverage ``wisdom of crowds,'' and document complete
and accurate acquisition packages and milestone timelines. The
acquisition team consists of the contracting officer, requirements
owner (business unit and/or IT), legal counsel, policy/quality
assurance specialist, and cost and price analyst. Other subject matter
experts (such as other Bureaus if Treasury-wide) participate, depending
on the requirement, risk, complexity, magnitude, and scope. This is
called a Procurement Innovation Team. Additionally, the IRS
Cybersecurity team identifies a single point of contact to assist
Procurement in understanding any unique or complex security issues.
This has improved collaboration and knowledge sharing across all
organizations. Furthermore, the Office of Procurement Policy is leading
a review of all IRS-specific clauses to verify accuracy, confirm
language and requirements are up-to-date, and ensure prescription(s)
for use are precise.
Question. What changes has the IRS made to its contracting
practices?
Answer. The IRS has taken a number of steps to improve its
contracting practices, including the development of a new Procurement
Strategic Framework. It includes 31 key initiatives to promote
proactive, data-driven actions that increase transparency and
accountability, improve productivity, and cultivate an agile workforce
with the skills to adapt to an evolving acquisition environment. Below
are a few examples of actions underway:
Acquisition Planning
Acquisition planning is the process by which the efforts of all
personnel responsible for an acquisition are coordinated and integrated
through a comprehensive plan for fulfilling the agency need in a timely
manner and at a reasonable cost. We are proactively engaging
requirements owners earlier in the acquisition process to strengthen
our ability to identify and develop customer requirements, as well as
to improve long-term acquisition planning. This includes a specific
focus on identifying requirements vulnerable to a cybersecurity attack
to assure all required clauses are included in the solicitation and
resulting contract.
Risk Identification and Mitigation
The framework includes the identification of potential risk areas
for key acquisitions and the development of strategies to better
mitigate these risks. We are collaborating with Treasury's Office of
the Procurement Executive to develop risk-based criteria for reviews/
approvals instead of using total dollar value as the main determining
factor for senior level oversight. Additionally, the Chief Procurement
Officer (CPO) initiated a simple method (i.e., CPO Critical Information
Requirements) for contracting staff, at any level, to elevate a
potential risk or issue immediately through the chain of command.
Use of Government-wide Contracts
We have developed an implementation plan to migrate actions from
IRS stand-alone vehicles to government-wide and Best-In-Class
contracts. This approach leverages best industry practices and allows
the IRS to benefit from economies of scale. The plan is continually
reviewed and new actions are added as requirements are received.
Business Process Improvements
We are streamlining and simplifying processes to improve efficiency
and flexibility of procurement operations. This includes taking steps
to reduce higher-risk procurement methods, including the use of bridge
contracts. We drastically reduced our procurement policies and
procedures by deleting over 800 pages of redundant, outdated or overly
complex requirements. Additionally, we are automating the pre-
solicitation review processes to decrease administrative burden and
lessen procurement action lead time.
Question. The Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
(FITARA) requires agencies, and specifically Chief Information Officers
of agencies, to conduct risk assessments when procuring information
technology goods or services. What type of risk assessments did the IRS
conduct when reviewing the bid proposals for the contract currently
held by Experian?
Answer. The contract with Experian was awarded against GSA schedule
520, Financial Business Solutions, as a professional services contract
and therefore not subject to FITARA.
Prior to making an award to Experian on July 5, 2017, IRS validated
Experian met basic connectivity and transaction interface requirements.
After award, we planned to perform a comprehensive on-site security
review with Experian prior to sharing data; however, it was put on hold
because the protest filed by Equifax on July 7, 2017 triggered an
automatic stay of performance with Experian. Immediately following
GAO's decision to deny the protest on October 16, 2017, IRS conducted
the review as previously planned with Experian. The results identified
16 findings, including one high risk finding. Experian was given 30
days to remediate the findings. The IRS conducted a follow-up review on
November 30, 2017 and validated that Experian had corrected 9 findings
including the high-risk finding prior to going live. An additional on-
site review was performed on March 2, 2018. There are 3 outstanding
moderate findings remaining, and the low finding is no longer
applicable to the environment.
Question. When IRS issued the bridge contract to Equifax, it
clearly did not have all of the information it needed to understand the
full extent of the security issues. It also seemed that IRS did not
build in enough time to account for a possible bid protest. What steps
has IRS taken to improve the acquisition planning process to ensure
that bridge contracts are truly an option of last resort?
Answer. We are developing a new Procurement Strategic Framework
with key initiatives that focus on strengthening the IRS's ability to
identify and develop customer requirements. An emphasis is on earlier
customer engagement in the planning process between Procurement and the
customer to ensure acquisition strategies are executable, mandatory
contract vehicles are identified, and milestones are defined and agreed
to in order to eliminate the need for short-term contract actions.
Additionally, we are providing concentrated training in areas that will
directly reduce the chance of a protest, such as how to perform best
value tradeoffs and how to perform a debriefing after award. Lastly, we
are increasing transparency and outreach to industry partners by
posting information on FedBizOps, issuing requests for information and
draft solicitations, and holding requirement-specific industry days.
Question. The Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
Committee recently approved my bill, S. 2413, to bring greater
accountability and transparency to bridge contracts.
Notably, the bill requires amending the Federal Acquisition
Regulations to develop a common definition of bridge contracts,
increases reporting requirements for agencies on their use of bridge
contracts, holds senior officials accountable for approving of long-
term bridge contracts, and requires public notice when an agency enters
into a bridge contract. I believe that this will help to avoid the
situation the IRS faced with Equifax. Can you provide a current list of
all bridge contracts that the IRS has entered into in the past year,
broken down by category of contract, and the amounts and duration of
those bridge contracts? What assurances can you provide the committee
that the IRS has strengthened its acquisitions and contracting program
to avoid a similar instance to the Equifax data breach and bridge
contract incident?
Answer. Neither the IRS contract writing system nor the Federal
Procurement Data System (FPDS) currently has the capability to
distinguish a bridge contract from other types of contracts.
The IRS takes risk management and security issues very seriously
and is committed to fulfilling its mission while safeguarding the
public's trust. We have taken the opportunity to learn from the Equifax
situation and implemented several process improvements and safeguards
across the agency. Below are a few examples of actions underway.
Procurement Strategic Framework
The Office of Procurement is crafting a deliberate strategic
framework that includes 31 tactical initiatives to enhance internal
operations and promote proactive, data-driven actions that increase
transparency and accountability, improve productivity, and cultivate an
agile workforce with the skills to adapt to an evolving acquisition
environment.
Earlier Engagement
The Office of Procurement is proactively engaging requirements
owners earlier in the acquisition process to strengthen the IRS's
ability to identify and develop detailed requirements, as well as
improve long-term acquisition planning. This includes a new initiative
that Procurement has instituted for bringing the entire acquisition
team together earlier in the acquisition process to discuss
requirements, adjudicate issues/concerns, leverage ``wisdom of
crowds,'' and document complete and accurate acquisition packages and
milestone timelines. This method is called a Procurement Innovation
Team (PIT).
Elevation of Issues Quickly
Ensuring information is elevated to the highest levels of the
organization quickly has been instituted within the Office of
Procurement. The Chief Procurement Officer (CPO) established a process
(i.e., CPO Critical Information Requirements) whereby an employee, at
any level, can elevate information, unimpeded, through the chain of
command as soon as an issue/concern is recognized. This will allow an
opportunity for executive involvement and influence prior to actions
being executed.
Incident Response Team
The value of immediately standing up a multi-disciplinary team with
all stakeholders has proved beneficial in sharing information timely
and synchronizing various actions. While we recognize this is employed
after an incident has occurred, it is a critical component of our risk
mitigation strategy.
______
Question Submitted by Hon. Robert Menendez
Question. Mr. Commissioner, in October, 32 members of the House
Ways and Means Committee--both Republicans and Democrats--sent a letter
to the Treasury Department asking it withdraw IRS Notice 2007-55 which
was issued over a decade ago and continues to deter foreign investment
in the United States. The notice relates to the Foreign Investment in
Real Property Tax Act, or FIRPTA. In short, the notice treats certain
distributions from REITs as the sale of REIT assets rather than the
sale of REIT stock. The result is that the distributions are subject to
tax rates as high as 54 percent. The practical effect is to raise the
tax burden on investors in U.S. commercial real estate and
infrastructure to levels that are punitive and prohibitive. Cal-
Berkeley professor and economist Ken Rosen recently estimated that
FIRPTA costs the United States between $65-125 billion in lost
investment and between 147,000-284,000 in lost jobs. This is an
infrastructure issue--FIRPTA blocks private investment in U.S.
infrastructure. Repealing IRS Notice 2007-55 is a simple and immediate
thing that the administration could do to boost private investment in
U.S. real estate and infrastructure.
Many of us have been working on this issue for years--no senior
official seems willing to defend the current notice, but it just keeps
getting kicked down the road.
Could you review this matter and let us know within 30 days, in
writing, whether you will repeal section two of the Notice and restore
prior law, as dozens of members of Congress have encouraged?
Answer. Thank you for your inquiry. IRS is aware that this long-
standing issue is a priority for many members of Congress. We look
forward to continuing dialogue with the Treasury Department, members of
Congress, and other stakeholders as we work on this issue.
______
Prepared Statement of Hon. Ron Wyden,
a U.S. Senator From Oregon
Less than 2 months ago, Republicans passed legislation making $10
trillion in tax changes virtually on the fly--the biggest tax overhaul
in 3 decades, requiring a web of complicated rule changes. Now they're
giving short shrift to the IRS, which is the agency that actually has
to implement those changes and provide service to American families and
businesses based on the new rules.
The IRS said it would need nearly $400 million to implement the new
law, but the Trump budget held the agency's funding flat. The budget
makes a fake reference to increasing enforcement dollars, but it kicks
the actual decision to appropriators in Congress who are unlikely to
fork over the necessary resources. And that comes at a time when tax
cheats are looking at the Trump tax law and licking their chops,
planning complicated new schemes of abusing the rules to get out of
paying their fair share. Particularly with the new passthrough
loophole, the law is an open invitation for scamsters to game the
system, leaving a heavier burden for Americans who do follow the rules.
This isn't an academic matter. Denying the IRS the resources it
needs to be an effective agency impedes its ability to serve the
American people, and the Trump administration knows it. By the
administration's own projections, as a result of continued budget cuts
for taxpayer service, fewer than half the people who pick up the phone
to call the IRS for filing services in 2019 will get through, down from
75 percent in 2018. And that's with lawmakers on both sides already
bemoaning poor service provided to taxpayers by the IRS.
Bottom line, the IRS might not be anybody's favorite Federal
agency, but Americans expect it to function without political agenda or
interference. That brings me to another issue I need to address this
afternoon.
Mr. Kautter, who is here with the committee this afternoon in the
throes of tax filing season, is the acting IRS commissioner. That is
supposed to be a non-partisan job, overseeing the administration of tax
law. But Mr. Kautter is also currently the assistant secretary for tax
policy, which in this administration is about as partisan a position as
they come.
This committee recently spent years investigating accusations of
political interference at the IRS. That bipartisan investigation
determined that sloppy work by IRS officials led to both conservative
AND progressive tax-exempt groups being subjected to unfair scrutiny.
And in my view, both sides would agree that the IRS should be politics-
free when it's administering the law. I recall a lot of insistent
speeches to that effect, particularly from my Republican colleagues.
But now that the party in control of the White House has flipped,
there's a Republican political appointee running IRS at the very same
time it's implementing a monumentally complicated and partisan law his
department helped write.
In December, I wrote a letter to Mr. Kautter asking how he would
guarantee their politics aren't bleeding into IRS, what policies or
safeguards have been created to avoid conflicts of interest, any
guidance regarding communication between the White House and IRS, and
much more. I have not received a response to my specific questions.
Given the energy and focus this committee has placed on the issue of
political influence at IRS in the recent past, it would be awfully
hypocritical not to take it seriously now.
______
Communication
----------
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA)
1455 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington. DC 20004-1081
T: +1 202-737-6600 F: +1 202-638-4512
https://www.aicpa-cima.com | https://www.cimaglobal.com | https://
www.aicpa.org | https://www.cgma.org
INTRODUCTION
The American Institute of CPAs (AICPA) appreciates the leadership taken
by the Senate Finance Committee for your commitment to ensuring the
success of the new tax reform laws and for considering various
approaches to enable the Internal Revenue Service (IRS or ``Service'')
to implement those changes while providing quality service to
individuals and businesses, as well as their advisers.
As taxpayers face a period of uncertainty regarding the sweeping tax
law changes of Pub. L. No. 115-97, it is critical that the IRS has the
appropriate resources to proceed as a modern functioning agency that
will issue immediate guidance on priority issues,\1\ focus on the needs
of taxpayers and tax preparers,\2\ and implement the legislation in an
effective and efficient manner.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See AICPA letter, ``Request for Immediate Guidance Regarding
Pub. L. No. 115-97,'' January 29, 2018.
\2\ See AICPA statement, ``What the Taxpayers Want or Need From the
IRS to Comply With the Tax Laws,'' May 17, 2016.
In this statement, we provide a series of recommendations that will
strengthen tax administration and improve compliance programs while
protecting the public. An effective tax administration system should
include proper governance and oversight, proficient taxpayer services
and a practitioner-focused services unit, which can collectively
improve the taxpayer experience while streamlining the tax
administration system. Furthermore, the regulation of tax return
preparers and the limited use of contingency fees are necessary to
promote voluntary compliance and protect taxpayer rights.
RECOMMENDATIONS
1. IRS Governance and Oversight
As practitioners with vast experience working with the IRS, we have
incorporated the lessons learned and built upon the foundation
established by the report of the National Commission on Restructuring
the IRS (``Restructuring Commission'' or ``commission'') and outline
below governance and oversight recommendations to shape the agency of
the future that everyone desires.
Governance Objectives. Successful governance of the IRS will include
strong leadership, accountability, and transparent policies working
collectively towards needed change. In order to hold the IRS
accountable, the agency's governance, management and oversight
structure must:\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The National Commission of Restructuring the Internal Revenue
Service, ``A Vision for a New IRS: Report of the National Commission on
Restructuring the Internal Revenue Service,'' June 25, 1997, page 8.

Develop and maintain a shared vision among all personnel and
stakeholders with continuity;

Set and maintain consistent priorities and strategic direction;

Impose accountability on senior management;

Develop appropriate measures of success;

Ensure that the budget and technology support priorities and
strategic direction; and

Coordinate oversight and identify problems at an early stage.
Congressional Oversight. Congressional oversight is a critical process
in ensuring executive branch compliance with laws, evaluating
performance, and providing the transparency necessary to maintain the
public's trust. We recommend reestablishing the annual joint hearing
review \4\ to focus on the following priorities: (1) strategic and
business plans; (2) taxpayer service and compliance; (3) technology and
modernization; and (4) filing season.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Pub. L. 105-206, sec. 4002, expanded IRC section 8022(c)
regarding reporting by the Joint Committee on Taxation. Pub. L. 108-311
(October 4, 2004) modified this provision by removing the specifics
required for the annual report and eliminating the joint review after
2004 (also see IRC section 8021(f)). A statutory change is needed to
reinstate the required joint review.
As once required by statute,\5\ the Joint Committee on Taxation should
provide a bi-annual report on the overall state of the Federal tax
system.\6\ However, the statute stipulates that the report is only
required if the necessary resources are appropriated to carry out the
requirement. Such a report would contribute to stability at the IRS and
assist it in achieving its mission. Therefore, we urge Congress to
appropriate the necessary funds for the report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Id.
\6\ IRC section 8022(3).
IRS Oversight Board. The IRS Oversight Board was intended to provide
experience, independence, and stability to assist the IRS in moving
forward in a focused direction. However, the board received criticism
for being ``ineffective'' and ``missing in action'' in achieving its
stated mission,\7\ and suspended operations due to an insufficient
number of members to constitute a quorum.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Morningstar, Inc., ``The IRS Has no Independent Oversight This
Tax Season,'' April 18, 2016.
We recommend that Congress require a Government Accountability Office
(GAO) review of the private sector board and determine if it is an
essential component to providing the trust and continuity that will
allow the IRS to become a respected, service-oriented organization. The
GAO could provide recommendations to ensure the board has sufficient
authority to (1) hold the IRS accountable for successfully fulfilling
its mission; (2) oversee the implementation of key recommendations from
advisory groups; and (3) ensure the IRS remains independent and non-
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
partisan.
Human Resources. Congress should enable and encourage the IRS to
utilize the full range of available authorities to hire and compensate
qualified and experienced professionals from the private sector, as
needed, to improve the Service's ability to meet its mission. It is
also crucial for the IRS to designate a senior-level executive
dedicated to overseeing and collaborating with the practitioner
community in creating a practitioner services unit (see discussion
below).
2. IRS Taxpayer Service
Congress should determine the appropriate level of service it desires
and that is needed by the IRS, and dedicate the appropriate resources
for them to meet these goals. Agreed upon measures of success are
necessary to improve both customer service and voluntary compliance.
To instill trust in the tax administration system, we recommend
taxpayer service goals based on the following two guiding principles:

The IRS should only initiate contact with a taxpayer if the IRS
is prepared to devote the resources necessary for a proper and timely
resolution of the matter.

Customer satisfaction must be a goal in every interaction the
IRS has with taxpayers, including enforcement actions. Taxpayers expect
quality service in all interactions with the IRS, including taxpayer
assistance, filing tax returns, paying taxes, and examination and
collection actions.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Verbatim quote of the two guiding principles, The National
Commission of Restructuring the Internal Revenue Service, ``A Vision
for a New IRS: Report of the National Commission on Restructuring the
Internal Revenue Service,'' June 25, 1997, page 23.
Resources necessary. Appropriate hiring, adequate training, skillful
management, and the necessary technological tools are essential for the
IRS to meet its responsibilities. The leaders of the IRS must have the
experience and skills to motivate their workforce and lead them to the
realization of the desired vision. Organizational alignment from
Congress, the President, the Commissioner, and through the ranks of the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
IRS, is necessary to delivering the promised goals.
Furthermore, to enable the IRS to achieve the improvements required for
a 21st-century tax administration system, the IRS needs a modern
technological infrastructure. Currently, the IRS has two of the oldest
information systems in the Federal Government making the information
technology function one of the biggest constraints overall for the
IRS.\9\ Without modem infrastructure, the IRS is unable to timely and
efficiently meet the needs of taxpayers and practitioners.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ National Taxpayer Advocate, ``Annual Report to Congress 2016,
Executive Summary: Preface, Special Focus and Highlights,'' 2016, page
31-32. The report references a 2016 GAO report (GAO-16-468) which found
that some of the technology the IRS still relies on was first placed in
use 56 years ago.
Customer satisfaction. Measurement tools are required to achieve
customer satisfaction goals, including fairness in enforcement. The IRS
made significant progress in measuring taxpayers' opinions in the years
following the issuance of the Restructuring Commission. However, in
recent years, the Service has stopped reporting on customer
satisfaction surveys and analysis. We recommend that customer
satisfaction surveys, gauging performance at all levels within the IRS,
continue as an appropriate success measure. Congress should utilize the
survey results during the oversight and appropriations processes to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ensure the Service is continually meeting the needs of taxpayers.
A service-focused approach, with taxpayer education in mind, will
require the IRS to take into consideration the needs of both tax
practitioners and un-represented taxpayers, and the varying methods
needed to interact with them.
3. IRS Practitioner Services Unit
The IRS should create a new dedicated ``executive-level'' practitioner
services unit that would centralize and modernize its approach to all
practitioners. Over time, the IRS has established a number of
functional departments. These individuals are dispersed across the IRS
and are not coordinated in a manner that enables practitioners to
timely access critical information (such as their clients' account
status or the availability of dispute resolution opportunities). Nor do
the current teams or processes systematically solicit, gather or
evaluate practitioner feedback. Enhancing the relationship between the
IRS and practitioners would benefit both the IRS and the millions of
taxpayers served by the practitioner community.
A dedicated practitioner services unit would allow the IRS to
rationalize, enhance, and place under common management the many
current, disparate practitioner-
impacting programs, processes, and tools. Moreover, by centralizing
these programs, IRS employees would have a consolidated approach to
timely resolving issues. This coordination and improved access of
information would prevent unnecessary delays and inefficiencies (such
as requiring practitioners to submit the same information multiple
times to multiple IRS employees). Finally, to ensure success of the
practitioner services unit, it is essential for these services to
approximate comparable private sector services and allow practitioners
to resolve account issues for their clients in a timely and efficient
manner.
Online tax professional account. The IRS should provide tax
practitioners with a tax professional account as part of the IRS's
online portal with account access to all of their clients' information
(both individual and business accounts) where the practitioner has a
valid power of attorney (POA) on file. Additionally, the secure tax
professional account should allow the IRS to communicate directly to
practitioners the information necessary to improve taxpayer awareness
and allow practitioner correspondence with timely acknowledgement of
receipt.
Furthermore, a centralized login system allowing for single sign-on
authentication of the practitioner and immediate access to all client
data, as opposed to practitioner authentication before accessing each
client's account, is an indispensable efficiency for the IRS and
practitioners alike.
Secure platform. The development of the online portal should include a
comprehensive, agile platform that protects users' identities and their
data, detects threats and immediately responds to potential security
breaches. In order to enhance taxpayer protection, practitioners who
want access to taxpayer accounts should consent to guidelines such as
Circular 230 or other similarly approved requirements. Professional tax
practitioners can become particularly active and safe users of online
services if the IRS invests early in providing a digital mechanism for
POA and disclosure authorization and creates practitioner accounts
contemporaneously with individual online accounts.
To continue to improve efficiency, the IRS should also focus its
attention on replacing the Centralized Authorization File with a
consolidated online solution utilizing electronic signatures and an
algorithmic-driven approval process that is as close to real time as
possible.
Robust practitioner hotlines. IRS should provide practitioners with a
robust practitioner priority hotline (or hotlines) with higher-skilled
employees. These employees should have the experience and training to
understand and address more complex technical and procedural issues.
This expertise would allow the IRS to focus its training on a
particular technical area allowing designated employees to resemble its
counterparts in the private sector. The IRS should also consider hiring
experienced people, such as, graduate students or retired practitioners
seeking part-time or seasonal employment.
Designated customer service representatives. Under the practitioner
services unit, the IRS should assign customer service representatives
(also known as a single point of contact) to each geographic area to
address unusual or complex issues that practitioners were unable to
resolve through the priority hotlines. We recommend allocating the
number of representatives based on the number of practitioners in a
specific geographic area.
4. Regulation of Tax Return Preparers
The AICPA has always been a steadfast supporter of the goals of
enhancing compliance and elevating ethical conduct. We support the use
of a preparer tax identification number (PTIN) for all signing tax
preparers, and subjecting all tax preparers to Circular 230. To help
protect the interests of taxpayers, the AICPA thinks Congress should
provide the IRS with a focused and well-defined approach to the
regulation of tax return preparers with Congressional oversight.
Subjection of all tax preparers to Circular 230. Requiring tax return
preparers to follow the Circular 230 standards of conduct as delineated
in the Internal Revenue Service Return Preparer Review report is
essential \10\ In the report, the IRS proposed requiring:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Internal Revenue Service Return Preparer Review, December
2009, page 37.
. . . all signing and non-signing \11\ tax return preparers to
comply with the standard of conduct in part 10 of title 31 of
the Code of Federal Regulations and reprinted in Treasury
Department Circular 230. The authority of attorneys, certified
public accountants, enrolled agents, enrolled actuaries and
enrolled retirement plan agents to practice before the IRS will
not change from the authority they have under current Treasury
Department Circular 230.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ See AICPA comment letter, ``Chairman's Mark of a Bill to
Prevent Identity Theft and Tax Refund Fraud,'' September 15, 2016,
position on ``Limitation on IRS's Authority to Require a PTIN,'' page
6.
The remaining tax return preparers will be authorized to
prepare returns and to represent a client before the IRS during
an examination of any return that the tax return preparer
prepared for the client as they are currently permitted under
the limited practice provisions in section 10.7(viii) of
Treasury Department Circular 230. The conduct of the tax return
preparer in connection with the preparation of the return and
any representation of the client during an examination will be
subject to standard of conduct in Treasury Department Circular
230. Further, inquiries into possible misconduct and
disciplinary proceedings relating to tax return preparer
misconduct will be conducted under Treasury Department Circular
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
230.
Defined parameters for examination and continuing education. Congress
should mandate that the IRS enact a testing and continuing education
program similar to the registered tax return preparer program in effect
prior to Loving v. IRS that would apply exclusively to ``unenrolled
preparers.'' The one-time basic 1040 ``entrance'' examination to ensure
competency in individual income tax return preparation and the
requirement for unenrolled preparers to satisfy 15 hours of annual
continuing education were both appropriate and necessary to protect
taxpayers from incompetence and misconduct, while not raising the bar
so high that there are an insufficient number of preparers to assist
taxpayers wanting and needing such assistance. Specific parameters and
limitations regarding an examination and continuing education are also
appropriate to ensure a tax return program does not expand beyond
Congress's goals of protecting the public from incompetent and
unscrupulous tax return preparers.
Limitation on IRS's Authority to Require a PTIN. Congress should limit
the IRS's authority to require a PTIN. In order to protect the
interests of the public, the IRS should track (through the use of the
PTIN) all individuals that sign a tax return. However, in order to
prevent potential overregulation and duplicative filing obligations,
Congress should (i) exclude non-signers from the requirement to obtain
a PTIN if those non-signers are supervised by an attorney, CPA, or
enrolled agent; and (ii) the supervising professional signs the tax
returns or claims for refund prepared by the individual. Such an
exclusion from the current PTIN system would recognize the inherent
regulatory regime within which CPAs and other Circular 230 legacy
practitioners already practice, as well as the fact that CPA firms must
stand, as a matter of licensure, behind the work done by the members
and employees of their firms.
Authorization to Revoke PTINs. The IRS could more effectively utilize
their current PTIN system to protect the public from incompetent and
fraudulent tax return preparers. We, therefore, recommend that Congress
grant the IRS specific authority to revoke a PTIN to efficiently
prevent unqualified and unscrupulous preparers from continuing to file
inaccurate and fraudulent tax returns.
GAO Study on IRS's Exchange of Information With State Taxing
Authorities. The AICPA supports directing a GAO study on the impact of
increasing the exchange of information relating to return preparers
between the IRS and state taxing authorities. Such exchange of
information (for example, a list of revoked PTINs and the reasons for
the revocations) would improve tax administration by reducing duplicate
government resource expenditures and increasing taxpayer compliance.
Mitigation of Marketplace Confusion. Congress should also require the
IRS to take steps to mitigate marketplace confusion. For example, prior
to Loving v. IRS, the IRS recognized the potential for marketplace
confusion when it required subjecting the currently-unenrolled
community to the guidance in Notice 2011-45, 2011-25 IRB 886, with
regard to advertising restrictions.
5. Contingent Fees
Finally, the AICPA opposes any expansion of the use of contingent fee
arrangements which are not in the best interest of the public. The
AICPA's Code of Professional Conduct and State Boards of Accountancy
have rules addressing the appropriate use of contingent fees in tax
practice and allow for contingency fees on a limited basis. Allowing
tax preparers a financial interest in a tax return (in other words, a
contingent fee arrangement), encourages tax preparers to take positions
that increase their fee rather than positions supported by the law. The
AICPA is available to work with Congress and the IRS in addressing
adequate use of contingent fees.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
The AICPA appreciates the opportunity to submit a statement for the
record. We look forward to working with the Committee to ensure that
the IRS has the appropriate resources needed to implement the extensive
tax law changes through a modernized and effective tax administration
system.
The AICPA is the world's largest member association representing the
accounting profession with more than 418,000 members in 143 countries
and a history of serving the public interest since 1887. Our members
advise clients on Federal, state, local and international tax matters
and prepare income and other tax returns for millions of Americans. Our
members provide services to individuals, not-for-profit organizations,
small and medium-sized businesses, as well as America's largest
businesses.
[all]