- INTERNATIONAL EFFORTS TO INCREASE ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND OPPORTUNITIES TO ADVANCE ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN THE UNITED STATES
[Senate Hearing 116-340]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-340
INTERNATIONAL EFFORTS TO INCREASE ENERGY
EFFICIENCY AND OPPORTUNITIES TO ADVANCE
ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN THE UNITED STATES
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
OCTOBER 22, 2019
__________
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-883
WASHINGTON : 2021
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska, Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
JOE MANCHIN III, West Virginia
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
RON WYDEN, Oregon
MIKE LEE, Utah
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
STEVE DAINES, Montana
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
CINDY HYDE-SMITH, Mississippi
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
Brian Hughes, Staff Director
Kellie Donnelly, Chief Counsel
Chester Carson, Senior Professional Staff Member
Spencer Nelson, Professional Staff Member
Sarah Venuto, Democratic Staff Director
Sam E. Fowler, Democratic Chief Counsel
Brie Van Cleve, Democratic Senior Professional Staff Member
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa, Chairman and a U.S. Senator from Alaska....
1
Manchin III, Hon. Joe, Ranking Member and a U.S. Senator from
West Virginia..................................................
2
WITNESSES
Motherway, Dr. Brian, Head of Energy Efficiency, International
Energy Agency..................................................
4
Bresette, Daniel, Executive Director, Environmental and Energy
Study Institute................................................
23
Layke, Jennifer, Global Director for Energy, World Resources
Institute......................................................
30
Tew, W. Scott, Executive Director, Center for Energy Efficiency &
Sustainability, Ingersoll Rand.................................
41
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
Bresette, Daniel:
Opening Statement............................................
23
Written Testimony............................................
25
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
85
Layke, Jennifer:
Opening Statement............................................
30
Written Testimony............................................
32
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
99
Manchin III, Hon. Joe:
Opening Statement............................................
2
Motherway, Dr. Brian:
Opening Statement............................................
4
Written Testimony............................................
7
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
75
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa:
Opening Statement............................................
1
Tew, W. Scott:
Opening Statement............................................
41
Written Testimony............................................
43
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
107
INTERNATIONAL EFFORTS TO INCREASE ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND OPPORTUNITIES
TO ADVANCE ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN THE UNITED STATES
----------
TUESDAY, OCTOBER 22, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m. in
Room SD-366, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lisa
Murkowski, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
The Chairman. Good morning, everyone. The Committee will
come to order.
Today is all about efficiency.
Back in May, we met to examine opportunities to advance
renewable energy and energy efficiency here in the United
States, and today we are going to take that just a step further
to look at the efforts to increase efficiency internationally
and what best practices we can potentially utilize here at
home.
Efficiency is a key ingredient to good energy policy. As we
work to make energy more affordable, I think the first place we
should look is to ensure that we are using energy in the best
and the most efficient way. By reducing energy use, we reduce
energy costs which matters to every family and business. We can
improve reliability through technologies that reduce load when
demand is high, lessening the likelihood of brownouts or
blackouts. Efficiency, of course, can also play a major role in
reducing greenhouse gas emissions by reducing energy
consumption. So whether we are talking about impacting the
lives of low-income and rural communities, or ways to address
the impacts of climate change, energy efficiency is a big piece
of that puzzle.
I am pleased that we have Dr. Brian Motherway, the Head of
Energy Efficiency at the International Energy Agency (IEA),
joining us this morning. IEA has placed an increased focus on
efficiency. I was pleased to be asked to be an honorary member
of their new Global Commission for Urgent Action on Energy
Efficiency, and that is something that I thank you for this
opportunity but again to focus on not only what we are doing
but best practices globally.
We all know that efficiency presents an amazing
opportunity, but really, we know that it is an opportunity but
how do you turn it into a reality? There are many international
efforts that are underway to share policies and best practices
for advancing clean energy, and expanding research and
development into innovative technologies. Hopefully we will
hear a little bit more this morning about the ``Three Percent
Club.'' This is a coalition of countries and businesses that
are committed to increasing global energy efficiency by three
percent annually.
Here at home, energy efficiency remains one of the easiest
steps that we can take, and its benefits can be significant.
The Alliance to Save Energy reports that 25 million
American households have reduced or foregone medical or food
purchases to pay energy bills, and households earning less than
200 percent of the federal poverty level spend on average 16.3
percent of their income on energy costs.
As we were looking at our background memo for Committee
members, in the very first sentence in our briefing memo, it
states here in the United States energy efficiency measures
have helped reduce energy use by 50 percent relative to what it
would have been had the 1980's energy use pattern continued,
saving each American an average of $2,500 per year on their
energy bills. That is significant.
Even small changes in using energy more efficiently can
make a big difference. I like to cite some of the things that
we see in my state. A little community called Yakutat, which is
in the northern end of the Southeast panhandle, with a
population between 500 and 800 people depending on the fishing
season, but the elementary school there made a change out to
more efficient lighting. It doesn't sound like that big of a
deal, but they are able to save about $70,000 a year which for
them in that community translates to a teacher's salary. When
you look at what the benefit is and then the payback to that
community has already been completed. So lots of good examples
out there.
We have a lot to discuss this morning, so I just want to
briefly introduce our panel of expert witnesses as I wrap up.
I mentioned Dr. Motherway. So again, thank you for
traveling across the Atlantic to join us here this morning. We
are also joined by Dr. Daniel Bresette, the Executive Director
of the Environmental and Energy Study Initiative (EESI); Ms.
Jennifer Layke is the Global Director for Energy at the World
Resources Institute (WRI); and Mr. Scott Tew is the Executive
Director of the Center for Energy Efficiency and Sustainability
at Ingersoll Rand.
We will have good conversation this morning as we talk
about how we advance energy efficiency here in this country and
globally.
With that, I turn to my friend and my colleague, Senator
Manchin.
STATEMENT OF HON. JOE MANCHIN III,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WEST VIRGINIA
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Senator Murkowski, for holding
the hearing today on energy efficiency. I would also like to
welcome and thank all of you for being here and enlightening us
on what is going on and what we need to do.
We have been focusing on climate solutions in this
Committee and we need a variety of solutions to make the
differences that we need, but energy efficiency really is the
low-hanging fruit and I think we have all acknowledged that.
Multiple studies have shown that energy efficiency is
cheaper than investing in any other type of new generation. It
is truly the cheapest kilowatt out there.
It is also readily available. There are lots of
opportunities to improve efficiency in buildings, industry and
transportation, and it is a jobs creator. In energy efficiency,
jobs grew in my home State of West Virginia by nearly five
percent last year to 1,600 jobs. That is important for a state
like mine where we are losing some of our more traditional
energy jobs. Nationwide, 2.35 million people work in energy
efficiency, over twice the number employed in fuel, gas and
coal jobs. I am hoping the discussion today will focus on the
role of energy efficiency and economic competitiveness in our
global fight to address climate change. Energy efficiency
improvements starting in the 1970s have helped us produce more
economic output with less energy.
That increase in energy productivity is a shot in the arm
for U.S. competitiveness. Today, energy use, per dollar of
gross domestic product, has fallen by more than half compared
to 1980. That means we produce twice the GDP for the same
energy, saving each American an average of $2,500 per year on
their energy bills and also making the overall economy
stronger.
This is a clear example of why energy efficiency is a win-
win. It increases productivity, creates jobs and helps us
expand overall economic activity. In fact, the International
Energy Agency found that if cost-effective and technically
available energy efficiency measures were fully deployed, the
global economy could double in size by 2040. That is a big
number, double in size by 2040, while seeing only a marginal
increase in energy consumption.
I am glad that we have Dr. Motherway here to discuss these
findings. The U.S. should be leading the pack in energy
productivity including helping emerging economies in the world
enjoy the same benefits, like reduced energy costs, access to
modern conveniences like dishwashers and air conditioning,
things we have taken for granted for many years now.
As I have mentioned, energy efficiency is also a tool to
help us reduce emissions, a very significant tool, and I know
our witnesses are going to discuss that today.
Senator Murkowski and I took a trip to several Arctic
nations earlier this year and what struck me is that for those
nations, climate change is not political, it is a fact. We are
the only Arctic nation that uses climate change as a political
divide, the only one, and they have much more diverse political
challenges than we do.
Our Committee has been forward leaning this year in having
experts here testify on the facts around the changing climate
because we may not all agree on the approach to take, but we
should be starting from the same place with a baseline of
facts. That is the only way we can really start working
together on solutions.
I think that commonsense climate solutions, like energy
efficiency, should be our common ground. We should be counting
energy efficiency as among the nation's most abundant natural
resources that we can leverage to increase the prosperity of
all Americans. I hope the panel can help us identify barriers
and opportunities to accelerate investment in efficiency.
I think this Committee has demonstrated a commitment to
energy efficiency. So far, we have reported 12 bills that would
increase energy efficiency in buildings, manufacturing,
industrial and transportation sectors. Two of those bills are
focused on the Federal Government, because we are the largest
energy user in the country. That is great material for a robust
energy efficiency title in an energy innovation bill, and I
hope to work with my colleagues and my Chairwoman on that.
In the meantime, I look forward to hearing from all of you
to increase energy efficiency.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Manchin.
Let's go ahead and begin the testimony here this morning. I
have introduced each of you.
We would ask that you try to keep your comments to about
five minutes. Your full statements will be incorporated as part
of the record, but we would like to have plenty of opportunity
for the questions afterward.
Dr. Motherway, if you would like to begin. Again, thank you
for joining us from across the seas. Welcome to the Committee.
STATEMENT OF DR. BRIAN MOTHERWAY, HEAD OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY,
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY AGENCY
Dr. Motherway. Thank you very much, Chairman Murkowski,
Ranking Member Manchin, Senators and fellow panelists. It's a
privilege and an honor to be with you today to talk about the
topic that we see as very important for reasons that the
opening remarks of the Chairman and the Ranking Member have
already said very eloquently are why energy efficiency is so
important to money, energy, environment and wider social and
economic goals.
As you may be aware, the International Energy Agency is
working with governments amidst a growing recognition around
the world of the need for stronger progress in energy
efficiency. And, of course, this is the context for the recent
establishment of the Global Commission for Urgent Action on
Energy Efficiency, which was mentioned, which we see as a very
important, high-level examination of opportunities to
accelerate progress on energy efficiency.
And Chairman Murkowski, we're very pleased and honored that
you have generously agreed to be an honorary member of that
committee. We believe its work will be very significant for
energy efficiency's future around the world.
As has been mentioned, energy efficiency is already making
major contributions in a number of domains, including energy
security, cost reduction, environmental protection, as well as
enhancing competitiveness and resilience around the world. But
our analysis shows that globally, progress in energy efficiency
is slowing down which is of great concern to us. Energy
efficiency policy action is not keeping up with wider pressures
and social trends that are pushing energy demand up. And for
us, this represents a significant lost opportunity, especially
when we know that more can be achieved.
As the Ranking Member mentioned, we have undertaken
analysis that shows that we could more than double our rates of
annual energy efficiency improvement, if the only thing we did
was use technologies that are already existing and fully cost-
effective today. And if we did double that rate of improvement
and got back on track to around three percent annual
improvement a year, in the next few decades we could see the
global economy double in size while using, effectively, the
same amount of energy that we use today which, in turn, would
make lives better all over the world, giving people lower
energy bills, reduced greenhouse gas emissions and greater
energy security.
We're very pleased that our analysis, looking at how to get
back on track at three percent, is inspiring discussions around
energy efficiency around the world. And for our part, we look
at how policy can make a difference, and we look around the
world at some of the best policies. And let me, please, just
mention a couple that I think are of interest.
Many countries use regulatory approaches to policy. It's a
very common approach such as building codes, standards for
vehicles or appliances. They are effective in reducing consumer
costs. They drive innovation, and they can enhance industry
competitiveness.
One example I would mention is in Japan, the so-called Top
Runner Program, which covers a range of products from passenger
cars to refrigerators and everything in between. Performance
standards are dynamic so that every few years the best in
class, the most efficient technology, becomes the standard for
everybody to meet, therefore driving innovation and efficiency
over time which it leads to greater international
competitiveness for Japanese companies as well as giving
consumers access to efficient and highly cost-effective
equipment.
Higher standards are also driven through voluntary
approaches, not least here in the U.S. where public and private
organizations have come together to agree to new efficiency
levels, for example, for television set top boxes and internet
routers. Elsewhere, in many countries, voluntary engagement is
used in industry as well where sectors agree to set themselves
cost-effective energy efficiency improvement targets.
We also see the widespread use of market-based approaches
and market instruments to drive innovation and mobilize action.
Many European states, for example, have utility obligation
programs where energy providers are given energy efficiency
targets to meet. They are given freedom to choose where to
focus and that drives innovation and lowers costs. Many U.S.
states have used similar approaches very effectively as well.
Many governments focus on homes and how to make them more
efficient.
One interesting example here in the U.S. is Alabama Power's
Smart Neighborhood Program supported by the Department of
Energy which is a public-private collaboration linking very
efficient, high technology homes via a community-scale
microgrid. The result is desirable, modern, sustainable and
resilient homes and neighborhoods.
In my view, we are entering now a new epoch for energy
efficiency, driven by the fast pace of innovation in digital
technologies. Such technologies allow us to think about
efficiency in new, more dynamic system-wide ways. For example,
here in the U.S. many states have very successful programs that
reduce stress on electricity grids by incentivizing consumers
to reduce their consumption at peak times. What is new now,
driven by technology, is that this can be done easier, cheaper
and more effectively and the demand side can be more flexible
and can help not only reduce cost but also make the best use of
clean energy resources.
In our view then, this means that efficiency is no longer
just about the end use of energy in devices but also about how
to optimize the whole energy system, and this new modernized
way of thinking about energy efficiency will open up many new
opportunities.
So in closing, I just want to stress that the IEA looks at
all fuels and all technologies. We are the world's policy
advisor across the entire energy system, and we see energy
efficiency as a top priority. We support governments by
analyzing trends, sharing best practices and encouraging
exchange and collaboration. When we look at best policy
practices around the world, we see that there is--with good
design and good implementation, policies can succeed in
bringing many benefits to economies and citizens through
engaging the market, driving innovation and lowering costs for
all.
And a key lesson we find around the world is there is
always more potential. There's always a greater opportunity for
more efficiency. And, of course, this is why we think the
Global Commission for Urgent Action will play such an important
role.
So Chairman, Ranking Member, Senators, colleagues, thank
you very much for the opportunity to present my testimony
today, and I hope it has been of some value to you.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Motherway follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Motherway. We look forward to
our questions.
Mr. Bresette, welcome.
STATEMENT OF DANIEL BRESETTE, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ENVIRONMENTAL
AND ENERGY STUDY INSTITUTE
Mr. Bresette. Good morning. Thank you for the opportunity
to discuss energy efficiency and its potential to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions and make our transition to a
decarbonized clean energy future more affordable and
accessible.
I'm the Executive Director of the Environmental and Energy
Study Institute which declared 31 years ago that addressing
climate change is a moral imperative. Today we're fully engaged
in the climate policy debate and committed to working with this
Committee to find solutions to the terrible problem of a
rapidly warming planet.
The urgency of climate change requires immediate action at
home and abroad. Energy efficiency provides the easiest source
of measurable emissions reductions. It is the secret weapon
against climate change because we already have what we need to
do. Every kilowatt-hour saved today will make future
commitments easier to attain. The missing piece is the
magnitude of our commitment which falls short of the enormity
of the challenge.
Congress should reassert U.S. leadership in global efforts
to reduce emissions. For those concerned that a burden could
fall unfairly on domestic interests, I suggest instead that we
will have more authority to lead if we do ourselves what we ask
of others. This starts with energy efficiency as it pertains to
federal buildings. There is a backlog of energy efficiency
measures worth over $8.6 billion that would reduce emissions,
often by leveraging private sector capital at no taxpayer
expense. That list of idle projects could start disappearing
tomorrow if Congress passed the Murkowski/Manchin Federal
Energy and Water Management Performance Act that this Committee
approved last month. The contributions of emissions from
buildings is under appreciated. The building sector accounts
for about 40 percent of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions and about
30 percent of energy used in commercial buildings is wasted.
The Federal Government's current commitment to climate
change action falls short, but state and local governments are
rising to the challenge and reducing U.S.-sourced emissions by
adopting updated building energy codes. Congress should support
building energy codes as a key pathway to net zero construction
by 2050 by passing the Portman/Shaheen Energy Savings and
Industrial Competitiveness Act to encourage states and local
governments to go beyond the model building energy code and
train code officials to improve compliance.
One area of innovation of interest to EESI is energy
efficiency financing which could be administered by special
entities like green banks. States and local governments have an
abundance of creativity but are often constrained by a lack of
capital to initiate financing for underserved or hard to serve
populations or establish credit enhancements to leverage
private sector capital. Pending before Congress are bills that
would support financing such as the Chairman's proposal to
expand eligibility of the Department of Energy's existing loan
guarantee program and Portman/Shaheen which includes the SAVE
Act to ensure homeowners realize a return on energy efficiency
investments.
EESI knows that many costs incurred in the race to address
climate change could unfortunately impact people and
communities least able to access the benefits of a decarbonized
clean energy economy. Rural Americans, on average, pay about 40
percent more for energy than those in urban areas. We must do
all we can to avoid this negative outcome.
EESI's experience with on-bill financing programs offered
by municipal utilities and electric cooperatives shows how
cost-effective retrofits facilitated by low interest loans can
reduce upfront costs of improvement and lower monthly energy
bills. Participants, including those with lower incomes or who
live in disadvantaged communities, gain more affordable and
sustainable housing. The policy implications are far-reaching,
including lower emissions, healthier homes and even beneficial
electrification of heating equipment and personal vehicles.
EESI works today with many utilities and cooperatives to
implement on-bill financing. For example, in Juneau, Alaska, a
non-profit community partnership is collaborating with local
government and stakeholders to deploy financing for high-
efficiency heat pumps. Many homes in greater Juneau have oil or
electric resistance heaters and suffer from air leakages and
insufficient insulation. Together with cold climate heat pumps
and basic weatherization, on-bill financing could lower utility
bills for Alaskan families and help Juneau meet its climate
goals. EESI's experience suggests that this program design
could be deployed overseas, especially where credit is scarce
and incomes are low. In addition to unlocking savings, these
programs finance measures that offer resilience benefits like
better thermal performance of walls and windows.
Lastly, I would like to step back and make a broader point.
Energy efficiency offers benefits, but it works best as an
element in a full set of clean energy solutions. I encourage
the Committee to consider energy efficiency along with policies
to stimulate advancements in renewable energy, transmission and
grid modernization, storage and other clean energy
technologies. In addition, climate adaptation and resilience
legislation is complementary to these efforts to safeguard the
energy system and critical infrastructure from disasters and
extreme weather.
It is commonly said that energy efficiency should come
first. Yes, but it should not go alone.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss how energy
efficiency can deliver near-term, achievable emissions
reductions. I'm happy to answer questions and provide
additional information for the record.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bresette follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Bresette.
Ms. Layke, welcome.
STATEMENT OF JENNIFER LAYKE, GLOBAL DIRECTOR FOR ENERGY, WORLD
RESOURCES INSTITUTE
Ms. Layke. Thank you, Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member
Manchin and members of the Committee for the opportunity to
testify here today at this hearing. It's an honor to be here.
I'm Jennifer Layke, Global Director for Energy at the World
Resources Institute, a research organization working at the
intersection of development and environment to improve people's
lives.
Energy efficiency is a matter of economic competitiveness.
It is the lowest cost energy source that we have. From my
current work at WRI and from my work, private sector work on
energy efficiency, the evidence is clear, we can easily end, we
must cost-effectively reduce our energy waste if our economy is
to continue to grow at its potential.
The steps are known and the technologies are proven. Three
things immediately can make our journey more effective.
First, we need to ensure the Department of Energy delivers
on its statutory obligation to review and update performance
standards for equipment and appliances. I can't state strongly
enough the importance of these energy performance standards.
Households today save approximately $500 annually as a result.
The Administration should not be rolling back our progress on
commonsense technology improvements.
We must look, secondly, at the more wide-reaching
provisions of bills like S. 2137, the Portman/Shaheen bill,
passed out of the Committee last month. I urge the Full Senate
to take up this bill.
We must, thirdly, continue to accelerate the investment
into efficient technologies of the future, that includes
reintroducing Senate bill 224.
Let me share a few observations on critical areas where the
U.S. may be out of step with the global opportunity and action.
The building sector is one such area. In my written
testimony I provide examples of mandatory building energy
performance codes. And along with building labeling, these can
be very effective at stimulating the market. China is moving
swiftly toward requiring building performance standards, Tokyo
already cap and trades its building performance and we have the
opportunity to look at more innovative, systematic approaches
to building performance.
Many of these investments pay back within five to seven
years and offer better cash flow for their owners and
occupants, yet many building owners and homeowners are forced
to purchase inefficient equipment because there is no mechanism
to allow them to overcome the first cost barrier--the fact that
sometimes, efficient equipment may cost more. Can you imagine
our economy if we were not offering low interest loans and
leasing for automobiles?
My second focus is on industrial efficiency and equipment
manufacturing. In 2018, Senators Kennedy and Carper introduced
Senate bill 224, the American Innovation and Manufacturing Act.
This bill would provide American manufacturers the policy
certainty they need to make cooling and refrigeration product
investments that shift away from hydrofluorocarbons. This
phasedown is already agreed to internationally by the Montreal
Protocol under the Kigali Amendment and the U.S. market must
move in alignment with this international effort. I urge
Senator Cassidy, as a co-sponsor of that bill, to reintroduce
the legislation to Congress as soon as possible.
Let me offer an example of how this plays out. Right now,
there are 675 multinational companies that WRI and the larger
coalition of organizations are working with. One hundred thirty
of those are in the United States. They've committed to
science-based targets to improve their own performance
alongside the science and what's required. These companies will
be measuring and managing their carbon footprint and the
equipment they buy will not just be judged on the quality and
the price, it will be judged on the carbon performance. U.S.
technology must be able to compete in this race for the future.
But this Committee is also interested in the energy
efficiency efforts around the world. The American Council for
an Energy Efficient Economy releases a scorecard, and in 2018
the United States ranked tenth alongside Canada but behind
China and behind Taiwan. Many of the leaders are European
countries that have had strong policy drivers for efficiency.
The U.S. can connect this global energy efficiency effort and
Senator Murkowski, thank you for joining the Commission and
helping support this interaction between the U.S. efforts and
global efforts. WRI is doing the same. We joined with the IEA
and many other partners around the Three Percent Club. I hope
we have an opportunity to discuss that further. It's a global
effort--15 countries and over 40 organizations are supporting
that effort.
We also work on buildings through our building efficiency
accelerator and in conjunction with the United For Efficiency
under the Sustainable Energy for All banner, we're working to
ensure that the building sector has access to the latest
technology. In fact, the doubling of energy efficiency
improvement is somewhere that the U.S. is off track, the
Business Council for Sustainable Energy reports, along with
BNEF, that our productivity declined in the United States,
energy productivity declined by 0.4 percent last year.
Yesterday, I spent with the FERC Chairman Chatterjee, who
convened stakeholders at the University of Kentucky to discuss
today's electricity system and the challenges and
opportunities. Utilities, regulators, policymakers, technology
advocates spoke about the opportunities for clean, affordable,
reliable electricity, yet energy efficiency was not mentioned
as part of that agenda.
It is critical that we provide Americans with an integrated
set of solutions and technologies, both on the supply and the
demand side, and increasingly these two areas overlap.
We look forward to opportunities to work with you all and
the Congress and the Administration to ensure that Americans
are unburdened from high energy cost.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Layke follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Layke.
Mr. Tew, welcome.
STATEMENT OF W. SCOTT TEW, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR
ENERGY EFFICIENCY & SUSTAINABILITY, INGERSOLL RAND
Mr. Tew. Thank you, Chairman Murkowski and Ranking Member
Manchin, and good morning to all of the members of the
Committee. It's a pleasure to be here with you today.
My name is Scott Tew, and I lead the development of
Ingersoll Rand's global positions with regard to energy, energy
efficiency, climate and sustainability. Through our climate-
based businesses, Thermo King and Trane, we heat, cool, and
automate homes and buildings and keep transported food and
perishables safe and fresh. We're also playing a key role in
the evolution of innovation as a catalyst for energy
efficiency.
As our planet continues to face the ongoing challenges
brought about by urbanization, resource constraints, workforce
dynamics and, of course, climate change, Ingersoll Rand and
Trane and Thermo King are developing and unleashing solutions
that help. We've been at this a very long time.
When our company was founded nearly 150 years ago, Ulysses
S. Grant was President. The great State of Alaska was still 88
years from officially becoming a state. With time has come
experience and we believe, also, credibility and at the heart
of everything we do is a commitment to efficiency and
sustainability, a greater purpose that allows us to make a
positive impact on the world.
At Ingersoll Rand we set and deliver on energy efficiency
and climate commitments. We delivered our first-generation
commitments well ahead of time. In 2014, we set out to reduce
the greenhouse gas refrigerant footprint of our products by 50
percent by the year 2020. Our efforts, though, actually yielded
a 53 percent reduction, two full years ahead of schedule. We
also pledged in 2014 to reduce our operational greenhouse gas
footprint by 35 percent and, again, we were able to reduce that
impact by an even greater number, 45 percent, also two years
ahead of schedule. We're also on pace to fulfill a pledge to
invest $500 million in product-related innovations by 2020.
We have much to be proud of, but also much work remains to
be done. To that end, we recently launched a 2030 commitment
with new environmental targets. Here are three of them. One, we
plan to transform our global supply chain. Two, we plan to
reduce our customer's carbon footprint by one gigaton of
carbon, something we call the Gigaton Challenge. It is the
largest customer facing climate commitment ever made by a
company. In case you're wondering, a gigaton is equivalent to
the annual emissions of Italy, the UK and France combined. It's
large. Number three, we're increasing the opportunity for all
by strengthening the economic mobility and bolstering the
quality of life, not only of our workforce but also in the
communities where we have major investments.
From our advantage as a leader in the business of
sustainability, we believe there are a few key points to keep
in mind as policymakers, regulators and industry work together
to identify future energy efficiency solutions.
First, energy efficiency is good for business. It's good
for consumers, it's good for the health of the climate and
that's why energy codes and appliance standards remain the
bedrock of an effective building energy policy in developed
economies like the U.S. Improvements in appliance standards for
air conditioning and equipment now mean that our products use
35 percent less electricity, providing the same cooling
capacity with no tradeoffs. These policies not only save
consumers money and reduce greenhouse gas emissions, they also
allow us to manage the energy use of our products which, in
turn, modernizes the energy infrastructure. Ultimately, U.S.
leadership on energy efficiency standards means that we can
focus our innovation for North America while seeking
opportunities to bring those technologies to countries
developing their own standards elsewhere.
The second point I'd like to highlight is that future
building policy must recognize system interactions within
buildings and the environment. So while there will always be a
place for robust energy codes and appliance standards, we have
to begin thinking beyond energy performance of components at
the individual product level because that's where the biggest
opportunity for energy savings will come from in the future.
Great care must be taken when it comes to crafting codes
and standards so that solutions that improve overall efficiency
at the systems level, remains available to consumers. The
potential opportunity does not stop at the building system
level either, buildings can be assets in our infrastructure.
Building management systems can respond to signals from the
grid and can automate any connected subsystems at the component
level. That is the essence and the calculus of energy
efficiency, determining the desired energy outcomes for
improvement, assigning metrics to measure their progress and
implementing policies that encourage solutions.
Looking ahead, the work remains challenging but incredibly
exciting. I'm privileged to work in this industry that
continues to transform the planet, our communities and lives
for the better.
Thank you again, Chair Murkowski, for allowing me to make
my comments.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tew follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Tew, and thank all of you. We
appreciate your comments, and I look forward to the discussion.
I am going to defer my questions and turn to Senator
Gardner for the first round here.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you for the
opportunity to ask questions, I truly appreciate the deferral.
To the members of the panel here, thank you very much for
being here today. Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Manchin,
thank you very much for doing this hearing today.
As we all know, the United States has made great strides
when it comes to addressing our emissions and our energy use.
Energy efficiency is not only good for our environment, but it
is good for our consumers as well. The average American has
saved almost $2,500 per year on their energy bills because of
the achievements we have made, but more needs to be done, more
can be done.
I am proud to have joined both the Chairman and Ranking
Member in introducing the Federal Energy and Water Management
Performance Act of 2019 which formally authorizes the Federal
Energy Management Program so we can leverage the knowledge and
expertise of the Department of Energy to help other federal
agencies increase their energy efficiency.
I am also proud to have teamed up with Senator Coons to
reintroduce legislation that I have been working on for the
past several Congresses, the Energy Savings Through Public-
Private Partnerships Act of 2019, which will encourage the use
of energy savings performance contracts (ESPCs) in federal
buildings. Using the ESPC model will allow private companies to
use their own money and resources to make energy efficiency
upgrades to federal buildings at no cost to the taxpayer. In
exchange for making energy efficient upgrades, those private
companies receive a portion of the money saved as a result of
the increased efficiency. This could save billions of dollars,
creating thousands of private sector jobs, all resulting in
greater energy efficiency and lower emissions.
One of the things that we have talked about over the past
several months has been this statistic that we came across that
goes back roughly 15 or 20 years. Over that course of time, 50
percent of the emissions reductions achieved by the United
States have been achieved through gains in energy efficiency.
So nearly half of our emissions reductions have been achieved
through energy efficiency. That's greater than renewable energy
emission reductions or fuel switching emission reductions
combined.
Now I am under the understanding that most of those savings
came from efficiencies in the generation process. So I guess I
would just ask, and I don't know who the appropriate one on the
panel is to ask this. If that is the case, if we have made such
significant strides in energy efficiency through the generation
side of things, how can we export that knowledge, those
technologies, those efficiency gains in the United States to
China, to India, other areas where they obviously have not
created those kinds of efficiencies? And what would that mean
from a global emissions reduction standpoint in real time? I
don't know who wants to take a shot at that?
Dr. Motherway.
Dr. Motherway. Thank you very much, Senator, for your
comments. And I must say, I'm very pleased to hear how much
dynamic action is going on in the U.S. at the moment around
energy efficiency, and I commend the Senators for the range of
activities.
The U.S. has made tremendous strides in energy efficiency
in the last couple of decades, and you cite the numbers to
support that. And I think there are tremendous opportunities to
export technologies, but also, the kind of business models you
spoke about in terms of performance contracting and financial
innovations and all that goes with that.
And for me, certainly, the next phase will be driven by how
digital technology makes that more possible in terms of
measuring savings, giving customers and suppliers security.
And I must stress that the number you cite in terms of the
gains, in terms of emission reductions from the last couple of
decades being nearly half from efficiency, the same will be
true in the next couple of decades. According to our analysis,
in the next two decades efficiency has the potential to provide
almost half the total emission reductions available from the
energy sector entirely.
And I think the opportunities for export will be driven by
certainly what we see that the global interest in energy
efficiency and the available solutions has never been higher.
So I must totally agree with your point that the opportunities
are very strong.
Senator Gardner. Thank you.
Yes, Ms. Layke.
Ms. Layke. Thank you, sir.
I am encouraged by the conversation of this, sort of,
integration of both supply and demand side. This is one of the
areas where, I think, there's tremendous opportunity.
And let me point to the long tradition that the United
States has had in multilateral and bilateral cooperation
efforts both through the EPA, through the Department of Energy
and through the Department of State. There are existing efforts
underway with the Department of State, for example, to look at
grid modernization in India. Those types of programs and the
cooperation that the U.S. Government can have in enabling
capacity building for these kinds of technological advancements
is one of the things that we've done very well in the United
States.
I, myself, began my career working on multilateral ozone
protection efforts the United States worked on with China and
with other countries to ensure the phaseout of CFCs in that
first generation. Similar programs could help advance digital
technology and modern the grid infrastructure.
Senator Gardner. Thank you.
Dr. Motherway, going back to your point. Your projections
show that, I don't know, the next several years that global
energy emission reductions will be achieved at least half by
and through energy efficiency. Is that how you said that?
Dr. Motherway. That's correct, yes, just under half we
expect in the next two decades can come from energy efficiency.
Senator Gardner. Great. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank you.
The Chairman. Senator Manchin.
Senator Manchin. I am also going to defer to my friend from
New Mexico, Senator Heinrich.
Senator Heinrich. Thank you, both.
I want to first make the point that one of the frustrations
that all of my constituents seem to have is that Congress is
not getting a lot done, and I think that is an accurate
estimation.
This Committee has been a relative exception, and we have
seen legislation marked up on economy-wide energy efficiency.
We have seen federal building upgrade legislation. We have seen
energy storage legislation.
I hope all of us will take this hearing as an opportunity
to go back and push on Senate leadership to get those bills on
the Floor, because we can get an awful lot done based on the
good work that has gone on from our Chair and our Ranking
Member on this Committee.
Mr. Bresette, so much of this discussion, especially around
economics, comes down to the tension between short-term
economics and long-term economics. I remember when the light
bulb standards were first being debated on the Floor of the
body on the other side of the Capitol, the U.S. House. A number
of our colleagues came to the defense of the economics of their
constituents but in a somewhat misguided way trying to protect
the incandescent light bulb. I just pulled up a little search
of what the life-cycle costs now are of incandescent versus
LEDs and for 25,000 hours at the equivalent of 60 watts, the
lumen equivalent, an incandescent will cost you $180, and an
LED will cost you $30. In effect, what we are doing for those
folks who are pushing the protection of incandescent over newer
technologies is locking people in to a higher cost of energy
per month, six times higher, actually.
We need to find those mechanisms that provide a way to
finance the difference between the short-term economics and the
long-term economics. You mentioned on-bill financing as a way
to do that. Do all of you support that kind of approach and
what do you think of other mechanisms, be they property
assessment mechanisms or others?
Mr. Bresette. Thank you, Senator.
Yes, I think generally speaking, that's, kind of, the magic
of financing. It reduces the emphasis on the upfront cost and
that allows the beneficiary to focus on the long-term benefits.
You know, it's easy to focus on what's immediate. And when
the immediate stops being the cost and it starts being the
benefits which accrue from day one, that's really the magic of
financing. On-bill financing that ESI works on is typically
targeted at rural utilities. That seems to be where there's a
lot of interest. But there are lots of other financing
mechanisms.
You mentioned property assessed clean energy (PACE), that's
a good one. Many states have revolving loan funds for larger
commercial projects or multifamily projects. There are also
deferred payment programs. These are leveraged, sort of, mostly
like consumer credit programs. And then there's also
performance contracting which is, at its heart, a financing
mechanism.
Senator Heinrich. Yes.
Mr. Bresette. I think one thing that you would notice is
that those programs are all fairly targeted to that end user,
right, to that customer. A performance contract may not work
for a homeowner. On-bill financing might not work for, you
know, given technologies or maybe where PACE would come in.
But financing is really important. As financing importance
has increased, I think that's been driven, at least in part, by
an awareness that rebates are limited. A lot of the program
development in financing and in rebates, of course, is done by
the utility sector.
Senator Heinrich. Right.
Mr. Bresette. And rebates are a finite resource. Financing
has the ability to constantly be recycled and to spread those
benefits wider.
Senator Heinrich. We have seen the Administration recently
roll back the efficient light bulb standards. Do any of you
think that that is smart policy?
[Witnesses nod, no.]
Senator Heinrich. Moving on.
Space cooling.
Senator King. Let the record note, silence.
Senator Heinrich. Yes, thank you.
Space cooling is a huge and growing issue, and it is
growing, in part, because people in very warm, tropical
climates rightfully expect now the kind of lifestyle and basic
work environment that we have enjoyed in this country for a
long time.
It is also growing because places like Washington, DC, are
seeing more and more days above 90 degrees every decade that we
move forward. So this is going to be a really critical place.
We have somebody in the private sector. We have Dr.
Motherway, who knows this issue very well. What are the role of
technologies that are not traditional cooling such as heat
pumps in solving this issue, and I am curious, Mr. Tew, if your
organization supports the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal
Protocol?
Mr. Tew. Thank you for the question, Senator.
And so, a few questions there that you asked. One is about
heating and cooling. Obviously, it is a big deal. Buildings
represent 39 percent of electricity use, a large portion of
that is heating and cooling. And heating and cooling should no
longer be viewed as a luxury item, to your point.
It's not about just tropical locations. We sell systems in
Alaska just like we sell in tropical locations.
Kigali is important. Kigali is important for several
reasons. One is it's about next generation refrigerants, and
it's about phasing down the ones that are not climate friendly.
Seventy-five nations have already ratified the Amendment.
We think it's important here for one big reason. It really
would help us move past a patchwork quilt of standards at a
state level. So we need U.S. policy and ratification to help us
do that.
To your other point about the connection between heating
and cooling and electricity use, it's also climate connection
as well, as you know. Indirect emissions from the energy used
to power heating and cooling represents roughly 12 percent of
emissions in the U.S. So it's significant. It's also overlooked
many times. We go after the shiny objects, and many times we
don't focus on the built environment that already exists in
buildings like this one.
And as we just mentioned, the financing. We fixed a lot of
the financing through ESPCs, performance contracts, and other
ways. The ROI is there as well, the return on investment, over
time.
So I think we've addressed and checked most of the boxes.
It's not only good for business and good for building owners,
it's also good for the environment.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Heinrich.
Dr. Motherway, you mentioned, and we are all talking about,
the extraordinary potential of efficiency, but your recognition
of the fact that these gains that we have been making in
efficiency, we are starting to see slow down. Obviously that
should concern all of us. If we are recognizing that this is
the easiest thing to do, the first place we should go, and yet
we are slowing down in these gains.
And you note that IEA, one of the things that you do is
analyze these trends. So you are seeing it happen.
A couple questions for you.
First, as you are looking at these trends, are we seeing
this slow down only in the United States or is this happening
around the globe with other countries as well, or are we
slowing while everybody else is continuing to move on forward?
And then, a bigger question. You note the various ways that we
advance policy whether it is through regulatory, mandatory
standards, voluntary or market-based driven and you cite the
example of the Japanese. I think the Japanese as a culture are
probably more amenable to being told ``this is what we will
require.'' In this country, as Senator Manchin has pointed out,
we are still arguing over the light bulbs here in terms of
whether or not we should have options. I guess the question to
you is, how do we raise the profile of energy efficiency so
more people are excited about it, like they are other energy
technologies?
We are always talking about the latest, greatest,
innovative thing and we keep the words like ``shiny object''
out there. Why haven't we been able to make energy efficiency
be that cool thing that we are all trying to do?
So two prongs here. Is everybody, kind of, slowing down on
the efficiency side? And then, recognizing that, what more can
we do to reverse this trend that you are seeing?
Dr. Motherway. Thank you, Chairman.
So yes, the slowdown is global. Patterns change in
different parts of the world, but everywhere we see a
decreasing rate of progress.
I want to stress that the world is becoming more efficient
each year. We are still extracting more value from the energy
we use every year, but in 2015 the rate of improvement was
almost three percent. In 2018, it was 1.2 percent. So we're
going in the right direction, but at a much slower pace than we
were previously. And then, compared to what we could be doing.
It is a global phenomenon.
It's driven in many countries by increasing economic
growth, increasing economic activity. People are getting access
to more energy services. Cars are becoming bigger. Homes are
becoming bigger. These are all bringing benefits to people's
lives. These are good things.
But energy efficiency policy now needs to work even harder
than before to have its impact in the face of these trends
and----
The Chairman. So it is not just that we have gone after the
low-hanging fruit. So much of this is being driven by the
demand for energy, just writ large?
Dr. Motherway. Yes.
And there are certain factors such as we see certain
sectors, intensive industrial sectors, growing faster than the
general economy, but it's not that we are running out of things
to do to make the world more efficient, it's more driven by the
wider trends.
And I take your point in terms of I confess to having spent
several decades failing to make efficiency exciting or sexy,
but I'll keep trying. And I think we've heard a lot of very
good points made here by the Committee and by my colleagues on
the panel that the average person doesn't think about
efficiency. They do not say, ``I want to be efficient.'' ``I
want to buy something efficient.'' They want good services.
They want nice appliances, nice homes. They want low bills.
Often, they do want to make their environmental contributions.
So I think we all need to stress the wider context for
efficiency in terms of its role in enhancing economies, making
economies more resilient, making neighborhoods more resilient
and, of course, lowering bills and lowering environmental
impacts.
So I think we need to focus on how people think about these
things, how they make their decisions and stress that
efficiency is an ingredient in a wider project of social and
economic development.
The Chairman. It comes back to education.
I will yield my time and turn to my colleague here, Senator
Manchin.
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
To anybody, but I think, Dr. Motherway, it might be more to
you. How many people in the world do not have any electricity
or energy would you say, of the seven plus billion? Do you have
a rough idea on that or?
Dr. Motherway. It's about a billion people.
Senator Manchin. A billion that do not.
Okay, and how many under energize or first-generation
energy recipients?
Dr. Motherway. I would say, one way or the other, the
majority of people around the world do not have the full access
to all the energy that----
Senator Manchin. The reason I am asking the question, I
think back to my grandparents and my grandparents coming here
at the turn of the century, the 20th century. And I remember my
grandmother talking about the first time she got a washing
machine or a refrigerator. I can assure you she wasn't worried
about how she got it. She wasn't worried about how it was
produced, how much pollution was being emitted when she got it.
She was just tickled to death to have it.
I was in India and all the rural areas, and you see mostly
the females during the day, gathering up manure to heat it, I
mean to bake it and then use it as fuel. If they are able to
flip the switch or chain on something, they don't care either.
How do we incentivize these nations?
If we had a more matured country that could have shown us,
they already have technology that even though we are going to
be first generation, we are using it in the cleanest fashion?
I am thinking, how do we get India? How do we get some of
Asia, some of the developing nations now, to use some of the
technology that we have had? How do we do that? What kind of a
policy? Do you need a trading policy? You don't want to use a
carrot and a stick, but you have to have the carrot, if you
don't incentivize them to use a new technology.
I will give you a perfect example. If we'd had scrubbers,
low NOX boilers and baghouses for mercury back in
the 1930s, we could have started out in pretty good fashion.
That did not happen until 2000, 2010. And I don't know if the
world can stand us to go through another cycle with billions of
people coming on board using old technology. I think that is it
in a nutshell.
Any comments you might have along that which are, and how
to make it, or to make it sexier, not just the facts of what we
are dealing with?
Dr. Motherway. I couldn't agree more, Senator, and I think
you put it very well. I think one interesting example is the
topic of cooling which is something we talk about a lot because
it's effectively the fastest growing demand for electricity
globally. And the simple reason is here in the United States,
nine out of ten households have air conditioning where in
India, it's less than one in ten.
And, of course, as they become richer----
Senator Manchin. Now look at what China is doing. They are
using more now. They are using 70 percent in the last few years
for air conditioning.
Dr. Motherway. Absolutely.
And I think we realize if India were to follow the same
path in terms of installing very large amounts of inefficient
air conditioning, the economic and environmental costs would be
enormous.
And I think that's where your point about the new
generation of technologies is really important, not just much
more efficient air conditioners, but also, more efficient
buildings, much cleaner electricity systems.
In particular what I would stress is countries that haven't
fully developed or rolled out these technologies have an
opportunity to leapfrog other parts of the world including many
of our countries because they can move to much more efficient
equipment. But also, as I mentioned, digital technology is
making things much more easy to control, to measure, to
monitor. It's really rolling out a new generation of
technology.
And I think, I see great opportunities to countries like
the U.S. to be involved in that global conversation in terms of
rolling out expertise and helping others learn from its
experience.
Senator Manchin. But I am saying, how do you incentivize
it?
You might want to talk about that, Ms. Layke and then also
Mr. Tew, it comes right down your alley, I think.
Ms. Layke. Thank you for the opportunity to respond.
There are three things that, I think, we can learn from.
First, the topic or the theme of energy efficiency is
helpful to embed in other characteristics. People are looking
for opportunities to improve their lives. They're looking for
the best technologies. They're looking for solutions, whether
you are in Africa or you're in the United States, you're going
to be, you're drawn to those technologies that you believe have
the highest value to you.
So how do we demonstrate that? We can label. ENERGY STAR
labeling has worked very well in the United States.
We can talk about the attributes and we can create
competition in the market to incentivize these types of things.
Right now, in India and around the world, there's a Global
Cooling Prize, for example, where manufacturers and small
startups and universities are looking at heating and cooling
and how to begin to build a new generation of technologically
sound solutions that can help across income spans. So how does
that household in India afford this?
But the other area that we could work on is things like
integration. So, zero-carbon buildings. Thinking about how you
take both the energy supply and the energy demand and you put
that together in a way. That's the appeal of an automobile
powered by a battery, that it could potentially become your
backup in your home. Those are the types of solutions that
allow energy efficiency to move forward.
We have been working on a zero-carbon building and
announced in September a partnership to look at opportunities
for zero-carbon buildings around the world. I do believe this
is one opportunity to reframe the building space as both an
opportunity for supply and demand to come together to create
energy efficient performance.
Mr. Tew. And I'll just make a comment, Senator.
You make good points about India and other developing
countries. A lot of studies say that a billion new air
conditioners will be put in service over the next decade.
Currently, the infrastructure in the developing countries, in
particular, maybe our own, can't support a billion new air
conditioners unless we begin approaching efficiency at a
systems level, to Jennifer's point.
We've got to think about more than just the incandescent
light bulb, it has to be the full system. How efficient is the
home, is the commercial building? How efficient is the grid
that it will pull from? And it all has to be attacked and not
just at a component level, but also at the systems level. I
think that's just really important to consider.
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator King.
Senator King. Thank you.
Fascinating subject and panel.
I want to go back to something that Senator Heinrich talked
about, because I think it is really important. A lot of these
decisions are individual and the big problem for individuals is
capital and the big issue is financing.
I just got a new iPhone. And it was financed, essentially,
in my phone bill. I did not pay any upfront costs; therefore, I
really didn't think too much about it. I wanted the new phone,
and so it folded right in. Maybe I am not a very good consumer,
but it worked. The point is, I think, on-bill financing, we
have really got to emphasize that.
Ms. Layke, you mentioned a five- to seven-year payback. For
most corporations, that is not good enough.
I used to be in the energy efficiency business, and my
clients wanted 1.5- to 2-year payback because they are
allocating scarce capital within the corporation and they are
looking for a short payback, particularly in the world of
quarterly results.
I would urge you, perhaps this would be a question for the
record, to give us your best wisdom on financing techniques,
particularly as they apply to individuals. Corporations are
pretty sophisticated with how they can do financing.
The other piece is interest rates. I used to work with an
automobile dealer, and they said that the biggest determinant
of car sales was interest rates which really surprised me.
Interest rates go down, car sales go up because people are
concerned about what their monthly payment is.
Please give us some thought on this because one of the big,
at least in the northern tier states, one of the big issues is
heat pumps which are very efficient, very good change, but they
are expensive. The capital investment is high. So give me some
thoughts on that.
Another thought is you mentioned, Mr. Tew, at the end of
your comments the grid itself. The grid, itself, is grossly
inefficient.
I just looked this morning at the New England grid. At four
o'clock this morning it was 9,000 megawatts. At 4:30 this
afternoon, it's going to be around 15,000 megawatts. That is a
66 percent swing.
If we can have techniques such as time-of-day pricing,
electric vehicles, energy storage in the home during the day,
so you draw down your energy at night, use it during the day in
terms of things like space heating, we can drastically increase
the efficiency of the grid.
We always talk about generation. But in Maine, anyway, the
transmission and distribution cost equals the generation cost.
In fact, it is somewhat higher.
So that is not, it is not a climate change issue, but it is
certainly a cost issue because if you can use the current grid
more efficiently, everybody's price per kilowatt-hour goes down
because the cost of the grid is spread over the number of
kilowatt-hours. I urge you to consider time-of-day pricing.
Mr. Bresette, is that something you guys have looked at or
some other incentive to even out that very dramatic curve?
Mr. Bresette. Yes, for sure.
And also as some of the technologies that my fellow
panelists have talked about, you know, especially with respect
to electric vehicles. Electric vehicles become more commonplace
in residential settings, then you have this battery on four
wheels that can be used to absorb power at different times of
the day and then deploy it as a storage device.
Can I make three quick comments with respect to financing?
Senator King. Please.
Mr. Bresette. The first is you hit the nail exactly on the
head. Monthly payments are critical.
Senator King. Could you say that again? I would like that
to be in the record.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bresette. Okay.
Senator King, you hit the nail right on the head. Monthly
payments are a huge thing. That's how people tend to, how
individuals tend to think about what they can afford. Right?
Senator King. Right.
Mr. Bresette. That's why, you know, there are--that's why
when you go to a car dealership to buy a new car, the last
thing you talk about is financing. Right? You talk about what
color it is. You talk about the interior. You talk about
pinstriping. You talk about all sorts of stuff. And then at the
very end, someone is like, oh, and how are we going to pay for
this today? It's almost a forgone conclusion for people with
acceptable credit. And for people who don't have acceptable
credit, there are options, but they're still able to finance
it, maybe not a new car, but something.
The second point I'd like to make is you mentioned simple
payback. The one reason why simple payback often comes up in
conversations of energy efficiency is because it's difficult to
evaluate what an actual return on investment of energy
efficiency is. Simple payback is a shortcut in a lot of ways.
And until we have a better way to really evaluate the benefits
of energy efficiency over time, it's always going to be
subjected to a simple payback requirement. And that really puts
it at a disadvantage.
In the residential setting, we're always talking about
simple payback whether it's with codes or with financing or
whatever it is. But what's the simple payback of a new
bathroom? What's the simple payback of a granite countertop?
What the simple payback of a deck?
Those things don't get, simple payback doesn't get applied
to those home improvements because there's a recognition of
what the effects of those improvements have on the property's
value.
For energy efficiency, that's very difficult to do.
Applying new insulate or installing new insulation in walls is
very difficult to evaluate. And that's why I mentioned the SAVE
Act in my opening remarks and in my testimony because that
would help homeowners realize an actual rate of return on their
investment.
And then the fourth thing is with respect to individuals.
Not only are individuals difficult when it comes to financing,
but residential retrofits, the existing homes, every home is an
existing home. And an awful lot of them were built before there
were building energy codes. And every one of those homes is a
huge challenge. You have to have contractors in. You have to
have a policy framework.
Senator King. The people are not going to do that if they
have to pay an upfront capital cost.
Mr. Bresette. Absolutely, absolutely.
And if you have contractors coming back and you have
auditors and you have all of these decisions that you have to
make and there's confusion about well, I just installed this
great furnace or this great air conditioner and now you want me
to do air sealing. I'm not sure why I need to do that now. It's
really complicated.
And where we really need to make a lot of progress is
allowing retrofits to happen alongside financing with good
consumer information, things like ENERGY STAR but also home
labeling, disclosure at the time of sale so that people are
making decisions about residential energy efficiency the same
way they make others.
Senator King. To go back to the beginning, and I am out of
time, but I hope you all will see this as the beginning of this
discussion, not the end, and supply us with some thinking,
particularly on the issue of financing.
And then finally, I know I am out of time, we can't forget
China and India. This has to be, I mean, if we are going to
deal with climate change, we have to talk about those
countries.
And they are right, I would say, to have the same kind of
level of amenities that we have. We can't tell them you can't
air condition or you can't have a second car. But how do we
help internationally to guide them to be more efficient,
because otherwise everything we do is just not going to meet
the demands of the world climate situation.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator King.
Senator Cantwell.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thanks for
holding this important hearing.
To Senator King's last point, we have been involved in
U.S./China clean energy initiatives that were helping the
Chinese establish better building codes because, I think, at
that point 50 percent of all buildings that were going to get
built in the next ten years were going to be built in China. If
they are not energy efficient, then they are going to be using
way more supply than needed.
I want to thank the Chair and the Ranking Member for
including language in the energy bills you have been moving
through on energy efficiency in buildings. We spend something
like $430 billion a year, and it is something like 40 percent
of our total energy use is in buildings.
And so, while I appreciate the conversation we have been
having about consumers and homes, there is this huge
opportunity with just buildings writ large. And I think that
there are better ways to try to get those retrofits to happen,
including some of the language that we have in the legislation
that is moving through Congress. I hope we can push some of
those things over the goal line.
In fact, I remember the Chair coming to Seattle and
visiting McKinstry, and it was a great opportunity because we
went to one of their control rooms and we were basically
watching them monitor energy expenditures in the North Shore
School District which was way far north from Seattle, but we
were watching their energy consumption and they were basically
monitoring it so they could drive down the cost of our school
systems.
So we are big believers in the modernization that we think
can happen. We think, I personally believe, this is like what
we did for automobiles. We need to do for buildings what we did
for automobiles and that is, drive that level of efficiency.
On that point, besides the legislation on smart buildings
we have been considering, as you guys look at a global view of
this, what other initiatives do you think are spurring this
kind of development?
A report in the U.S. showed that there is a feedback loop
that this sector of clean energy business retrofitting has
proven to their customers that you are just going to get
whatever savings, 20 percent savings, and you are just going to
be able to then put that back into your competitiveness as
business and a sector. So they are getting a lot of uptake on
that. But are there other models that you see around the globe
that are working that we should be pursuing on smart buildings?
Dr. Motherway. Thank you, Senator.
I agree with the area of your focus, and I will say that
one of the opportunities for energy efficiency is it is a
global conversation because all countries are facing very
similar issues, the same pressures and using the kind of same
technologies and policy instruments to move things forward.
And referring to a couple of comments. I do believe that
this system thinking is really important. The concept of smart
buildings, not just about being inefficient in themselves, are
efficient in themselves, but being part of a whole energy
system, you know, helping balance grids, reducing costs on the
network, also helping deploy clean energy resources and things
like that.
So there are new technology opportunities emerging very
quickly. And I would urge anyone to think about it in that more
systems way. I think the conventional way of thinking about
energy efficiency, about the use in that one building or that
one appliance, it needs to change and it's starting to change
in different parts of the world.
And I do think financing is clearly very important. I would
just make one point which is certainly nobody will upgrade
their home without a good financing package, but my suspicion
is that most people won't upgrade their home even with a good
financing package because it's not like a car, where I get
something new in the driveway. It can be invisible stuff in the
wall or a changed furnace which I don't really notice the
difference until I get my energy bill a couple of months later,
that we still need to address how it's marketed.
And so, but also the practical challenges. Maybe it's cost
neutral for somebody, but they have to move out of the house
for a month or maybe they're getting different advice from
different people. So government really has a role in, kind of,
building these markets on both the supply and demand side.
When new solutions are being rolled out, people are seeing
it in their neighborhoods, and they're saying I want what they
have, so, that kind of building scale.
That's where, I think, I would commend the work of this
Committee and the work of the government here with a focus on
government buildings, in the sense that they can lead by
example because then people can see it working, the supply
chain of contractors and specifiers and architects and
engineers starts to grow. So that kind of leading by example, I
think, is a really important area.
Senator Cantwell. Anyone else?
Mr. Bresette. Yes, completely endorse the systems approach,
thinking about buildings as machines and not just big boxes
full of things is really the right way to do it.
You know, one thing that's happening, you mentioned
building codes and Washington State is a leader when it comes
to building codes. The International Energy Conservation Code
is under development right now, and there's a lot of
conversation in that context about what the role of buildings
will be.
You know, buildings right now, maybe they're in a moment of
transition. In the future buildings will become more integrated
in the grid. We've talked about, sort of, systems and we've
talked about how storage will be, but also there are proposals,
for instance, to make buildings electric vehicle (EV) ready
because in the future we won't fuel our vehicles at gas
stations the same way we do now. We'll fuel them in buildings,
whether they're commercial buildings and homes. And so, I
think, thinking ahead to how buildings will be used in the
coming decades with the understanding that the buildings we're
building today will be around with us for some time.
Senator Cantwell. I know my time is expired. I also want to
thank the Chair for visiting the Bullitt Center which, I think,
is probably one of the smartest system-built buildings in the
world, and Spokane is building an entire block of net-zero
buildings. The same kind of system approach. So definitely a
lot of upside for business here.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. It is just a reminder that there is a lot of
really good and innovative things that are happening.
If people can get inside and see them--like the McKinstry,
it was fabulous. In Alaska we have the Cold Climate Housing
Center. Senator Manchin has been there. To be able to walk
through and see how you can make a home and a building 80
percent more efficient in a cold environment is pretty cool and
captivates the imagination.
Senator Cortez Masto.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you, Madam Chair and Ranking
Member for this great conversation, because it is important and
this is our future.
But we have to be smart about it. We have to be investing
in it at all levels from federal, state, local and the private
sector and that, I see, has been the biggest challenge is
getting everybody on board with the future that we really
should be embracing and it starts with our smart communities
because this is the very reason why we need to be really
technically sophisticated.
When we bring on 5G, when we are connecting all of our
communities, hopefully through broadband, and there are no
underserved communities, this is the benefit, what we are
talking about today. And this is one piece of it. So I am
excited about it.
But I do think to really get us all moving in the same
direction, that there is a role for the Federal Government to
play and I am curious. You guys are talking about it now, but
part of it is the incentives, right? Part of it is this carrot
and stick, but most of it is the carrot, is how do we
incentivize our communities to get them to continue to invest
in this future at all levels?
That is one of the reasons why I have the Renewable Energy
Extension Act. And the bill extends the Clean Energy Investment
Tax Credit for solar, fiber optic solar, fuel cells, small
wind, micro turbines, combined heat and power and geothermal
heat pumps that are set to phase down after the year. And I
would invite my colleagues to join me as well. But this is
really how we incentivize and start moving in this direction.
And I am curious. We have talked about some of those
incentives, but what else can we do because I also think it is
important we get the private sector on board and that includes
individuals, right, that are living, whether you are going to
work during the day in a building that should be energy
efficient and demanding it is at your workplace or even in your
home. What else can we do?
Here is the reason why I am asking. I come from Nevada.
Particularly in Southern Nevada, it gets really hot and we rely
on our air conditioning units. I know we have talked a little
bit about that. What people don't realize, and I was born and
raised there and this was astonishing to me, just before Earth
Day this year Climate Central, which is an independent
organization that conducts research and surveys on climate
change, released its list of U.S. cities that are warming the
fastest and Las Vegas ranked number one. It has warmed 5.76
degrees since 1970. And if you've ever been to Las Vegas in the
summer, it already hits 115 to 120 degrees.
And so, I am curious about your thoughts on what more can
we do at the Federal Government level and in industry be doing
to help families and businesses weather such extreme
temperatures, particularly when we are talking about heat and
not just relying on air conditioning to be the answer to
address those concerns?
I will open it up to the panel.
Ms. Layke. Thank you, Senator.
The important element of heat is that we have non-technical
solutions that can also help alleviate heat island effects in
cities whether that's cool surfaces, white coatings, other
types of surfaces that can reflect heat rather than absorb heat
and green spaces and pairing green space and white surfaces or
light surfaces can actually, has a demonstrable impact on what
the perception of heat is in a city on any given day.
Now, does that help you move from 115 degrees down to it
feeling like a 90-degree day? Perhaps it doesn't make that
level of difference, but in many communities where there are
people living in poverty, India and many other places around
the world as well as in the arid West, we can also use
evaporative cooling and other types of systems to help, in
addition to using traditional air conditioning systems.
I also want to comment that the importance of cities in
this, and I applaud your linking the federal agenda to the
local agenda. We work with cities around the world, or in the
United States and around the world, and currently cities are
looking at how to get access to technology for low to medium,
low to moderate income families and housing. And this is an
area where cooling is one of the biggest priorities, as well as
technology and building upgrades.
The Federal Government has allocated, through
appropriations, funding in the past through the Department of
Energy to state energy offices and those types of
appropriations and programming can be extremely effective and
important in allowing states to address the local conditions
and local circumstances of the citizens in those states.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Anyone else?
Mr. Tew. Senator, great, great question, especially the way
it was framed.
These extremes, they're happening everywhere though. The
U.S. saw 11 percent higher heating days last year, and about
equal amount 10.5 percent higher cooling days last year. And
those are important because of the heat experience we see
nationwide. That is a direct connection to a pull on the grid
that is not sustainable over time.
And so, the approach here, as Jennifer just mentioned, it's
a systems approach. You mentioned storage. We need all of those
things. No longer can we just focus at the component level. It
has to be ground sourced heat pumps connected to storage,
connected to a cleaner and more efficient grid. All those
things are important.
I think financing is certainly a question that we have to
not attack it just at the component level. It's more about the
systems solution.
Senator Cortez Masto. Right. Thank you.
Yes?
Mr. Bresette. Let me make a comment too.
At EESI we think about efficient buildings as resilient
buildings. A lot of the technologies, whether they're envelope
technologies or window glazing, they allow a structure to be
more habitable or hospitable after an event. So when the power
goes out, an efficient building is one that you can stand to be
in longer, whether in a hot climate or a cold climate. And then
also, if every building were efficient there would be less
strain and stress on the grid. And, of course, that makes the
grid easier to recover, sort of, after the event, during those
weeks and days that follow.
Thank you.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you.
I know my colleagues have heard me speak to one of my pet
peeves, but when we think about what happens within our
buildings and just the efficiency that we lose when we crank
our air conditioning level to just that perfect 68 degrees so
that our male colleagues can wear long-sleeved shirts and t-
shirts and a tie and a jacket and leather shoes and socks and
long pants so that they are comfortable. It costs us a lot more
money and we could save a lot more money if we changed the
attire around here. Maybe it is because I come from Alaska
where, if it is cold out, we are wearing more clothes and we
wear them inside too. It is the season now where everyone is
wearing a light down jacket inside, you know.
I am not making light of this, but I do think that we
overly complicate some things because of the customs that we
have adopted as to what is the professional attire here. If we
wanted to save a little on our air conditioning and reduce our
consumption and be a little more efficient, we might want to
think about the temperatures that we keep our buildings at to
be comfortable. I know that in Japan during the summertime,
they do not keep the thermostats at 68 degrees. It is much,
much warmer and they are dealing with that. I am not suggesting
that you could turn off all the air conditioning in Las Vegas
when it is 100 degrees plus. I am very cognizant of that, but I
do think that we get very comfortable in what we are demanding
rather than acknowledging that maybe we just need to
accommodate ourselves just a little bit.
Let me turn to Senator Hoeven. I have a few more questions
that I wanted to ask about what other countries are doing, but
we will turn to Senator Hoeven. You can comment about whether
or not you think it is a good idea that men would no longer
have to wear all this attire.
Senator Hoeven. Well, I will tell you, it would be great if
we didn't have to wear ties and that would be a good start.
The Chairman. Alright, we are getting there. I have already
got Senator King----
Senator Hoeven. I am kind of on board here with you. I like
that kind of tieless thing that would open the collars, would
help a little bit in terms of the heating and cooling.
The Chairman. You guys would be able to think better, you
know, you don't have----
Senator Hoeven. I agree with that.
The Chairman. Yes.
Senator Hoeven. Yes.
The Chairman. Go ahead.
Senator Hoeven. Totally.
Thanks, Madam Chairman.
Ms. Layke, in your testimony, I think you referenced the
All-of-the-Above Federal Building Energy Conservation Act that
I am working on with Senator Manchin, the Ranking Member of
this Committee, which would repeal the unworkable ban on
natural gas and fossil energy used in federal buildings and
then replace it with a commonsense efficiency approach. We have
included that in legislation that the Chairman is working on
which we hope to pass.
Can you elaborate on why the fossil fuel ban has been
unworkable and how it actually runs counter to achieving
greater energy efficiency in federal buildings?
Mr. Layke. WRI has done analysis on the ability to use and
create renewable natural gas over time and using excess
renewable energy that could be used for natural gas. An
outright ban on natural gas, at this juncture, may foreclose
options that are needed in certain technologies and approaches
that are not yet commercially viable or available.
So we are looking at the long-term and considering options
for how to best create the transition from where we are today
to where we need to be in the future. And sometimes that
requires imagining the stepwise solutions that would allow us
to get there.
Senator Hoeven. Can you speak to how forward-looking energy
intensity reduction targets will drive energy efficiency
improvements in federal buildings and also how those targets
encourage innovation and help reduce operating costs, that kind
of thing?
Ms. Layke. I'm sorry, Senator, can you repeat the question?
Senator Hoeven. Sure.
Talk about how the energy intensity reduction targets will
drive energy efficiency improvements and also stimulate
innovation and help reduce operating costs.
Ms. Layke. Yeah.
There are three things that are really critical.
One is that we continue to measure and monitor our ability
to create the performance levels that we expect, whether that's
in a federal building, whether that's in a school, a hospital
and elsewhere. Allowing for that type of data, the aggregation
and the analysis associated with it, will help us make the
changes that we need to make and make the investments to get
the best returns possible. So first, there's a data and
information requirement and approach.
The second thing that I would offer is that the energy
intensity metric allows you to balance the different types of
energy systems that you have. We've spoken a lot in this
hearing already about the need for system level thinking, and
that may mean that you look at those opportunities to gather
efficiency from different interventions depending on what the
approach is that you're looking at. An Air Force Base may be
quite a different place than a Federal office building or
commercial space.
So energy intensity gives you the ability to manage and
intervene with the most cost-effective and technologically
appropriate solutions.
Senator Hoeven. Thank you.
Mr. Bresette, can you discuss programs such as USDA's Rural
Energy Savings Program, RESP, and tell me a little bit how it
empowers state and local businesses to improve energy
efficiency in rural communities?
Mr. Bresette. Of course, Senator, thank you.
The program that you mentioned is a program that's offered
by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Right now, I think it's
offering about $100 million, about $75 million of those dollars
have been loaned out to rural utilities, and those dollars are
then used to provide low-cost financing to their customers.
It's done using an on-bill line item so the repayment,
rather than getting a separate bill in the mail, the repayment
is made as a line item on your utility bill charge. One of the
principles of on-bill financing as EESI sees it is that those
charges should be bill neutral, so you're always saving more
than what your repayment ought to be. And there's a lot of
flexibility in the program. RESP, in particular, is very
flexible. So we're talking about all of the energy efficiency
improvements that we all know and love in our homes--
insulation, heating and cooling equipment, lighting--but also
potentially renewable energy deployments, electric vehicle
chargers, storage installations. It's a pretty flexible program
so that, you know, investments in the home can be made, sort
of, with a longer, forward-looking perspective.
Senator Hoeven. Good, thank you.
Dr. Motherway, in your testimony you cite an IEA estimate
that maximizing available energy efficiency opportunities could
allow the global economy to double by 2040, which is pretty
remarkable, with essentially the same energy demand as today.
What infrastructure investments, including tangible assets
such as more transmission and distribution lines as well as
digital and smart grid improvements are necessary to achieve
that? So what infrastructure is it going to take to achieve
something?
Both of those, I think, are pretty remarkable. Doubling by
2040 with the same energy demand, I think both of those are
certainly attention-grabbing prognostications, Doctor. And so,
what kind of infrastructure and so forth is it going to take to
do that? Smart grid improvements, something our Chairman talks
about quite a bit.
Dr. Motherway. I think it's a very good question, Senator,
because as I said earlier in this discussion, energy efficiency
of the future is different to the past. It's moving away from a
focus on reducing the energy of any one individual device into
what we've all spoken about in terms of systems efficiency.
And the kinds of technologies you talk about and the kind
of investment you're talking about really creates, what I think
could be, you know, game-changing opportunities to enhance
efficiency in a much more cost-effective way and in a much
faster way than in the past.
So I think that, to be frank, our numbers of doubling the
global economy for the same energy use, if anything, is an
underestimate because that's based purely on technologies that
exist today and that are cost-effective today. So as innovators
around the world come up with new ideas and come up,
particularly in the digital space and in the smart grid space,
that potential is only going to grow.
So I think a focus on that system thinking, particularly in
electricity, thinking about grids, thinking about integrating
supply and demand in intelligent ways so that you're not just
optimizing the end use, but you're optimizing the whole system
as well the future focus should be.
Senator Hoeven. Well, it is certainly going to take some
smart guys and smart gals to develop that kind of smart grid.
Don't you think?
The Chairman. We are working on it.
Senator Hoeven. Indeed. Thank you.
The Chairman. Exciting.
Senator Hoeven. It is interesting, thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Hoeven.
Dr. Motherway, you said earlier that perhaps your regret is
that with all your years of work you haven't been able to make
energy efficiency kind of cool and sexy. Maybe it is in the
technology? I mean, we are all talking about, do you have an
iPhone 10 or an 11, I think I have a 5 or a 2.5 or whatever.
But we talk about what we are able to access on our apps, and
certainly young people are really very focused on the
capabilities that they have at their fingertips now. So maybe
that is how we make it cool. And by making it cool, then you
realize as you are looking at this, I am actually saving money,
I am reducing my carbon footprint. Maybe this technology's time
could not come until we could do this in a very smart and
technologically advanced way.
I wanted to ask a question to you, Ms. Layke, and this is
regarding your testimony that the United States is number ten
in terms of where we stack up in leadership on energy
efficiency--Italy, Germany and France are in the top there.
When we look to the good ideas in other places, what are these
nine countries ahead of us doing that we could look to and
adapt? Is there anything that stands out to you?
Ms. Layke. Thank you for the question, Madam Chair.
There are three areas that really drive the energy
intensity of any country: the transportation system, as we have
talked about, the industrial infrastructure and the built
environment. Those are the three major categories or areas
where energy is used. Electricity and energy being separable,
some use in primary energy and some use electricity.
But the areas that we see that are driving some of those
countries to the top of the list that the United States still
needs to consider are around our transportation systems.
Transportation emissions are now the largest source of
emissions in the United States, surpassing those of other
areas.
And that transportation efficiency is something we haven't
covered extensively in the hearing today. We'd be happy to
submit additional ideas, but using and leveraging the
electrification of transportation is also something that other
countries are doing more successfully. In Japan, for example,
electric trains. China is using train technology as well. So
there are opportunities for us to think about those.
The second, industry, is that many countries have an
industrial sector that is newer than the United States. Not in
Europe but elsewhere. So China, where the ranking is higher
than ours today, there may be opportunities for us to really
consider how we do industrial upgrades and industrial system
improvements. The Chinese have a younger infrastructure. We
could match that infrastructure if we were making investments
and if our companies and our corporations had incentives and
financing to do so.
The third is around buildings, and we've spoken about
buildings extensively. In Europe, in particular, many of the
labeling and performance certifications that are required there
are enforced and are raised in standard. I think Dr. Motherway
already laid out that those standards are already increasing in
efficiency expectations over time so that builders and others
know what to expect. Ours remain flat and constant and then
have to go through a revision process which then is negotiated
over time. So that incline for efficiency can be built into
policy rather than to be reflective of a certain point in time.
The Chairman. I appreciate that.
Senator King, further questions?
Senator King. Yes, several.
One, I think it is important, it has been mentioned a
couple of times, but funding for innovation is really
important.
I can remember when the height of energy conservation for
lighting was high pressure sodium replacing fluorescent. And I
remember saying to someone at the time, well, that is it. You
know, we are not going to be able to do any better than this.
And now, of course, we have LEDs which use virtually no
electricity. I mean, and that is an amazing change, but it is
based upon innovation. So funding for research and the NREL lab
and those kinds of things are very important, because one big
breakthrough can change the world.
Second, Mr. Tew, you gave some figures that I didn't fully
grasp but sounded important about growth of heating costs or
heating volume and air conditioning last year was 11 and 7.
Could you flesh out was that in the U.S. or worldwide?
Mr. Tew. Yes, that was U.S. numbers based on IEA data. It
was the number of heating days versus cooling days. Last year
in the U.S. one of the few times this has happened, we had a
significant increase in both the number of heating days, 11
percent----
Senator King. Days that heat is required.
Mr. Tew. Days where you need heating.
Senator King. Okay.
Mr. Tew. And almost an equal amount, 11 percent, increase
in the number of cooling days, days you would need cooling or
air conditioning.
Senator King. But what that means is that we are using more
energy to keep ourselves comfortable.
Mr. Tew. Correct. Exactly.
Senator King. We are moving away from the mean.
Mr. Tew. Correct.
Senator King. I think that is very important data. I was
not aware of that data.
Finally, speaking of data, I think there is a huge energy
potential in making data available. I call it the Prius effect.
When you drive your Prius and you can see that you are doing 80
miles per gallon instead of 40, you adjust your driving. It is,
sort of, a contest with yourself. Just having that information,
I believe, is equal to about ten percent of energy savings.
So there is tremendous potential. If you had a screen in
your kitchen that showed exactly what was going on in your
house in terms of your hot water heater, your furnace, your air
conditioning and to your point, if you turn your air
conditioning down one or two degrees, what does that do?
I think people, if they have that information, they will
act on it now, you know, they have this vague feeling if I turn
it down a little, I will save a little.
But I think technology that will give us, and it is all
there--smart meters and those kinds of things. I think that is
a technique, Madam Chairman, that I think would just, giving
people the information about how much energy they are using and
how their decisions affect the amount of energy that you are
using.
You are all nodding. I presume that means assent.
Alright, thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Senator Cortez Masto.
Senator Cortez Masto. Let me just make a comment, because I
actually agree. And I am glad you brought up smart
transportation because that is something we haven't talked
about and it is something I have been pushing as well with this
idea that with the internet connectivity of things, this new
technology is going to benefit our transportation through our
communities, getting more people access, but at the same time
we are going to be able to utilize the technology to bring in
electric vehicles, electric buses, the infrastructure, charging
stations, everything that is needed for this new technology.
I actually had a regional transportation commissioner in
Southern Nevada put it this way. She said this new technology
for transportation is the asphalt of the future. It really is.
I will just reiterate something my colleague just said is
that data is important for this generation. I think this is a
way to make it sexy for them is they like this data. They like
to show that they are being energy efficient.
We actually have smart transportation systems in parts of
Nevada. One of them is you can pull a car up to a street light
and your data on your car will actually read when it is going
to turn red. And the intent is to give that person that is
behind the wheel a little comfort knowing that pretty soon it
is going to turn red or green or red or green and I can go
because the data is important and data information is important
for so many different reasons. And I think there is a benefit
to that.
So that was my only comment.
Thank you. This is a great conversation today, and I really
appreciate all of you being here.
The Chairman. Yes, it really was.
I want to ask one final question and this goes back to the
financing aspect of it because, again, as innovative and
interesting and cool as it may be, if folks can't afford it up
front they just, kind of, look with some amount of envy at
okay, maybe one day I will be there. The ways that we could
help facilitate access, I think, is going to be important.
I appreciated the conversation about the on-bill financing.
I don't remember which one of you mentioned, you know, within
Senators Shaheen and Portman's bill we have the SAVE Act there.
We have the loan guarantee program. Are there other financing
policies that, in your opinion, DOE should be looking to as we
talk about their efficiency efforts?
And then, I wanted to ask on that, on the on-bill
financing, in my home state we recognize that the
Weatherization Assistance Program has been extraordinarily
invaluable to families, but it, again, has that upfront cost
that can be prohibitive for so many. Do you think the on-bill
financing would work, would have application to that program as
well as something that we could look to? But what else within
DOE might we do other than loan guarantee?
Mr. Bresette.
Mr. Bresette. Thank you, Senator, Madam Chairwoman.
Yes, I think that's right and especially in a place like
Alaska where there's, you have, like I mentioned, oil and
resistance heat. You can use the financing that's provided by
on-bill to provide capital for equipment replacements and then
you always want to do your weatherization measures whether
that's funded by the Weatherization Assistance Program or
whether it's financed at a market rate by a local contractor,
you always want to do air sealing, duct sealing and insulation.
Those are the three things you always want to do in addition to
making an equipment replacement.
Weatherization has served about seven or a little bit more
than seven million homes. But the need of weatherization is
much, much more than that, tens of millions of homes are
qualified for weatherization. And frankly, the appropriations
are not where they need to be. There are weatherization
authorization bills that are before Congress, including one, I
believe, that passed out of this Committee a few months ago.
It's an incredibly important program. One thing that
weatherization does as well is it really encourages a local
network of contractors who are qualified to make these
improvements. So you have what weatherization does, yes, it
makes improvements to peoples' homes, but it also ensures that
in pretty much everywhere in the country, there's a cadre of
people who are qualified to make those improvements and quality
installation is very, very important.
With respect to other things DOE could do, we always want
to give a shout out to the State Energy Program. A lot of
really remarkable innovation is done in state energy offices.
And especially since the stimulus of 2009 to 2012, a lot of
state energy offices have looked very carefully at financing.
How do we leverage private capital? How do we craft programs?
How do we work with partners to reach underserved communities
or multifamily buildings or segments of the building sector
that might be a little bit difficult to reach with, sort of,
traditional programs?
So I think increased support for state energy programs,
weatherization, are two good examples of things you could do
that would have, sort of, a positive tangential effect on
financing availability.
The Chairman. Dr. Motherway.
Dr. Motherway. Thank you, Chair.
And I think the focus on finance is absolutely correct and
when you look around the world there are some interesting
innovative policies emerging in terms of some countries are now
using bulk procurement to drive down the cost of innovative
technologies. Some countries are wrapping up the financing with
the wider deployment at a community scale. So they're trying to
not treat every upgrade as an individual project which can be
more expensive but maybe get neighborhoods to work together.
And as I mentioned earlier, I think public sector
leadership is often very strong here because it can be the
first mover to show what can be done.
When I see finance fail to solve the problem, it's usually
when it's done in too much isolation and assuming that if all
that you do is make financing available, then things will work.
But then, things like training of the installers, helping
people make the right choices, making sure the right
technologies are coming on to the market. It needs to be done
in that wider sense where finance is an absolutely essential
ingredient but won't solve the problem on its own. And that
kind of wider capacity building, market development work,
really is a key to success, I think.
The Chairman. That is a good point. That is a good point.
I am reminded. I mentioned earlier the Cold Climate Housing
Research Center that we have in Alaska. It has made just a
tremendous, tremendous difference with regards to building more
energy efficient homes in Alaska and pioneering some
technologies that, we think, are really, really cool.
Part of the challenge that they are facing right now as a
non-profit is reaching outside audiences, yet for the Arctic
nations who deal with cold climate, having this level of
expertise and knowledge shared with them is extraordinarily
important.
When I asked the question about how, what are other
countries doing that we can learn from? You know, making sure
that places like Cold Climate Housing are able to reach that
broader audience, making sure that the technologies that we can
put in place in cold places can be equally applicable in hot
places, as you, kind of, think about, okay, what is the inverse
here? But making sure that this information is shared. The
financing is absolutely key, but as you point out there are
other things. How do we make sure that others know about it?
How do we make sure that we've got the training, the technology
sharing?
So this has been, as I anticipated it would be, a
fascinating discussion. I think we recognize that this is one
of those areas that, boy, if there was ever any area in the
energy space that should be bipartisan, it is like, why
wouldn't it be efficiency?
In my view, it is probably the most conservative of
policies. Don't use something, right?
[Laughter.]
How we build on this is so important. And again, the
opportunity to focus on it, not only in our country, but
recognizing that we have a big Earth here that we are all
paying attention to and making sure that everyone is learning
from this is important.
I appreciate the opportunity to have this discussion today.
If there are other bright ideas that any of you have that you
would like the Committee to consider, please, please, let us
know because we want to try to do more.
I don't like the fact that we are sitting here at number
ten in terms of world leadership when it comes to efficiency.
Has this been pointed out?
It should be the easy things. We should not see this trend
going down for us right now. I want to figure out how we get
going back to a better place. So we will work on that with your
assistance.
To my colleagues, know that this will continue to be an
important focus for me and for us on the Committee.
With that, the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:48 a.m. the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]