- IMPLEMENTATION OF FINCEN'S CUSTOMER DUE DILIGENCE RULE--REGULATOR PERSPECTIVE
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
IMPLEMENTATION OF FINCEN'S CUSTOMER
DUE DILIGENCE RULE_REGULATOR PERSPECTIVE
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON TERRORISM
AND ILLICIT FINANCE
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MAY 16, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services
Serial No. 115-92
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
31-456 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES
JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina,
MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Vice Chairman
Member
PETER T. KING, New York
CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California
NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL POSEY, Florida
MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan
STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin
DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
AL GREEN, Texas
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina
KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
ANDY BARR, Kentucky
JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania
BILL FOSTER, Illinois
LUKE MESSER, Indiana
DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine
JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
MIA LOVE, Utah
DENNY HECK, Washington
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
JUAN VARGAS, California
TOM EMMER, Minnesota
JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
RUBEN KIHUEN, Nevada
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
TED BUDD, North Carolina
DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana
Shannon McGahn, Staff Director
Subcommittee on Terrorism and Illicit Finance
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico Chairman
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina,
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado, Ranking
Vice Chairman
Member
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania
CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
LUKE MESSER, Indiana
JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
BILL FOSTER, Illinois
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine
JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
MIA LOVE, Utah
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
JUAN VARGAS, California
TOM EMMER, Minnesota
JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
RUBEN KIHUEN, Nevada
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
TED BUDD, North Carolina
DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on:
May 16, 2018.................................................
1
Appendix:
May 16, 2018.................................................
23
WITNESSES
Wednesday, May 16, 2018
Blanco, Kenneth A., Director, Financial Crimes Enforcement
Network........................................................
3
APPENDIX
Prepared statements:
Blanco, Kenneth A............................................
24
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
Pearce, Hon. Stevan:
Statement for the record from the Consumer Bankers
Association................................................
29
Statement for the record from the Credit Union National
Association................................................
31
Statement for the record from the Independent Community
Bankers of America.........................................
33
Blanco, Kenneth A.:
Written responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Budd........................................
35
IMPLEMENTATION OF FINCEN'S CUSTOMER
DUE DILIGENCE RULE--REGULATOR PERSPECTIVE
----------
Wednesday, May 16, 2018
U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Terrorism
and Illicit Finance
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:01 p.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Stevan Pearce
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Pearce, Pittenger, Rothfus,
Tipton, Williams, Hill, Emmer, Zeldin, Davidson, Budd, Kustoff,
Hensarling, Perlmutter, Maloney, Foster, Kildee, Sinema,
Vargas, Gottheimer, Kihuen, and Lynch.
Chairman Pearce. The subcommittee will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time. Members of the full
committee who are not members of the Subcommittee on Terrorism
and Illicit Finance may participate in today's hearing, and all
members will have 5 legislative days within which to submit
extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in the record.
This hearing is entitled, ``Implementation of FinCEN's Customer
Due Diligence Rule--Regulator Perspective.''
I now recognize myself for 3 minutes to give an opening
statement.
I want to thank everyone for joining us today. Today's
hearing will examine the implementation and enforcement of
FinCEN's (Financial Crimes Enforcement Network) customer due
diligence (CDD) rule, along with its compliance requirements
for financial institutions. Last week, the customer due
diligence rule went into effect, capping a 6-year effort by
FinCEN to address shortcomings in our anti-money laundering
(AML) and countering terrorist financing (CTF) regulatory
regime.
I want to applaud FinCEN for their work in this area. As
Chairman of the Terrorism and Illicit Finance Committee, I have
heard testimony from a variety of experts in the field of
detecting and pursuing criminals in the financial system. Many
agree that a critical component of success in these
investigations is law enforcement's timely access to beneficial
ownership information of shell corporations being used to
further criminal endeavors. The CDD rule requires covered
entities, including banks, brokers, or dealers of securities,
mutual funds, and futures commission merchants to identify and
verify any beneficial owner who, directly or indirectly, owns
25 percent or more of the equity interest in a legal entity,
along with a single individual who exercises control over the
legal entity at the time of account opening.
Although we agree on the importance of this information,
there are legitimate concerns about the application of this new
rule and the impact it will have on financial institutions. As
the GAO reported in February, banks in the southwest border
regions are derisking specifically because of concerns with BSA
compliance. Adding additional requirements will likely increase
this occurrence and cut business off from the financial system.
Outstanding questions also remain for institutions that are
working to ensure compliance with the CDD rule, including what
an appropriate risk-based approach to collection entails. I
look forward to the Director's opinion on these issues.
Today's hearing is an opportunity to discuss the
implementation and enforcement of FinCEN's CDD rule and the
impact it will have on our financial institutions. I hope our
members will take this opportunity to learn from our witness
about the benefits of collecting beneficial ownership
information and how FinCEN plans to work with bank examiners
and financial institutions to implement and appropriately
enforce the CDD rule.
I would also like to thank Director Blanco for being here
today. I look forward to his expert testimony.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Perlmutter for 2 minutes.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Blanco, thank you for being here. Thank you for your
service.
The lack of transparency in our financial system has
created an environment where criminals who should be shut out
of the financial system can use anonymous shell companies to
launder money, finance terrorism, and engage in other illegal
activities.
In the last few years, high-profile leaks, such as the
Panama Papers and Paradise Papers, have highlighted this tactic
and the need for Congress and agencies to address beneficial
ownership and financial transparency. FinCEN's customer due
diligence rule seeks to take an important step in requiring
beneficial ownership information and preventing criminals from
hiding from law enforcement through anonymity. I look forward
to your testimony on the implementation of this new rule and
our discussion about how FinCEN and this subcommittee can
continue to improve our anti-money laundering system and reduce
illicit finance.
Obviously, some of the banking institutions that we hear
from, from time to time feel that this puts a little additional
burden upon them, and we have had complaints about that. But I
think, from a law enforcement point of view, the need to know
who owns a particular entity is very critical, and so we want
to hear about the benefits and the burdens of this rule.
And I thank you today in advance for your testimony.
Chairman Pearce. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Pittenger for
2 minutes for an opening statement.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Perlmutter, for holding this hearing today.
I would also like to thank our distinguished panelist, Mr.
Kenneth Blanco, for his testimony to our subcommittee this
afternoon.
As the Director of the Financial Crimes Enforcement
Network, commonly known as FinCEN, his division is responsible
for the enforcement of the customer due diligence rule, which
went into effect May 11th.
Last month, this committee's Subcommittee on Financial
Institutions, of which I am also a member, heard from legal and
issue-area experts on financial institution perspective.
I am looking forward to Mr. Blanco's testimony on the
regulatory perspective and hearing his thoughts on how we can
encourage information sharing while still providing banks
clarity and not placing additional burdens on their customers.
Banks value legal compliance, but especially midsize banks
value their customers' experience. We must ensure FinCEN is
providing banks with adequate information to ensure their
compliance, that there is no unintentional noncompliance.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman Pearce. The gentleman yields back.
Today, we welcome the testimony of Mr. Ken Blanco. He is
the Director of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network,
FinCEN, in the U.S. Department of Treasury. Mr. Blanco joined
FinCEN in 2017, after serving as the Acting Assistant Attorney
General of the Criminal Division at the United States
Department of Justice.
During his tenure with the Criminal Division, Mr. Blanco
oversaw a number of its sections, including the Money
Laundering and Asset Recovery Section, formerly the Asset
Forfeiture and Money Laundering Section, the Narcotic and
Dangerous Drug Section, the Organized Crime and Gang Section,
the Childhood Exploitation Section. Mr. Blanco has supervised
many of the Criminal Division's most significant national and
international investigations into illicit finance, money
laundering, Bank Secrecy Act, and sanctions violations,
including the investigation of global financial institutions
and money service businesses.
Mr. Blanco joined the Department of Justice almost two
decades ago as an Assistant United States Attorney in the
Southern District of Florida. Prior to joining the Department
of Justice, Mr. Blanco began his career at the Miami-Dade State
Attorney's Office, where he served in various sections,
including the Organized Crime Section, Public Corruption
Section, and the Major Narcotics Section. Mr. Blanco earned his
J.D. from the Georgetown University Law Center, where he also
currently teaches as an adjunct professor of law.
You will be recognized now for 5 minutes to give an oral
presentation of your testimony.
Without objection, your written statement will be made part
of the record.
Mr. Blanco, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF KENNETH A. BLANCO
Mr. Blanco. Thank you, Chairman Pearce, Ranking Member
Perlmutter, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me to appear today on behalf of the Financial Crimes
Enforcement Network, FinCEN, to discuss our efforts to
safeguard our Nation's financial system, by increasing
transparency through the implementation of our customer due
diligence, or CDD, rule. I have prepared a written statement
that I would like to submit for the record, Chairman.
Prior to my appointment as the eighth Director of FinCEN
just a few months ago, I had served for almost three decades as
a prosecutor in both State and Federal offices and, for the
last decade, at the highest levels of the Department of
Justice. Over those three decades, I saw firsthand the
importance and power of our financial system and the need to
keep it safe and secure.
I appreciate the opportunity today to discuss how the CDD
rule and its compliance requirements for financial institutions
advances our mission of keeping our financial system secure,
our Nation safe and prosperous, and our communities and
families safe from harm.
The reach, speed, and accessibility of the U.S. financial
system make it attractive to criminals, terrorists, state
actors, and other bad actors. In response, we have developed
and rigorously enforce one of the most effective AML/CFT
regimes in the world. Nevertheless, as strong as our AML/CFT
framework is, bad actors will continue to exploit its
vulnerabilities to move their illicit proceeds undetected
through legitimate financial channels in order to hide, foster,
and expand the reach of their criminal and terrorist
activities.
The misuse of legal entities to disguise illicit activities
has been a key vulnerability in the U.S. financial system. This
is not breaking news. Corporate structures have facilitated
anonymous access to the financial system for criminal
activities and terrorism. Transnational organized crime
syndicates, rogue states, human traffickers, terrorists, and
other bad actors have been able to establish shell companies
and then open accounts in the names of those companies without
ever having to reveal who ultimately stands to benefit, masking
their identities, hiding in the shadows, and making it
difficult for law enforcement to pursue investigative leads and
for financial intelligence units like FinCEN to generate those
leads in the first place, putting our Nation and our people at
risk.
An open and transparent financial system in which we can
identify the transactions and account owners is, therefore,
essential to disrupting and dismantling criminal and terrorist
networks that seek to exploit our system and do us harm.
For these reasons, FinCEN and the Department of Treasury
have prioritized increasing transparency in corporate formation
and have strengthened regulatory requirements regarding
customer due diligence for legal entity customers when they
open accounts at financial institutions.
FinCEN finalized a CDD rule on May 11, 2016. The CDD rule
was the result of extensive and thoughtful engagement with
industry and with other stakeholders, notice and comment,
hearings and other discussions over many years about the
benefits of the rule as well as its potential burdens.
The CDD rule clarifies and strengthens customer due
diligence requirements for covered financial institutions by
streamlining and standardizing existing regulatory requirements
and adding a new requirement for these financial institutions
to know and verify the identities of the actual people who own,
control, and profit from companies, also known as beneficial
owners.
The CDD rule advances the purpose of the Bank Secrecy Act
by making available to law enforcement vulnerable information
needed to disrupt financial networks and other criminal
organizations and terrorist networks. This, in turn, increases
financial transparency and augments the ability of financial
institutions and law enforcement to identify the assets and
accounts of criminals and national security threats. It also
facilitates compliance with sanctions programs and other
measures to cut off financial flows to these bad actors.
I understand that this committee has been interested in the
readiness of both industry and government regarding the CDD
rule's implementation. To that end, I can report that FinCEN
has been working collaboratively and regularly in ongoing
discussions with our regulatory counterparts and industry to
ensure a common understanding of consistent compliance
standards within and across regulated industry sectors. This is
especially important when we issue a new rule. We understand
and we appreciate that there will be a period of fine-tuning
for compliance industry, with the examination process itself,
both of which will take time. And we know that new questions
often emerge when implementation begins.
The purpose of the rule is to enhance AML/CFT, not to serve
as a vehicle to punish financial institutions. We are committed
to continue working with our partners, agencies, and industry
to ensure that covered financial institutions are also
implementing the rule effectively, in a way that makes
practical sense, and we understand that it won't happen
overnight. In the meantime, we encourage our financial
institutions to alert their examiners and us and to share their
issues and concerns.
Chairman Pearce, Ranking Member Perlmutter, I look forward
to answering your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Blanco can be found on page
24 of the appendix.]
Chairman Pearce. Thank you, sir.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
And so I guess one of the key things is if you have any
information on the cost-benefit analysis. In other words, there
are lots of speculation on how much this is going to cost our
banking system. So do you have that information?
Mr. Blanco. Chairman, I don't have the specifics as far as
the numbers. We can get you those numbers with respect to the
cost-benefit and how much that is going to cost.
I can just tell you, Chairman, through my experience of 29
years in law enforcement, the benefits are really important and
critical to law enforcement, and I think very critical to the
financial institutions in order for them to be able to do their
due diligence as we move forward.
The information, I have only been at FinCEN for 4 months. I
can tell you the information that we collect from the financial
institutions and the way we use it is critically important for
our mission.
Chairman Pearce. OK. On the southwest where New Mexico
lies, there are reports of how there is something like 80
percent of the banks have chosen just to eliminate accounts for
people who might draw too much attention, so derisking.
So how do you approach that problem when you are talking
about this further requirement?
Mr. Blanco. Chairman, I don't think this further
requirement is going to exacerbate any of the derisking that is
happening on the southwest border. What we plan on doing is
talking with those banks and industry in that area to see if we
can come up with any solutions to those issues that they are
seeing.
I can tell you we have an outreach program at FinCEN that
is very robust, where, in fact, this morning, I met with the
Florida Bankers Association. So we are listening to their
comments and understanding what they have, but I don't think
that the CDD rule is going to do anything to further what is
happening on the southwest border.
Chairman Pearce. Now, there are people that are critics of
this CDD rule, and then our attempt to quantify in law the same
concept, who declare that the information is readily available
right now, that the IRS has the information.
Did you look at other agencies, other less-intrusive ways
if this is intrusive? Tell me a little bit about that.
Mr. Blanco. I can tell you, Chairman, that with respect to
the information that the IRS receives, that is very different
information, and the way to get the information is much more
difficult than what we are proposing.
Having been on the other side and being a prosecutor trying
to get that information, you would have to get a court order to
get the IRS information, first of all, which takes time, and it
defeats the purpose of your AML risk assessment.
In addition, the information that is contained in the IRS
records are very different. It is not as specific as the
information that we are looking for. It is a little different.
It doesn't specifically go to equity owners, and it doesn't
specifically go to what we have as a control prong for
beneficial owners.
It is a very different standard, much more simple than what
we are asking for. It doesn't really get to the point of who
actually owns and who actually controls the entity that we are
looking at.
Chairman Pearce. That question of who actually has the say-
so over the company is one that has drawn questions also. The
language I think says that anyone who has significant input or
whatever the language is. How are the banks to interpret who
actually has that input? What guidance can you give them?
Mr. Blanco. In the guidance that we have provided through
the FAQs (frequently asked questions) that we provided, both a
year ago and just recently, it is pretty clear that somebody
who has some decisionmaking, whether it is in a control
position, somebody who has a stake in the corporation as far as
making decisions, that is really what we are looking for. Who
maintains the actual control, or do they have a decisionmaking
process within the company? That is what we are looking at.
And if you look at the IRS, what they ask for, it is
somebody who has some responsibility, which is very different,
and that is more of a mushy standard. We are looking for
somebody who has control, makes decisions. That is what we are
looking for.
Chairman Pearce. Now, there have also been statements that
this is going to be very onerous to the small businesses. Tell
me a little bit about what you visualize the form looking like
that the banks are going to get filled out.
Mr. Blanco. Chairman, we have a form that is attached to
our website that they can take a look at. I have a copy of it
here. We are happy to give you a copy. It really is very
simple, and it asks for very simple things.
It asks for, on the customer side, the name, legal entity,
the address, ZIP Code, the name of the person who is the
customer. Then it goes into who is the equity owner. Who are
they? Is there anybody who has 25 percent? If so, you have to
list who they are: Name, address, social security number if
that exists, or foreign identification number if that exists as
well.
They could also, if they wish, get a copy of the driver's
license. It doesn't have to be the actual driver's license that
they have to see; it could be a photocopy. And then it goes
into the control prong, and that is an individual with
significant responsibility for managing or directing the
entity.
It is a very simple form. They don't have to use this form.
Banks can use their own form, consistent with whatever software
or products that they are using, as long as it has that
information in it, four or five key points. That is all we are
looking for. It is very simple.
Chairman Pearce. My time has expired.
I would recognize the gentleman from Colorado, Mr.
Perlmutter, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thanks, Director.
And I like terms like ``mushy,'' so we will get to the
mushy in a second. But, the debate for us is whether it is most
of lower Manhattan coming down or the Murrah Building in
Oklahoma City or some terrible act. We want to try to stop
those things. And so the cost of those are enormous, if
calculable at all. The costs of the compliance certainly are
there.
Between the chairman, Mrs. Maloney, Mr. Hill, we have
talked about secretaries of State. We have talked about the
IRS. We have talked about the lawyers. We have talked about the
bankers. Somebody has some responsibility to help you, as the
head of FinCEN and the FBI and elsewhere, have good information
that stops some terrible act that harms Americans.
So let's just go back to basics. How prolific, how often,
in your experience as a law enforcement agent, have you seen
shell companies come into play to hide bad actors?
Mr. Blanco. All the time.
Mr. Perlmutter. So explain that.
Mr. Blanco. It is not a secret, it really isn't. Even when
I was a young prosecutor at the State's attorneys' offices and
we were doing financial crimes, people would hide behind shell
corporations all the time. Yes, eventually you might find out
who owns it, maybe.
That time expended in trying to figure that out and the
hoops that you have to jump through, by that time those
criminals have already left and gone and either defrauded the
elderly person who they were defrauding or committed whatever
act they are going to commit, transferred the drug money if
they had it to transfer drug money, or took their human
traffickers and already sold them into human trafficking. They
are done.
What this does for us is, even if the information that is
provided to us is false--let's just assume that, because I have
heard that. People say, ``Well, Ken, how are you going to get
them to provide you truthful information? The fact that they
are providing false information to us is a key indicator of who
you are dealing with at that point. And it gives you a lead of
how you should be investigating these people, and it is a red
flag.
But let's just assume the information is correct, which I
think much of it will be. It gives you leads. The time you are
saving in doing your investigation is exponential. For example,
a terrorist act, and many of you may understand this, we have a
group that responds 24/7. They come into the FinCEN office. We
run names. We run numbers. We run phone numbers. We run
corporations.
Without the beneficial ownership information, it takes a
lot more time. With that information, both at the time of the
account being opened and, frankly, at the time the business is
incorporated, it is going to be critical for us to respond. It
is about stopping acts before they happen. And this critical
information, which is very simple information, it really is, we
are not asking for a lot here, very simple information that
gives us a heads-up what is going on.
And the--I am sorry; I am talking a lot.
Mr. Perlmutter. So my question was: You talked about at the
formation of the company. How often do you update this through
your particular rule? Is it every month? Is it upon a loan
renewal? Is it a change of somebody who signs the credit card?
What is it?
Mr. Blanco. So those are triggering events that would cause
you then to update it. And that is, we have been having a lot
of conversation with both industry, and we have been having a
lot of conversation with law enforcement. And the way that we
have left it with industry and law enforcement is that, through
your normal AML program, whatever AML program you have, if you
notice that there has been a change event, a triggering event,
that is when you update it.
Triggering events could be all kinds of things. They could
be an extensive money flow that all of a sudden appears in the
bank account. That gives you indication something is different.
A change in ownership, different name being used, a different
account being opened, all those things that are common sense
would cause us to update the beneficial ownership information.
Mr. Perlmutter. So just if I were the banker at that point
and there is a new signer on the account, a signatory on the
account, is that a triggering event? The question I have--and I
think you are on the right track. I am not fighting with you on
this.
And you used the word ``fine-tuning,'' and that is what
this is going to be, but, if I am that banker, every time that
customer walks in the bank, is that a triggering event? And how
often are you expecting stuff from these guys? Because it
sounds like a lot.
Mr. Blanco. Not every time a customer walks in the bank, I
don't think that is a triggering event. But let's just say
there is a new signatory on the account. Yes, I think that is a
triggering event. That is a changed circumstance that you are
going to want to take a look into, and you may want to verify
the beneficial ownership information.
And in our FAQs, we also said, look, you can also just
update the information as long as you get an oral or verbal
confirmation that the information is still correct except there
is a different signator or a change event. It doesn't have to
be a drastic event.
We are not looking for things that are very rogue. We just
want people to think. What would cause them to want to update
the beneficial ownership information? What makes sense? What is
the triggering event?
Like you said, we are going to be working through this with
industry and with law enforcement. We are not using this as a
hammer on anybody. It is not a gotcha game. What we are trying
to do is make sure that we have the right information.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you, and my time has expired.
Chairman Pearce. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair would now recognize Mr. Pittenger for 5 minutes.
And be advised that we just had a vote call. There are 14
minutes left in that. So we will take probably two more rounds
of questions: Mr. Pittenger, and Mrs. Maloney I think would be
the next. So we will try to get those in. Then we will take a
recess for votes and return to the hearing.
So, Mr. Pittenger.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you again, Mr. Blanco. It seems to me that the new
CDD rule makes financial institutions weigh convenience and
customer experience against cost of compliance. Do you think
that is an accurate assessment?
Mr. Blanco. I am sorry, sir. I--
Mr. Pittenger. It makes the financial institutions weigh
convenience and customer experience against cost of compliance.
Do you believe that is a valid and accurate assessment?
Mr. Blanco. Yes, one could assume that is a valid
assessment. I think here, though, when we talk about cost
weighed against a secure financial system, I am not so sure we
are talking about cost.
I think what we are talking about is the financial system
that is safe and secure, that everybody can benefit from,
including the banks and including the customer. And the
customer too also wants a secure financial system so that they
can put their money in a place where they can invest and make
sure that it is safe and secure.
So I know we talk a lot about costs, but I can just tell
you what we are asking for is something very simple. I cannot
imagine it costing too much.
Mr. Pittenger. Yes, sir. Do you think, with that in mind,
that some institutions will opt to derisk some customers due to
the difficulty in understanding the CDD rule or complying with
it?
Mr. Blanco. I hope that does not happen. We are going to
look for that. We take derisking very seriously. We believe
people should have access to capital and access to the banking
system, and we want to make sure that happens. May it happen?
It might. And those are things that we are going to take a look
at and make sure that those things do not happen for the wrong
reasons. They may derisk them for other reasons, but we want to
make sure it isn't because of this.
Mr. Pittenger. Sure. Mr. Blanco, it is my understanding
that the CDD rule will only apply to new accounts opened after
the effective date.
Mr. Blanco. That is correct.
Mr. Pittenger. If that is true, what happens to a financial
institution if they fail to meet the new CDD rule requirements?
Mr. Blanco. So we have spoken with our regulators, and we
have spoken with institutions, our financial institutions, and
we know there is going to be this time period where everybody
is adjusting to it. And all we are asking for is that they have
a good faith effort to comply with it.
We are not using it to ding anybody. We will work with
them. We have fielded hundreds of questions since this came out
in 2016, actually thousands of questions, and we are going to
continue to do that. It is not a gotcha game.
Mr. Pittenger. Yes, sir. With that in mind, would a
financial institution be restricted with their customer
accounts across the entire customer relationship or solely with
respect to the new accounts opened after the implementation
date?
Mr. Blanco. I am sorry, sir. I am having trouble
understanding.
Mr. Pittenger. I understand. Would a financial institution
be restricted with their customer accounts across their entire
customer relationship or solely with respect to the new
accounts opened after the implementation date?
Mr. Blanco. If I understand your question correctly, you
are talking about a customer across their entire relationship
with the bank.
Mr. Pittenger. Versus new accounts opened.
Mr. Blanco. Once they start opening new accounts--and
remember, what we are talking about here are legal entities
that are opening new accounts.
What the financial institution will have to do is make sure
that it corresponds correctly with the other information that
they have on other accounts, yes.
Mr. Pittenger. FinCEN released two sets of FAQs--one in
2016 and then one in the final days before implementation--to
help bring clarity to the CDD ruling. However, these FAQs do
not specify the extent to which a financial institution should
integrate technology changes to the better use of information
it obtains through CDD.
Is there any clear guidance on what to do with the
information once it is gathered and how it should be used to
enhance AML programs?
Mr. Blanco. We can provide better guidance, Congressman.
But I believe, in the FAQs themselves, they talk about where
the information should be stored and how it should be used in
the regular course of their AML/CFT risk assessment. That is
something that they can use in the normal course of how they
review their risk with respect to that one client.
Mr. Pittenger. Then how would or should the information
then be integrated into the transaction, monitoring, or
sanctions compliance programs?
Mr. Blanco. In the normal course, each of the institutions
has their own procedures and policies that they use, and it
should just be done with their normal policies.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Pearce. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair will now recognize the gentlelady from New York,
Mrs. Maloney, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking
Member, for calling this hearing.
And thank you, Director Blanco. I have had a bill in on
beneficial ownership at the request of law enforcement for
quite some time. And I think that the customer due diligence
rule is a huge step forward. I support it, but I also believe
that the responsibility shouldn't be entirely on financial
institutions. Banks should know their customers, but it
shouldn't be this hard to figure out who their customers really
are.
And law enforcement and banks have expressed to me that
they are unable to figure out who these people are. That is why
I have introduced a bill, the Corporate Transparency Act, that
would require companies to disclose their beneficial owners at
the time they are formed, and then financial institutions would
have access--and law enforcement--to that beneficial ownership
information, so that they can assure themselves that these
companies that open accounts with them are not money
launderers, sex traffickers, or other types of criminals. Under
my bill, FinCEN would be in charge of collecting this
beneficial ownership information.
And in your view, should companies be required to disclose
their beneficial owners at the time they are formed?
Mr. Blanco. Yes.
Mrs. Maloney. And is FinCEN capable of maintaining a
database of beneficial ownership information that would be
available to law enforcement and financial institutions?
Mr. Blanco. Congresswoman, if that is what ultimately
happens, we have to keep in mind that we are going to have to
be well resourced in order to do it. If you are asking me today
if we are well resourced to do it, I would tell you it would be
very difficult for us to pull that off.
If, in fact, the ultimate decision is going to be to have
FinCEN house it, then we are going to have to be resourced to
do it, but we can do it.
Mrs. Maloney. Great. Do you think that a bill that would
have FinCEN collecting beneficial ownership information and
then allowing financial institutions to access that information
from FinCEN would complement your customer due diligence rule?
Mr. Blanco. I do.
Mrs. Maloney. Great. And in 2016, FinCEN issued two
geographical targeting orders (GTOs) covering Manhattan and
Miami that required title insurers to collect beneficial
ownership information for any legal entity making all-cash real
estate transactions. And the findings from the first 6 months
were just shocking. FinCEN found that about 30 percent of the
transactions reported involved a beneficial owner or purchaser
that had previously been the subject of a suspicious activity
report (SAR), which is a shockingly high number and strongly
suggests that criminals and other bad actors are using
anonymous shell companies to launder money.
FinCEN's GTOs were then extended last year and also
expanded to include L.A., San Francisco, San Diego, and San
Antonio.
So I have two quick questions: First, has the beneficial
ownership information that you have collected after you renewed
the program continued to be useful for FinCEN? Second, doesn't
this suggest that one of the keys to cracking down on money
laundering and terrorist financing, which is a top concern of
New York, the city I represent, is requiring companies to
disclose their beneficial owners at least to law enforcement?
Mr. Blanco. The answer is yes to both.
Mrs. Maloney. OK. Thank you very much, and I hope we didn't
miss our votes. We have to run. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Pearce. We have 6 minutes left. So the Chair now
places the committee in recess until after the votes.
[Recess.]
Chairman Pearce. The subcommittee will come to order.
We have a couple of members coming in for questions.
Until then, I would recognize myself.
So you talked about implications for bankers and that we
are there to work together; you are just not after gotchas.
What about the people who are filling out the forms, if they
fill them out incorrectly on purpose? Tell me a little bit
about the consequences.
Mr. Blanco. That is a very good question, Congressman. That
actually was a question that I asked myself. Of course, being a
prosecutor, I want to know what the consequences are.
Right now, the consequences are there are no penalty
provisions to the false information given. However, I think it
really depends on what they say. They could be prosecuted for
bank fraud, depending on what information they choose to lie
about, and the consequences to the bank in which lying it. But
right now the consequences are that they will be investigated
probably, but there is no crime with respect to that, at least
that I know of, no penalty provision with respect to the CDD
rule.
Chairman Pearce. So how do they come to the attention, how
do we know that the banks are not gathering the latest
information and that people are submitting bad or improper
information?
Mr. Blanco. I think two ways, Chairman. One way would be
that the banks, through their normal due diligence, would
discover that this information is false information.
It could be that the bank person who is actually doing the
intake of the information will recognize the red flags.
And I think the third way to do it is that law enforcement
themselves, when they run these names, realize that the
information is incorrect. And right there, that is a red flag
that perhaps this legal entity should be looked at or the
individual opening the legal entity, the customer himself or
herself should be looked at.
Chairman Pearce. I would recognize the gentleman from
Nevada, Mr. Gottheimer, for 5 minutes.
I would then recognize the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Davidson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you, Chairman.
And I really appreciate your testimony today, Director, and
I appreciate the opportunity to talk about some of the
rulemaking there. A number of issues have been raised as banks
have attempted to come into compliance with the consumer due
diligence rule. And the frequently asked questions, that have
been issued by FinCEN aiming to clarify the rule, have in some
cases had the reverse effect of complicating and confusing its
requirements.
For example, who should actually be listed as the
beneficial owners that a bank might need to report. It is very
clear when you say 25 percent or greater, but when, for
example, significant influence. And from your previous
testimony, perhaps every time a company updates their org
chart, there might be a trigger to say, ``Gee, we just hired a
new plant manager at one of our facilities; do we have to
update our org chart with FinCEN?'' And then the premise is,
that all the small businesses in America, many of the smallest,
least sophisticated businesses of America are criminals if they
don't keep these forms updated. So it seems the burden is
heavily shifted to law-abiding citizens to somehow keep the
government apprised of their privately held business, instead
of on this organization that we created and asked you to lead
to do the work to find this information out.
I guess, do you believe that some of the same, perhaps even
some complicating factors may arise in terms of how beneficial
owners should be reported? Do you think about the kinds of
businesses that you are asking to comply with this admittedly
simple-to-use form, but at what level in the org chart do I say
this person isn't exercising significant influence over my
business?
Mr. Blanco. Congressman, what the form asks for is just one
individual if we are talking about a control prong. We are only
asking for one person. We are not asking for a litany of people
who may have responsibility or control over the legal--
Mr. Davidson. You just need the CEO?
Mr. Blanco. You could. You could put the CEO. You could put
the controller. You could put a senior manager. It has to have
somebody who has decisionmaking and that is responsible for
making decisions.
Mr. Davidson. You just need a name. You don't need all the
names; you just need a name.
Mr. Blanco. You do not need all the names.
Mr. Davidson. OK. So the other complicating factor is there
are a number of folks that will have issues with the shift in
bases, which is the default is, if a newly created business is
established, the government collects a fair bit of information.
And they don't necessarily collect all this in a way that would
make it easy for FinCEN to access, but in a lot of ways it
seems that it would be easier for us to lower the threshold for
you to obtain this information than to criminalize every
business in America unless they fill out this admittedly easy-
to-fill-out form.
Mr. Blanco. Congressman, we are not criminalizing these
individuals. People are going to make mistakes. We get that.
The question is, are they intentionally falsifying documents to
avoid actually listing who the beneficial owners are?
Mr. Davidson. I understand. And the basis there is to say
that you are going to focus on a certain number of companies.
You are not focused on every small business in America, yet you
make every small business in America fill out the forms. That
is the gap.
So you are heavily focusing on financial institutions, it
seems, and they are charged with enforcing the rule. Do you
believe FinCEN has the technical expertise and capacity to
properly enforce the CDD regime being applied to small
businesses which have never heard of this CDD rule? Or FinCEN,
for that matter.
Mr. Blanco. I am with you on that, Congressman. I think we
can. I think we do have the tools to enforce it. And I think we
are doing a great job of doing outreach also to these small
institutions and other institutions who are covered by this
rule. We are going to do a better job of doing it. We are out
there speaking. This whole hearing, I am sure many of them are
going to be interested in watching it as well. So we are going
to get out there and make sure that there is--
Mr. Davidson. Do you believe the IRS already has enough
information or any other part of the government would already
have enough information if you could just ask them?
Mr. Blanco. No. We wouldn't be doing the CDD rule if we
thought that.
Mr. Davidson. I guess we can disagree on that.
And I think the last thing is just a specific one on CDs.
Every time a certificate of deposit changes, you roll it over.
You might hold it with a bank. It is the same thing. So you
might have, every 90 days, you are updating a certificate of
deposit. It seems like a pretty heavy burden on banks. You are
confident you have the rule right on that?
Mr. Blanco. In fact, today, we are issuing exemptive
temporary relief on instruments just like the CDs that roll
over. We are going to spend more time thinking about them and
what we need to do. And these are for CDs that preexist the
implementation of the rule on May 11th.
Looking into the future, these CD rules, as long as the
information doesn't change--and we leave that for the banks to
tell the customers and the customers must agree: If any of the
information on your beneficial ownership changes, you must
notify us.
So I don't see that that is going to be too much of a
burden moving forward. As you will see today on our website,
and we have noticed it today, that we are issuing temporary
exemptive relief on those that preexist the date of the
implementation.
Mr. Davidson. I think that you feel too much immunity from
the regulatory impact that is being inflicted on America's
economy and America's small businesses.
With that, my time has expired, and I yield, Chairman.
Chairman Pearce. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Lynch for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
your work on this committee.
And thank you, Mr. Blanco, and congratulations. I haven't
seen you since you received your promotion.
Mr. Blanco. Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. I am a big fan of FinCEN, and I am a frequent
flier to FinCEN's offices and a frequent advocate for more
funding for the work that you do and your folks do within
Treasury, although I know there are a lot of competing claims
within Treasury for those resources.
Mr. Blanco. There are.
Mr. Lynch. So I try not to cause too much trouble there.
Mr. Blanco. Thank you for your support.
Mr. Lynch. But suffice it to say we work with your folks
regularly. Everybody up on the committee does, and we really
appreciate the work that you do, and we understand the
relevancy of all the work you are doing.
So among the key findings that FATF had back in 2016, the
Financial Action Task Force, they evaluated our AML, anti-money
laundering protocols, and counterterrorism, counterfinancing
terrorism protocols. And they said that one of the chief
weaknesses was, and I will quote them, ``lack of timely access
to adequate, accurate, and current beneficial ownership
information that created fundamental gaps in the U.S.
context.''
So the new implementation of Customer Due Diligence
requirements, do you think that will be enough to address the
weaknesses that they have identified in our system?
Mr. Blanco. I think it is one step in identifying the
weakness. I think there is another weakness, as most of you
know and talk about, and that is beneficial ownership
information at the point of opening a corporation, of starting
the legal entity itself. That is going to be critical for us to
know and to understand and to use.
Mr. Lynch. Right. The other piece that we are working on
quite a bit--the chairman has put a lot of focus on this--is
cybersecurity within the financial sector. And I have been
thinking this through to try to figure out a way that we might
get the financial services industry to more robustly police
themselves. They are always complaining about overregulation.
If we can get them in as a partner, a willing partner, then it
might be a better result.
But one of the things I have been considering is draft
legislation to establish a financial sector cyber stress test
council. This is unlike the other stress test, which is
governed by FSOC, an external regulator. It would really be
industry-driven, but we would obviously see what they are
doing. But require them to periodically upgrade their system so
that it seems, as the hackers evolve, they find these
weaknesses in our system. And we don't regularly update, so we
are having these repeated failures.
Would something like that help you, in terms of
establishing a standard out there and a level of accountability
that requires continual upgrade periodically? Because that is
what the hackers are doing. They are plus-upping their methods,
and they seem to be able to find that weak link.
Mr. Blanco. One of the priorities I have here at FinCEN--
and I think I might have spoken to you about this--is
cybersecurity and cybercrime, and I think it is going to be
really important for us to get a handle on that, moving
forward. And to your point, it does. It evolves. There has to
be a constant effort to renew what resources we are looking at,
what technology we have, to move ahead of the game.
In fact, I have put somebody in my front office that has
been charged with innovation development and tactical
development moving forward for FinCEN to look at issues just
like that.
Happy to work with your staff on anything that you are
proposing. Happy to have that discussion about it. I can tell
you that we work regularly with industry about this technology.
We were just on the West Coast talking to some of the virtual
currency exchangers about this technology and how we move
forward and the attacks that cyber hackers are doing on
information that we have, but in general the financial system.
Mr. Lynch. So I will work with my Republican colleagues to
see if we can come up with something that is suitable to both
sides, and also reach out to you and to the industry to see if
we can come up with something that is a consensus approach to
this rather than have people have to amend it later on.
Mr. Blanco. Happy to talk to you about it.
Mr. Lynch. Thanks for your great work.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Pearce. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Budd for 5 minutes.
Mr. Budd. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Director Blanco, for joining us today. I
appreciate that.
I want to talk this afternoon about the lack of clarity
surrounding compliance requirements under the CDD rule.
Financial institutions back home are still not entirely sure
what they could potentially be held liable for. In the latest
FAQs on the rule released by FinCEN, while it is helpful, it
still highlighted some issues that need to be addressed.
First, I am curious, in developing the FAQs that were
published on April 3rd, was there any discussion with industry
representatives to understand the potential impact? And let me
give you an example. Question 12 treats the renewal of a CD or
a loan as a new account, which is inconsistent with the
industry's approach. So was there any discussion with industry
on that?
Mr. Blanco. Lots of discussion, Congressman. In fact, today
I issued temporary exemptive relief on that one issue so that
we can have further discussion on it. We have given industry 90
days, exempting them from having to comply with it, so we can
better understand the rule. They have a very sympathetic ear in
me with respect to that, and we will take a look at it. I will
make a decision whether or not we provide permanent exemptive
relief moving forward.
But we have had--I have to tell you, Congressman, one of
the things--and look, I have only been in this job for 4
months, but I have to credit our FinCEN staff who, since 2012,
has really been talking to industry about this and learning
from them.
And we have taken what we have learned, and you will see we
have done seven or eight different tweaks to the rule. We
provided several exemptive reliefs, not only in premium
financing but also on the rollover, automatic rollover accounts
for preexisting accounts.
So we are listening. And I think that they should be happy
about the fact that we are engaging with them regularly.
Mr. Budd. I appreciate your ear toward industry on that. I
want to continue.
The FinCEN FAQs as well as the FFIEC manual update, it
stated that banks still must update beneficial ownership
details when opening multiple accounts. So what is this bank
supposed to do if a customer doesn't respond to calls or emails
or letters to confirm that their information hasn't changed?
Mr. Blanco. So I think that really goes to the bank's risk
assessment and how they use their protocols to make that
determination. I can tell you, Congressman, that what we have
done, both with our Federal regulators and also industry, is we
discuss with them that any time a new rule like this one is
being issued, there is going to be this time period where we
are going to take a look and give people the ability to
implement it without coming and saying, you didn't do this or
you didn't close that account. There is this timeframe where
things need to be worked out, both in the regulatory side and
in the implementation side. We are very mindful of that.
But in the instance that you just talked about, I have to
tell you it certainly is wondering if I am the banker, why you
are not getting back to me. And they have a better risk
assessment of their client than I would, and I think the
regulators will take that into account.
Mr. Budd. I appreciate your thoughts on that. And so do you
expect banks to follow the FinCEN FAQs as if they equate to
regulations or, rather, if it was formal guidance, even though
they were released without industry feedback and a comment
period?
Mr. Blanco. Actually, they were released with industry
feedback. One thing about the FAQs which is really
interesting--
Mr. Budd. Sorry to interrupt. Also, did it have a comment
period?
Mr. Blanco. It didn't have a comment period.
Mr. Budd. Did not have a comment period?
Mr. Blanco. Not with the FAQs, but the rule certainly had a
comment period that lasted for quite a while. If I am not
mistaken I think it lasted for 2 years or more, correct?
But the FAQs, one interesting thing about the FAQs is
before we issue FAQs, there is a lot of discussion with
industry and with law enforcement and with other individual
stakeholders before those FAQs come out.
So it isn't as though industry is seeing those FAQs the day
we publish them. Some of them are, but, for the most part, many
of them have had discussions in panels, in hearings, in
conversations with us, through our call-in line. We have a
call-in line where people can ask questions about the rule.
So a lot of this has already been hammered out before those
FAQs have even come out. And these tricky issues, the FAQ
answers the tricky ones. So you are talking about the ones that
are the most difficult for industry and, frankly, for
regulators too, to understand as we implement the new rule. And
we are working with industry to make sure that we do it right.
Mr. Budd. Thank you very much.
In the time remaining, one question: Finally, is FinCEN
concerned that banks might close accounts if they can't collect
the information, particularly since that would cause FinCEN and
law enforcement to lose that information?
Mr. Blanco. That certainly, Congressman, is something that
we are going to look at and make sure that, if there is a trend
in that way, we will certainly look into it and see why it is
happening and what we can do about it.
You are right: We end up losing valuable information. Also,
people end up losing access to capital, which is not what we
want either. So we will be monitoring that.
Mr. Budd. Thanks for your time, Director.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Pearce. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Hill for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Chairman. Thanks for holding this
hearing.
Mr. Blanco, glad to have you with us today. Thanks for your
work on behalf of law enforcement.
I read in the CDD discussion that the annual cost had a
range that you all have assessed up to around $280 million on
the high end.
How many SARs that FinCEN receives every year would be
directly related to a shell company report from a financial
institution? Would you just hazard a guess?
Mr. Blanco. I think I would probably guess incorrectly.
Given my background, I would say a lot, but I don't want to
give you the wrong figure. We are happy to get back to you.
Mr. Hill. Yes, if you would get back to me on that. So I
know you report the total number of SARs, but if you would tell
me how many SARs relate directly to a bank reporting to you
about a concern over a, quote, ``shell company,'' however the
bank defines shell company.
Mr. Blanco. Yes.
Mr. Hill. From criminal indictments that you have brought
in this arena, how many would turn on a shell company? And how
much money have you recovered from indictments that are
connected directly to a shell company?
Mr. Blanco. So I can tell you, with respect to
investigations that we have done, if they are sophisticated
investigations, multimillion dollar, whether they are fraud
investigations--so we are not just talking about drug
trafficking and human tracking or terrorism. We are talking--
Mr. Hill. But they meet the definition of FinCEN.
Mr. Blanco. Right. We are talking about fraud of elderly.
We are talking about really significant things that affect
people. Almost in every one of those very sophisticated cases,
you are going to have a shell company someplace involved
because that is the way they are laundering their money, and
that is the way they are moving their money, and that is the
way they hide what they do. And you don't have to go too far to
see those kinds of cases. So it depends on the level.
Mr. Hill. Do you think the banks are doing a bad job
collecting that information and reporting it since the Know
Your Customer rules were put in place?
Mr. Blanco. Can I just tell you I think the banks are doing
a great job. I think they are doing their best, and I think
they want to do even more and even better. So I wouldn't say
they are doing a bad job.
I think what we need to do is what we are doing here today:
Having hearings like this, inviting industry, having the
conversation, giving them priorities. These are our priorities,
banks, and this is what we are looking at, together with law
enforcement. I think that would better help the banks.
Mr. Hill. When I think of a tax haven, when I say the word
``tax haven,'' what pops in your head? Name a country.
Mr. Blanco. Congressman, I can't go there. That--
Mr. Hill. Is Panama a tax haven?
Mr. Blanco. The obvious ones. I have done a lot of work in
Panama, and I have done great work with their government. And I
enjoy working with them, and they are dedicated public servants
just like we are. So I wouldn't identify--
Mr. Hill. So would this sentence in the memo that we were
given be hyperbole where it says that the United States risks
being labeled as a money laundering, tax avoidance, and terror
financing haven? Would you say that is hyperbole?
Mr. Blanco. I think there may be some countries that would
say that, but I think that is hyperbole. But--
Mr. Hill. Yes. The Financial Action Task Force said it. So
I find that shocking that an organization that we support would
say that.
Mr. Blanco. One thing, Congressman--
Mr. Hill. Let me keep going. I have limited time. Sorry.
Has Congress asked or has the Treasury Department asked
States for changes in State law that would be best practices
for secretaries of State that they capture name, email address,
address, all the data that you are looking for, for all company
formations by State and make that available online and that it
also contain some State penalty for nonaccuracy or not being
updated? Have you ever called for that, or, to your knowledge,
has Congress ever asked the States to do that in model
legislation?
Mr. Blanco. Not in my recollection. They may have. I
wouldn't know.
Mr. Hill. Would you support that? Would Treasury support
that if the States said a telephone number, email address,
address, and contact person is just a best practice that was
required under their State law?
Mr. Blanco. The devil is always in the details in how it
works out. I think it is something that we can certainly think
about and discuss. I think it is always great to have the
States involved at the corporate formation level, but we can't
make them do it.
Mr. Hill. Yes. So Mr. Davidson asked you a question about
access to information you have or could have under a criminal
investigation. So the SS-4 taxpayer ID number form that the IRS
has and the annual tax reform data, including ownership, is
that data that would be helpful to you in searching for shell
company beneficial owners?
Mr. Blanco. Honestly, Congressman, no. It is different
information.
Mr. Hill. Why?
Mr. Blanco. Because what they are asking for is something
very different. And if you look at their definition of it--
first of all, two things: One is getting the information is
very difficult because you need to get a court order. And
having done that and spent months trying to get one, that
defeats the whole AML purpose. But if you look at the
definition of what they are asking for when they talk about
responsible party, they are not talking about an equity party.
They are not talking about somebody who would benefit from that
legal entity and what they are doing.
They are asking for a responsible person. A responsible
person could be--I am sure the IRS has their own definition of
what a responsible person is, but it is not what we are looking
for. We are looking for somebody who is making decisions, who
has some interest in the corporation, both either on the equity
side or the control side.
Mr. Hill. My time has expired, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman Pearce. The gentleman's time has expired. The
Chair would now recognize Mr. Tipton for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate your
holding this hearing.
Mr. Blanco, thank you for taking the time to be able to be
here.
I would like to be able to follow up on Mr. Budd's
questions just a little bit. We seem to have some evidence
that, in terms of derisking, it has been showing to be able to
push customers from larger institutions into smaller
institutions. Obviously, the bigger institutions have the
financial resources to be able to do the exams, to be able to
handle and have the backup people that are there.
And I guess my question to you is a little bit twofold. Do
you anticipate that the CDD rule and derisking trend is going
to trickle this down to the smaller institutions to the point
to where they may stop offering products and services, getting
people unbanked?
And then, as a little bit of a follow up to that, I think
it was a comment in relation to the CDs being individual new
accounts coming up. You had made the comment that, I think you
said, ``I think the regulators will take this into account.''
So I would like to know if you have had conversations with the
Federal Reserve, OCC, FDIC, and others issuing guidance in
terms of how they are interpreting what you are trying to be
able to develop?
Mr. Blanco. Let me answer the first one on whether it would
trickle down. I don't believe that the CDD rule would trickle
down and have an effect, but it is something that has been
commented on by more than several people, and it is something
that we will monitor.
We want to make sure that we are looking at that very
carefully. And if bank accounts are being closed or denied, we
want to make sure that we understand why that is happening. As
we have done in the last couple of weeks, we are happy to make
tweaks as we go along in this rule. We are not averse to doing
that as the rule becomes implemented and as our Federal
examiners begin doing exams.
With respect to the CD rollover, we have had conversations
with our Federal counterpart regulators, and I think we are all
in agreement that there is going to be this time period where
we are learning how better to do the exams with respect to the
CDD, and we are learning also how industry is beginning to
implement it.
It is not a gotcha game. I think we all agree to that. We
have agreed to work with them as they do their exams and learn
from their exams and maybe participate in some of their exams
as we move forward. I think it is going to be a collective
effort. Nobody here is playing the gotcha game.
What we really want, Congressman, what we really need is
accurate information. That is what we want. That is what we are
looking for. We are not looking to punish the financial
institutions. That is not what we want. There is no value in
that.
Mr. Tipton. I would concur. I think we all want to be able
to achieve the same goal, but just given the industry concerns
that currently are there, I think that it does beg for some
real actual clarity in terms of some of the enforcement that is
going to be going on.
You have just said that we are going to be--it is a work in
process. But I think when we are talking to, and I have a
primary concern for a lot of our smaller financial
institutions, smaller credit unions as well, in terms of some
of the compliance costs in that they are going to be associated
with this. How does that actually play out when they have a
moving target, while they have some enforcement activities, if
they are deemed to have been at fault at some level?
Mr. Blanco. Congressman, I will disagree with you in that
aspect that it is a moving target.
The conversations regarding CD really have gone back all
the way to 2016 when we started talking about these things. And
then it morphed into conversation with industry. We have had
several hearings. In 2012, it came up. In 2016, we issued the
rule. We have had extensive conversations. Congressman, just
recently, in meetings with industry, they all said--I was
approached myself and said: Ken, this thing needs to happen. Do
not delay it anymore. We are ready.
So I think that--and I am very sympathetic to the community
banks and the credit unions. I really am, coming from a suburb
of Miami. I am very sympathetic to it.
We will be watching it, Congressman. They are ready. And I
think they are going to do a great job moving forward. We are
working with our examiners to make sure that they understand
what we are looking for. We are sympathetic to what they are
examining for. Soundness and safety and also AFC--AML/CFT.
It is a work in progress like any new rule or any new
legislation that is passed. You have to work through the
difficulties of how you are going to examine and how you are
going to enforce it. But we are going to be doing it with our
ultimate goal of making sure that we get the right information,
not necessarily hammering people.
But there are going to be some people who frankly, I can
tell, we are all adults here, who feel like they don't have to
comply or they have to comply only when we issue a notice of
exam. That is when, all of a sudden, you see 50, 60 people show
up because now they have a compliance section.
That is not compliance. And that is not complying with the
CDD rule.
Mr. Tipton. I appreciate the efforts that you are making on
it. And I think am actually empathetic to the point of making
sure that we are trying to be able to get it right rather than
just issuing a hard and fast rule. We like to make sure that I,
personally at least, encourage you, when we are looking at some
of the enforcement, we get as much clarity as soon as we
possibly can and then implement some of that flexibility as we
are seeing this work through the various institutions of
different size as well.
So thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Pearce. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Blanco, thank you very much for your testimony. Thank
you for your service and for being here today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:45 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
May 16, 2018
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]