- ANNUAL OVERSIGHT HEARING OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
[Senate Hearing 116-144]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-144
ANNUAL OVERSIGHT HEARING OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON RULES AND ADMINISTRATION
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
NOVEMBER 14, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Rules and Administration
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available on http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-797
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON RULES AND ADMINISTRATION
FIRST SESSION
ROY BLUNT, Missouri, Chairman
MITCH McCONNELL, Kentucky
AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee
DIANNE FEINSTEIN, California
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas
CHARLES E. SCHUMER, New York
RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
RICHARD J. DURBIN, Illinois
TED CRUZ, Texas
TOM UDALL, New Mexico
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
PATRICK J. LEAHY, Vermont
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
CINDY HYDE-SMITH, Mississippi
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
Fitzhugh Elder IV, Staff Director
Lindsey Kerr, Democratic Staff Director
C
O
N
T
E
N
T
S
----------
Pages
Opening Statement of:
Hon. Roy Blunt, Chairman, a U.S. Senator from the State of
Missouri.......................................................
1
Hon. Tom Udall, a U.S. Senator from the State of New Mexico......
2
Lonnie G. Bunch III, Secretary, Smithsonian Institution..........
3
Prepared Statement of:
Lonnie G. Bunch III, Secretary, Smithsonian Institution..........
16
Questions Submitted for the Record:
Hon. Roy Blunt, Chairman, a U.S. Senator from the State of
Missouri to Lonnie G. Bunch III, Secretary, Smithsonian
Institution....................................................
20
Hon. Amy Klobuchar, a U.S. Senator from the State of Minnesota to
Lonnie G. Bunch III, Secretary, Smithsonian Institution........
28
ANNUAL OVERSIGHT HEARING OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
----------
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2019
United States Senate
Committee on Rules and Administration
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in Room
301, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Roy Blunt, Chairman
of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Blunt, Fischer, Capito, Udall, and Cortez
Masto.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HONORABLE ROY BLUNT, CHAIRMAN, A U.S.
SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF MISSOURI
Chairman Blunt. The Committee on Rules and Administration
will be called to order. Good morning. I want to thank my
colleagues for attending, and before I get any further, thank
Secretary Bunch for bringing some of their great collection for
us to look at. Mr. Secretary, we are glad to have you and
several people from your team here to back you up if you need
it, but I am confident you are going to be able to be the man
at the microphone there. This is your first official appearance
before the Senate Rules Committee. We are grateful to have you
with us.
Secretary Bunch's appointment is historic in a number of
ways. He is the first African American Secretary to lead the
Smithsonian Institution, as well as the first museum director
who was later appointed Secretary in at least 75 years. He is a
historian, something that I really enjoy, and he really
understands, so it is a great combination of things. This is
the fourth position that Secretary Bunch has had at the
Smithsonian, something I don't believe any of your predecessors
could claim.
In 1978, Secretary Bunch began his Smithsonian career at
the National Air and Space Museum as an education specialist.
Eleven years later, he joined the National Museum of American
History, and he most recently served as the founding director
of the National Museum of African American History and Culture.
As the founding director, he led an 11-year effort in
constructing that 400,000 square foot museum and helping raise
the matching the public--the private funds that matched public
funds and came up with the museum that tells an incredibly
powerful story of that part of our history and in fact of a lot
of our history.
Congress established the Smithsonian in 1846 through a
bequest by a British Scientist, James Smithson, who never
visited the United States, but he generously left his estate to
the United States Government to found, ``an establishment for
the increase and diffusion of knowledge.'' That ends the quote
from Mr. Smithson's will. Now we are almost 175 years later.
The Smithsonian encompasses 19 museums and galleries, numerous
research and educational facilities, the National Zoo, a
growing collection of 155 million objects and specimens.
Secretary Bunch's years of experience at the Smithsonian
truly do provide a unique perspective to look at the future of
the Smithsonian, and as the newly invested Secretary who has
inherited the responsibility for this vast, unique, unmatched
collection. Of course the Secretary also inherited the
institution's challenges, the aging facilities, a deferred
maintenance backlog totaling $1 billion, and I am sure that is
going to be one of the topics we talk about today. In the last
two decades, the Smithsonian doubled the square footage while
funding remained essentially flat.
Now, under any circumstance, that is not going to produce a
very good result. While doubling, the institution added
incredible capacity to see what Americans count on the
Smithsonian for. It also added a burden that we haven't been
willing to meet of maintenance, and I know that is one of the
things we want to talk to the Secretary about today and one of
the things that he sees is one of his great responsibilities.
When the Secretary started his job, we were in the middle of a
5-year strategic plan or at least of implementing a 5-year
strategic plan created by his predecessor, Dr. Skorton.
I want to discuss with the Secretary his thoughts on that
plan, his vision on how it needs to change as we look now at
the reality of many of the obligations and opportunities that
are out there before us. Mr. Secretary, we are glad you are
here. I want to call on today's Ranking Member, my good friend
Senator Udall, for any comments that you would like to make.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HONORABLE UDALL, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE
STATE OF NEW MEXICO
Senator Udall. Thank you very much, Chairman Blunt, and
thank you for those nice words and introduction. Great to be
with you. You are a good friend and we have really enjoyed
looking at the display there, I think. I am very pleased to be
here this morning to discuss the Smithsonian Institution and
its programs, and to welcome its new Secretary Lonnie Bunch
before the committee for the first time since his appointment.
I am also proud to have the chance to oversee the institution
as both a member of the Rules Committee here and as the Ranking
Member of the Senate Interior Appropriations subcommittee.
In both roles, I have worked to make sure Congress is an
active partner with the Smithsonian Institution and provides
the resources it needs to meet its obligations to advance the
civic, educational, scientific, and artistic life of this
Nation. I can just say I am here sometimes on weekends, and my
wife and I go to many of your museums and it is a marvelous
display for Americans about so many important issues in
American life and issues around the world. I am proud that the
Senate Interior subcommittee has worked to advance an
appropriations bill that provides more than $1 billion. This
also includes new funding increases for security, facilities
maintenance, and $1.7 million in new funding for the Latino
Center.
I look forward to producing a final bill that will give the
institution a strong budget for fiscal year 2020. I welcome the
chance to talk about the opportunities and the challenges of
the--and supporting the great work that the Smithsonian is
doing here this morning and having a discussion about that. We
all know that the Smithsonian requires real investments to keep
its existing museums operating, to expand its collections, to
tell the story of all Americans, and to support the reach of
its research and educational programs across the country.
In particular, I expect we will hear this morning about the
importance of Congress committing the resources needed to meet
the institution's maintenance and capital needs. The capital
requirements clearly need to be a priority, but we will have
the opportunity to talk about the importance of Congress
authorizing new museums to celebrate the history, and Latino
community museums that would recognize and celebrate our
Nation's diverse heritage and whose authorization legislation
enjoys broad bipartisan support.
In my view, Congress should be able to do both things,
support existing infrastructure, and provide an exciting
opportunity for the Smithsonian to expand its footprint to
include these new museums. I look forward to hearing from the
Secretary this morning as we talk about each of these
priorities. Thank you for being here and I would yield back to
the chairman.
Chairman Blunt. Thank you, Senator. Secretary Bunch, your
written statement will be made part of the record, but I would
like for you to have a few minutes to talk about as much of
that or all of that as you want to.
OPENING STATEMENT OF LONNIE G. BUNCH III, SECRETARY,
SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
Mr. Bunch. Thank you very much. Chairman Blunt, Senator
Udall, members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity
to testify today. As you mentioned, my tenure as the 14th
Secretary of the Smithsonian began just this summer. However,
my relationship with the Smithsonian spans many generations it
seems to me. I am pleased and humbled, however, to be the
Secretary of this institution that I love so much.
The Smithsonian appreciates the on-going support of
Congress, the Administration, and the American people, and we
take seriously the role we play in advancing the civic,
educational, scientific, and artistic life of this Nation. Our
collections are vast, representing an incredible scope and
depth of artistic, historical, cultural, and scientific
achievement. We are an internationally respected scientific and
cultural institution that does cutting-edge research in many
disciplines. Our 21 libraries collectively form one of the
world's great repositories of knowledge.
We have an extensive array of educational material that
learners of all ages can access online, in classrooms, and in
our museums. The Smithsonian buildings host millions of
visitors every year. Our facilities provide the foundation upon
which we build our programs, our exhibitions, our research, and
our scholarship. We have been successful at maintaining
building systems well beyond their intended lives, like we have
done at the National Air and Space Museum. But the truth is,
with a deferred maintenance backlog of nearly $1 billion, there
is much work to be done. All of our sites, the museums, the
research galleries, the Zoo, in addition to leased spaces, we
must care for over 13.9 million square feet of buildings. With
a backlog of maintenance issues, we have been reacting to
problems instead of proactively maintaining assets. But since
becoming Secretary, I have looked at the backlog with fresh
eyes.
In order to be more strategic in our approach, I have asked
and directed the staff to begin analyzing projects in a new
way. Rather than simply seeing the totality of our backlog, I
want to analyze our maintenance projects building by building,
system by system. With this approach, we are better able to
communicate our existing priorities, develop a better sense of
where our limited Federal dollars are best spent, and find
opportunities to address maintenance needs as part of our
capital revitalization projects. I believe that addressing our
maintenance backlog is of paramount importance to the future of
the institution.
In their wisdom, Congress and the Administration have
recognized the investment in long term care of our facilities
and have supported steady increases in our maintenance budget.
Many of our museums were built in 1960's through the 80's and
they need revitalization. Funding preventive care will result
in reduced overall levels of maintenance cost causing fewer
breakdowns, save energy, and decrease unplanned closures. The
planning and design funding requested in fiscal year 2020 will
begin to address the future of the Smithsonian Castle and the
Arts and Industries building. These projects represent the core
components of a 20-year plan for the South Mall, a series of
capital projects required after decades of deferred
maintenance.
In addition, our collection has grown, as you have said, to
over 155 million objects. These objects need to be stored,
maintained, cared for, and prepared for research and
exhibition. To most of our visitors, the collections we have
largely define the institution. Therefore, our collections are
a vital national asset, and we are always striving to improve
storage conditions, striking a balance between preserving the
collections and providing access to them. The spaces that house
our collections are not immune from deterioration.
The maintenance of these areas has been deferred to the
point of requiring capital investment. Our Collections Space
Framework Plan outlines a strategy for improving all of our
collections facilities. The Smithsonian's pressing
infrastructure needs, need and demand our immediate attention.
Despite our best efforts, much of our aging infrastructure
continues to be below acceptable standards. We appreciate the
support of Congress in addressing our most visible project, the
renovation of the National Air and Space Museum. But just as
important, we are grateful for the on-going support of the day-
to-day maintenance needs for this institution.
Finally, let me say a few words about my plans and what I
envision to do as Secretary of the Smithsonian. Under my
leadership, our goal is to reach at least 1 billion people
worldwide. I envision a virtual initiative leveraging state-of-
the-art resources and innovative partnerships, allowing
domestic and international audiences to experience our
scholarship, our research, our collections in new and exciting
ways. If we are fully to serve 21st Century audiences, we need
to be more inclusive, more accessible, and more diverse.
A critical part of making the museums more diverse is to
include traditionally under-represented stories, specifically
highlighting the stories of Asian Americans, American women,
Latino, and Asian Pacific Americans is vital to fulfilling our
goal. Under my leadership, we will make diversity in our
collections, in our archives, in our exhibitions, in our work
force, a higher priority. As you know, there are bills to
establish a Latino American and American Women's History
museums pending before Congress. If deemed in the public
interest to move forward with these proposals, it is important
that any additions to the Smithsonian are considered in light
of our existing priorities. A new museum would need funds for
both the creation and long-term operations of the facilities,
the care and preservation of our collections, and of course,
the on-going success of the museum. Our work is also to
increase knowledge is never ending.
As we continue to make new discoveries, we plan to share
them with future generations. Therefore, I plan to reimagine
the Smithsonian's role in lifelong learning by making the
institution a leader in K-12 education. Finally, what I want
is, I want people to see the Smithsonian as a resource to help
them better understand their lives, their universe, their
history and our shared future. It is incumbent upon us to be a
more universal voice, one that earns the American people's
trust in us and leverages the great convening power to increase
our relevance and research. We want to be the place that
matters for all Americans.
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to testify before
you today. I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bunch was submitted for the
record.]
Chairman Blunt. Well, thank you Secretary. As I said
before, we are so delighted you are here and look forward to
the unique set of capacity and ability and understanding you
bring to the Smithsonian. You mentioned that Congress had
provided money for maintenance and I think you were maybe
generous in how you described that but looking at the
maintenance numbers in front of me, we don't seem to increase
that very much. We are sort of about the--from $75.5 million to
$76 million the next year and then a pretty good increase up to
$79 million in the year we just completed.
We are hoping to get to $85.5 million in this budget. That
is your request for this budget. We are not where we ought to
be with getting that appropriations finished. But clearly that
is not doing the job. Why don't you talk a little bit about
your sense that going through every building, looking at the
building systems, looking at building by building requirements,
how you think that will help you prioritize? Am I right in
believing that the number you are working with in deferred
maintenance is right at $1 billion now?
Mr. Bunch. Yes, our deferred maintenance is at $1 billion.
I think that we have got really several important ways to
address this. One is there is always a need to increase the
amount of money we have for maintenance. We do right now about
1 percent of what we--that is what we spend but we really need
to spend at least 2 to 3 percent to be able to not only stop
the backlog but to reduce it. But in the meantime what I
realized is that by being more systematic, we cannot only
understand where the needs are, we can anticipate future needs,
because our goal is to have the knowledge and then to do
several things.
First of all, really utilize the fact that the key to our
success is to use both the maintenance budget and the capital
budgets to be able to do things like we have done with the Air
and Space Museum. By doing the renovation of the Air and Space
Museum, we were able to reduce and really address over $200
million of deferred maintenance at the Air and Space Museum. We
want to look creatively about how we bring together our capital
projects needs with the deferred maintenance. But also, I think
one of the keys thats clear to me is that we need to spend our
time, focus our attention, on preventative maintenance.
I think we want to make sure that by looking more
systematically, we can anticipate what issues we may be able to
defer based on actually doing preventative maintenance on that.
My hope is that we will continue to grow our budgets. We are
going to need your support to do that. We are going to be much
more systematic and prioritize what we need to do. Then to
really just make sure that we are using every opportunity we
can to leverage the resources to address that backlog.
Chairman Blunt. I would assume, hearing you explain that,
that there are some places where addressing one problem
prevents the second problem from either occurring or getting
worse. An HVAC system that is not working can create all kinds
of other problems in the building. Is that the kind of thing
you are looking at?
Mr. Bunch. Exactly. If you look at for example, as we think
about what we need to do with the Castle and Arts and
Industries, if we can create a central utility system that
services all that, it solves a lot of problems, it makes it
easier for us to maintain. We are looking at how to be more
creative, how to really use the best technology to come up with
solutions to the problems we will face.
Chairman Blunt. Am I right in the Castle and the space
there, the display, the space there--because of the HVAC
system, you are really not able to use that space for what it
was designed for?
Mr. Bunch. I think what we have to do with the Arts and
Industries building especially--that is a building that we
spend a lot of money to stabilize. The exterior is strong. The
roof is good, but there is millions of dollars that need to go
into turning that into a space that is usable for the public.
While we for example use that space for my installation, we
really are going to have to do new systems.
We are going to have to fit out the spaces, so it works for
the general public. In essence part of the challenge of the
master plan is to look at both the whole notion of the Castle
as well as the Arts and Industries, and how we use those better
to serve not just as office space but serve our visitors and
our public.
Chairman Blunt. Great. I am sure we will have time for a
second round of questions and Senator Udall also is the ranking
member on the authorizing committee so you can get a couple of
double strokes in here today by talking about the authorizing
issues and not just looking at those as appropriating issues.
Senator Udall.
Senator Udall. You know, and we worked together on the
Appropriations Committee. He is a cardinal. I am just a
cardinal in waiting. But Chairman Blunt, with your permission,
I would allow--Senator Cortez Masto has another hearing so I am
going to allow her to proceed with her questioning at this
point.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman and
Ranking Member. I appreciate the opportunity. Obviously, I have
similar concerns about the maintenance backlog. We want to do
whatever we can to assist and give you the resources you need
to address that. I do want to talk and ask a question about,
you talked about having 155 million objects? Is it a million?
Mr. Bunch. 155 million.
Senator Cortez Masto. Yes. You talked a little bit about
how the storage, and how it is necessary to have a plan for
that, and you mentioned a collection space framework plan. Can
you talk a little bit more about that? Are there challenges
that you are facing there, and what should we be aware of?
Mr. Bunch. As somebody who was a curator, as a director of
a museum, I realized that the only thing that is permanent in
the Smithsonian are its collections. Everything else is
fleeting. It is crucially important for us to preserve those
collections but also realize that we are going to have to
continue to build those collections as new stories are told,
new research is done.
So what we have looked at is creating this collections
framework document in 2015 was so important because it was the
first time that it gave us an accurate sense of exactly what
the conditions were in all those spaces, all the buildings,
what kind of equipment we had, and that has now given us the
strategic opportunity to really move creatively to address this
issue. Clearly it is a long-term issue. It is going to be
decades to do this. But because of the support we have
received, we have been able to do some things I think are
really important. We have been able to look at the sites that
were the worst or that had great deterioration, that have
decontaminations in the Paul Garber Center.
We have been able to decontaminate all of those artifacts,
look at new ways to move them. With your support, we have been
able to build new spaces that can hold artifacts both at Dulles
and at the Suitland campus. What that allows us to do is it
allows us to address the most serious problems, but also allows
us to have the kind of swing space that we need, as for
example, when we now move the Air and Space Museum, we have got
to be able to move artifacts away. Ultimately, that will give
us the kind of storage that we can use down the road.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. Then you talked a little
bit about new opportunities here and I want to take advantage
of you being the Founding Director of the Smithsonian's
National Museum of African American History and Culture because
I am a big supporter of the National Museum of the American
Latino. I guess my question to you is, what opportunities do
you foresee in establishing the National Museum of the American
Latinos that we can start working on now to bring this to
fruition?
Mr. Bunch. If there is one thing, I know how to do is how
to build a national museum. The challenge for us is to
recognize that we are going to have to realize that we are
going to have to build the money, to build the institution, to
maintain it, to build the collections but also to make sure
that we are bringing resources into the Smithsonian so that we
can handle our deferred maintenance. I think that there are
many issues to think about.
Issues of if you are going to build a Latino Museum, how
does the money get allocated? When we built the African
American Museum, there was no mechanism to be sure when Federal
money would come and that made it hard to strategize and plan.
I think it is also crucially important to realize that if we
are going to build new museums, it also has a major impact on
the central services of the Smithsonian: security, maintenance.
We have got to realize that there is going to be resources
put in those areas if we are going to be able to do a museum
that is worthy of the Smithsonian. With the right resources and
the right commitment, clearly, we can do the museums that will
make people proud.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. Thank you Secretary Bunch
and to the staff of the Smithsonian. Thank you for all of the
good work. Really appreciate it.
Mr. Bunch. Thank you.
Chairman Blunt. Mr. Secretary, on that topic, are you
suggesting if we were going to do another private, public
partnership that we can do a better job as you are raising that
money knowing what points you needed to make when public money
would then follow?
Mr. Bunch. Exactly. I think that even if there was a
mechanism that said it was a one-to-one match or that you knew
that at certain points along the construction process that you
could count on a certain amount of Federal money--what we had
to do was every year obviously come back and some years we did
well on capital some years we didn't, and that made it
difficult to actually move the museum along as quickly as I
would like. Candidly it took us 11 years. That is moving pretty
quick in the Federal system, but in some ways, I think that
there are things I have learned that we can shortcut that a
little bit.
Chairman Blunt. Thank you. Senator Capito.
Senator Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Secretary Bunch, for not just your service, for being here
today, and your long history in such an, I think, distinguished
field. Kind of along the lines as Senator Cortez Masto, not on
the Latino Museum, but we are at the 100th Anniversary of the
ratification of the 19th Amendment, giving the women the right
to vote. I wanted to highlight efforts that we have made here,
and you mentioned this in your statement on the Smithsonian
American Women's History Museum Act, which I am a co-sponsor.
Obviously, you have talked a little bit about building a
museum from the ground up. I wonder if you have--and you
mentioned the perspectives in terms of the financing. I don't
know if you have any perspectives here on if this act were to
pass how that would come to fruition.
Mr. Bunch. I think there are a couple of things to think
about. First of all, it is so important that if we do a museum
on the history of American women, it is important to recognize
that while it is both a story of individual women, it really a
story that is a lens that helps us understand what it means to
be an American. We have to frame it in a broader way so that it
is a story that has shaped everyone. I think that what I am
very proud of is the fact that the Smithsonian has this
American women's history initiative, which is allowing us to do
important work that crosses throughout the Smithsonian.
It allows us to look at what are issues that could be
explored in a museum, how do you build collections, what kind
of staff do you need. In a way, the American Women's History
Initiative is a commitment that the Smithsonian makes
regardless of what happens in the future that we will make sure
those stories are told in a way that is meaningful and
accessible.
Senator Capito. Thank you. I am very much interested in
that. The other thing coming from a rural state that is not too
far away, West Virginia, the Smithsonian's reach is broad into
all 50 states and probably globally as well. Could you talk a
little bit about what efforts the Smithsonian is making to make
sure that you don't have to come to Washington, DC, although
that would be great, to enjoy the gifts that the Smithsonian
can give?
Mr. Bunch. I think you framed it in the exact right way.
The wonders of the Smithsonian deserve to be something that
touches every school and touches every American home. In order
to do that, we have got to build on the things we do
traditionally even better. We have to think about how do you
create a virtual Smithsonian? How do you take the collections,
the expertise of the Smithsonian so that people aren't coming
just to see the virtual Museum of American History or the
virtual Air and Space Museum, but the wonders of the
Smithsonian in ways that help them understand history, art,
science, but helps them understand broader issues like identity
and globalization and technology.
So what I am committed to doing is really looking at how do
we create that Smithsonian that is virtual. How do we bring in
partners from around the country so that therefore we can have
the reach because I think it is important that the millions of
people globally who want to come to the Smithsonian should have
that access. But the other side of that is then to do even a
better job with our affiliates program, do a better job with
our travel and exhibition service to make sure we reach out in
very direct ways to communities small and large.
Senator Capito. Let me ask you this, we had Carla Hayden,
the Librarian of Congress, here last week I believe, and a lot
of what the direction that they are moving is to digitization
of their collection, all collection. You are talking about a
virtual sort of museum. Are you working with the Library of
Congress? Because there has got to be a lot of intersection
there of all kinds of not just history, but documentation is
and other things.
Mr. Bunch. We have started to work more effectively with
the Library of Congress. I have partnered with them when I was
Director of the museum, and I think tomorrow I think the
Librarian of Congress and the Archivist of the United States
and myself are sitting down to begin to look at what are the
things we can do in common.
Senator Capito. Right, because the National Archives does
have an exhibit on the ratification of the 19th Amendment. That
is very good. I know they put a lot of resources into that. I
am not going to ask you the resource question because I know
that is the big question. You can do anything if you have
enough time, money, and resources. I appreciate what you are
doing with the resources you have and thanks so much for being
here today.
Chairman Blunt. Senator Udall.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Chairman Blunt, for the
recognition. Welcome again. I am going to focus and followup a
little bit on Senator Cortez Masto's question on the Latino
Museum. You know, Latinos have played an important role in the
history of our Nation for over 500 years. In my home State of
New Mexico that history and ongoing influence is celebrated. It
is time for our national institutions to also recognize and
lift up the important contributions made by Latinos and Latinas
in our country, our heritage, our history, our cultural
tapestry. Self-identified Hispanics and Latinos currently make
up nearly one-fifth of our population and represent the largest
ethnic group in the United States.
That is why I have co-sponsored Senator Menendez's bill to
establish the Smithsonian American Latino Museum. I also
supported an amendment during floor consideration of the
Interior bill which would provide an additional $1.5 million
for the Latino Center and expand programming for existing
museums.
If the final bill includes that increase, what do you plan
to do with the additional funding, and more broadly, what steps
are you taking to ensure that the Smithsonian is including the
Latino experience in all of its museums?
Mr. Bunch. One of the things I am proudest of is when the
fact that during my entire career at the Smithsonian we have
created the Latino Center. What that Latino Center has done is
transformed the Smithsonian. As you know, the real power in the
Smithsonian is not museum directors, or secretaries, or
curators, it is people who do the research and bring in the
collections. What the Latino Center has allowed us to do is
embed curators who have that expertise in the museum of
American History, or the African American Museum, or the Art
Museums.
So one, we want to build on that, and my sense is that any
support we get will allow us to continue to hire people that
will help the center do its work. But also, as you know, one of
the things that is really important for us is that the Latino
Center is now following the pattern that we did with the
African American Museum, which was to create a gallery in the
Museum of American History that would allow you to do
exhibitions, allow you to hire staff, allow you to build
collections.
So I think any of the resources we have will also go into
that because I think it is really important for us to be able
to demonstrate in very concrete ways, here is a space where
that important story is always told.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Mr. Bunch. Obviously, I hope that
the work that the Latino Center is doing will now lay the
groundwork for the passage of the legislation to create a new
Latino Museum. I think it is critical that Congress take action
not just to support your existing facilities needs but also to
build this new museum.
When you and I last met, we talked about the importance of
you meeting with the Museum's advocates, groups like The
National Association of Latino Arts and Culture, the National
Council of La Raza, and the friends group working in support of
the museum creation and many others. Have you had the
opportunity to meet with these groups and what are you hearing
from them?
Mr. Bunch. I have had opportunities to talk to individuals
not collective groups. I am meeting with the congressional
Hispanic Caucus very soon. What I am hearing is one, a
commitment for people to realize and recognize that the
Smithsonian cares about this subject and wants to do even more,
and there is a great deal of interest in having me come talk to
people about how do we build the African American Museum. What
are the steps? What are the challenges?
So what I am hearing is great excitement. I think that what
I want to make sure is that as we share that excitement, we
also make sure that we are doing very concrete things that
people can see today that lay a foundation for the future.
Senator Udall. The Interior subcommittee bill funds the
Women's History Initiative at $3.7 million. What is the
Smithsonian doing with its current resources to celebrate and
deepen the public's understanding of the contributions of
American women? How would the additional $1.7 million be used
to expand that and prepare for a permanent Museum?
Mr. Bunch. Again, much like the Latino Center, being able
to explore this history of American women really allows us to
build collections which are key to building a new Museum. It
also allows us to do exhibitions that cross boundaries.
So I am very excited about--we are about to do an
exhibition at the Museum of American History on girlhood, which
will really allow people to understand the lens through sort of
adolescence and women. It is really important for us to say
that I want to be sure that curators throughout the Smithsonian
have the guidance and the resources to make sure that issues of
gender are explored in every of our museums.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Chairman Blunt. Thank you, Senator Udall. Secretary, I
think there have been 12 bills filed in this Congress for
looking at the potential for different museums or emphasis in
museums. Today you have mentioned an Asian Americans, Asian
Pacific Americans, Latino Americans, and a Women's Museum, all
has been part of this discussion. Assuming those would happen,
I think it is unreasonable to think that all of them would
happen or that any of them would be in place within a decade--
maybe we learned enough from the 11-year effort that if we got
started, we would be done 10 years from now.
That is clearly too long to wait to tell all of those
stories as effectively as we can. Are you giving consideration
to more prominence of those stories and the existing
facilities, which of course would mean telling less of other
stories in the existing. What would our plan be on all of those
areas for the coming decade no matter what we decide to do in
terms of a facility for one or more of those other important
components of who we are?
Mr. Bunch. My career has been about expanding the cannon,
making sure that we understand the rich diversity of America
not to explore just a particular community but to help us
understand who we are as Americans. I am bringing that
commitment to the rest of the Smithsonian. It is my expectation
that we will build on the work of the Asian American Pacific
Center that is really doing important work helping us find new
collections and new stories.
I am thinking about how, as we create the virtual
Smithsonian, these issues should be at the heart so people will
be able to tap that virtual presence and understand Latino
issues, African-American issues, Asian American issues, issues
of gender. We are not waiting on any museum to be built. We are
committed to making sure that the Smithsonian represents
America and gives all its visitors a better understanding of
who we are by looking at us through different lenses.
Chairman Blunt. You know, the Park Services, as they now
entered the second century the Park Service and we are getting
very close to the beginning of the third century of the
Smithsonian. They are looking more at public-private efforts.
We got to watch this closely at the arch, which after 60 years
we needed a number of things done. It became a huge local and
individual donor effort, involves some naming rights that had
not been part of the Park Service in the past, but it really
produced a result that we wouldn't have been able to produce
otherwise.
Are you thinking about that potential? I know there are
parts of the Smithsonian already that have had a sponsor when
they were built or an exhibit that has a sponsor. Is there any
capacity there for us to do some fundraising that would allow
maintenance in return for recognition in parts of some of these
facilities?
Mr. Bunch. There is always a great opportunity to build and
expand on the public-private partnership. The truth of the
matter is, it is very difficult for us to find philanthropic
support for some of the behind-the-scenes, but I think the
notion that the Smithsonian has done very well in its
fundraising over the last decade has really been able to find
new partners who have brought resources to allow us to tell
different stories and more important stories.
So my goal is to continue to build that public-private
partnership to do the fundraising. But also where there are
opportunities. For example, we are looking at what can be the
philanthropic support for fixing the Castle and the Arts and
Industries. They are such historic buildings. Maybe there is
more philanthropic support we can get for that. We are looking
in those directions to find funds wherever we can.
Chairman Blunt. Well, I was a University President for 4
years once and nobody wants to give money for the electrical
system. On the other hand, if you get money for the electrical
system and part of the understanding is one of the things you
are going to do is you are going to rewire the theater which
currently has no patron, I just think that is something we
ought to be thinking about.
When you do think about that, the public-private
partnership can't be we just have now with this private partner
a new source of revenue, but there does have to be some
collaborative discussion as to what that partner would hope to
have happen and our commitment to be part of it. Just something
to think about and I know, I am confident, based on your past
experience you are giving that some thought.
I am telling you, I think you would find support for that
and encouragement of that in the Congress if you go in that
direction. Senator Capito. Senator Udall.
Senator Udall. Thank you for the recognition, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Bunch as Vice Chairman of the Senate committee on
Indian Affairs, I strongly support the tribes' inherent right
to exercise self-government which includes their ability to
protect and maintain tribal cultural patrimony such as
ceremonial and religious event recordings. Many museums and
universities, including the Smithsonian, currently hold these
recordings in their collections.
Under current law, it is possible that those culturally
sensitive recordings could be released to the public domain
which is a major concern for tribes across the country. Last
week, I brought this issue up with the Librarian of Congress in
a hearing before this committee and was told that the Library
is working with the Smithsonian on tribal engagement. Can I get
your commitment to working with the Library of Congress and to
engaging with tribes on this important issue?
Mr. Bunch. Not only are we willing to work with the Library
of Congress, but we have already done a lot of work in this
particular area. One of the things we have done at the Center
for Folklife and Cultural Heritage is created what we call a
shared stewardship collections policy, which allows us to look
at the native holdings that we have to make sure that native
communities shape our collections policies, shape our access.
We actually communicate and consult with those communities
to make sure that we are not letting sacred music or issues
that shouldn't be in the broad public. We are doing the best we
can to ensure that we are honoring the intangible heritage of
the Native communities. I think that this is one of the most
important things we are doing because we will now take that
shared stewardship notion and really, I am going to ask the
rest of the Smithsonian to look at it, so we have a policy that
shapes the entire Smithsonian.
Senator Udall. Right. Thank you very much. That covers my--
he was looking ahead, and he covered my other question there
with that answer. I just would say in summary that I am really
a stand-in here for the Ranking Member Senator Klobuchar and
she is very, very proud, I think, of this collection and the
idea that the Prince Guitar and the items from Minnesota are
displayed here today. We will--and I know that the chairman is
also very proud of what is happening with Missouri. Thank you
for bringing those today and really appreciate it.
Chairman Blunt. I think I had my mic on as we were talking
about the original Bundt pan also.
Senator Cortez Masto. I said, I think I have that same pan.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Blunt. We decided everybody has a Bundt pan
whether used or not. I have a couple of quick questions. One
is, the Senate Interior Appropriations bill that Senator Udall
is very familiar with included a provision that would permit
you to move forward with your proposal to purchase a building
to serve as a consolidated administrative headquarters.
Does that language do what you need to do to get that done?
As I recall, we have talked about that and there is a
foundation involvement too which might circle back to my
public-private partnership efforts. How will that work, and do
you feel like the language that you see is adequate for you to
do what you would like to do there?
Mr. Bunch. I think the language is adequate. I will sort of
ask my staff to go back and make sure that there aren't any
issues that I don't know about. But I think that it is crucial
for us to be able to think in an innovative way, maybe in an
unorthodox way, to solve some of the problems that we have.
By consolidating all these leases we have, by being able to
use the Federal rent support to basically help us pay down that
debt, it will allow us ultimately to save an awful lot of money
for the Federal Government as we move forward. We are very
excited about doing that and I really appreciate the language
that you put in to help us do that.
Chairman Blunt. Alright, the last thing I will ask would be
in terms of the plan that Secretary Skorton had worked on and
you were a contributor that plan. Do you feel like that plan is
headed in the right direction? Are there any modifications now
that you have had time to look at it that you think you may
want to make?
Mr. Bunch. What I think is so powerful about that plan is
the notion of reach, relevance, and impact. I am taking those
words and really making sure they are at the heart of what I
want to do. By focusing on the educational piece, by looking at
the virtual Smithsonian, but also by realizing that we can't be
the institution for the 21st Century we want if we don't fix
some of the problems that we have with our processes, HR, and
contracting alike. For me, the framework of the strategic plan
is something that I will build on and I am just tweaking it to
focus on education and the virtual Smithsonian.
Chairman Blunt. Great. Any other comments from the Senators
here? Well, Secretary Bunch really thank you for joining us
this morning. We look forward to your leadership at the
Smithsonian. You come with a unique background and unique gifts
for this job and I hope we can continue to be in communication
about that. The record will be open for 1 week from today.
[The information referred to was submitted for the record.]
Chairman Blunt. The committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:45 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]