- INTERAGENCY CYBER COOPERATION:
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.A.S.C. No. 115-121]
________________________________________________________________
INTERAGENCY CYBER COOPERATION:
ROLES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND
AUTHORITIES OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF DEFENSE AND THE DEPARTMENT
OF HOMELAND SECURITY
__________
JOINT HEARING
before the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES
of the
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
meeting jointly with
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION
of the
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
[Serial No. 115-78]
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
NOVEMBER 14, 2018
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
33-477
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York, Chairwoman
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania
JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
RICK LARSEN, Washington
LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming, Vice Chair
JIM COOPER, Tennessee
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
JODY B. HICE, Georgia
STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida
(Vacancy)
Katie Sutton, Professional Staff Member
Lindsay Kavanaugh, Professional Staff Member
Neve Schadler, Clerk
------
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman
LAMAR SMITH, Texas
BENNIE G. THOMPSON, Mississippi
PETER T. KING, New York
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama
JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania
CEDRIC L. RICHMOND, Louisiana
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
JOHN KATKO, New York
DONALD M. PAYNE, Jr., New Jersey
WILL HURD, Texas
FILEMON VELA, Texas
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
J. LUIS CORREA, California
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida
CLAY HIGGINS, Louisiana
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
RON ESTES, Kansas
DON BACON, Nebraska
DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Steven S. Giaier,
General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas, Chairman
JOHN KATKO, New York
CEDRIC L. RICHMOND, Louisiana
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida
DON BACON, Nebraska
BENNIE G. THOMPSON, Mississippi
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas (ex
(ex officio)
officio)
Kristen M. Duncan, Subcommittee Staff Director
Moira Bergin, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
Langevin, Hon. James R., a Representative from Rhode Island,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and
Capabilities, Committee on Armed Services......................
3
Ratcliffe, Hon. John, a Representative from Texas, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection,
Committee on Homeland Security.................................
5
Richmond, Hon. Cedric L., a Representative from Louisiana,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Protection, Committee on Homeland Security......
6
Stefanik, Hon. Elise M., a Representative from New York,
Chairwoman, Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities,
Committee on Armed Services....................................
1
WITNESSES
Manfra, Jeanette, Assistant Secretary, Office of Cybersecurity
and Communications, National Protection and Programs
Directorate, U.S. Department of Homeland Security..............
8
Rapuano, Hon. Kenneth, Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Homeland Defense and Global Security, and Principal Cyber
Advisor, U.S. Department of Defense............................
10
Shwedo, Lt Gen Bradford J., USAF, Director for Command, Control,
Communications and Computers/Cyber, Chief Information Officer,
Joint Chiefs of Staff..........................................
12
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Jackson Lee, Hon. Sheila, a Representative from Texas,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Protection, Committee on Homeland Security.................
38
Manfra, Jeanette.............................................
46
Rapuano, Hon. Kenneth........................................
55
Stefanik, Hon. Elise M.......................................
35
Documents Submitted for the Record:
[There were no Documents submitted.]
Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:
Ms. Jackson Lee..............................................
69
Mr. Langevin.................................................
69
Mr. Larsen...................................................
69
Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:
Mr. Brooks...................................................
77
Ms. Stefanik.................................................
73
Mr. Suozzi...................................................
78
INTERAGENCY CYBER COOPERATION:
ROLES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND AUTHORITIES
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE AND THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
----------
House of Representatives, Committee on Armed
Services, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces,
Meeting Jointly with the Committee on Homeland
Security, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Protection, Washington, DC,
Wednesday, November 14, 2018.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 3:04 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Elise M.
Stefanik (chairwoman of the Subcommittee on Emerging Threats
and Capabilities) presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ELISE M. STEFANIK, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM NEW YORK, CHAIRWOMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS AND
CAPABILITIES, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
Ms. Stefanik. The subcommittee will come to order.
Welcome to this joint hearing of the Armed Services
Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities [ETC] with
the Homeland Security Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Protection [CIP].
Today, we will examine interagency cyber cooperation and
the roles, responsibilities, and authorities of the Department
of Homeland Security [DHS] and the Department of Defense [DOD].
Holding this joint hearing has been a priority for this
subcommittee for the past few months, and we are pleased that
it has come together today.
This is a timely opportunity to hear about recent
interagency coordination efforts, and the status of related FY
[fiscal year] 2019 NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act]
provisions. This is a critically important topic that will
shape our oversight going forward as we consider the long-term
policy frameworks needed for the United States cyber
enterprise.
Our committee, and ETC in particular, has performed
significant oversight of the cyber organization, operations,
and mission force development within DOD. With this joint
hearing, we can now take a broader focus on the cyber
organization and capabilities within the entire United States
Government.
Cyber threats posed by both state and nonstate adversaries
continue to grow and evolve at a rapid pace. These threats are
not just to our military weapons and systems, but also to our
Nation's critical infrastructures. Attacks against the electric
grid, the financial sector, or our healthcare system, could
have profound impacts on our daily way of life and economic
security.
As we have seen in recent years, cyberattacks, such as
WannaCry ransomware, can have significant adverse economic
impacts, and bring the private sector and government services
to a standstill. And since the average response time to detect
a cyberattack is measured in months, not minutes or hours, we
must improve our abilities to detect and respond to malicious
cyber activity.
This year, three important cyber strategies were released
by the White House, the Department of Defense, and the
Department of Homeland Security. These strategies all recognize
the importance of a whole-of-government approach to addressing
the challenges posed by securing our Nation in cyberspace. They
will be an important step in building a cohesive U.S. cyber
enterprise.
And while this hearing today isn't solely about election
security, it affords us the timely opportunity to hear about
the significant interagency efforts recently aimed at ensuring
the security of our 2018 midterm elections. Protecting the
elections required a broad approach led by the Department of
Homeland Security that included contributions from the
Department of Defense and many other partners.
Our subcommittee, in collaboration with the Homeland
Security Committee, have been active in addressing the issue of
improving cooperation between the two departments. In this
year's fiscal year 2019 National Defense Authorization Act, we
established a pilot program that allows the DOD to provide
technical cybersecurity personnel to the Department of Homeland
Security in order to enhance security and resiliency of
critical infrastructure. I look forward to hearing the status
of this pilot program at this hearing.
Also in this year's NDAA, we created a National Security
Artificial Intelligence [AI] Commission that will be important
in identifying the impact AI will have in the cyber domain. As
our adversaries continue to improve at increasing speeds, we
must similarly grow our abilities to defend against these
threats.
I believe that we will only be successful if the U.S. can
leverage the capabilities and authorities of all its
departments and agencies in a united approach. We must reduce
wasted resources on overlapping and duplicative efforts in
government to make sure that we are using our cyber defense
resources sensibly.
Both agencies here today have made great strides in
building their cyber capabilities over the last few years. To
build upon that progress, I firmly believe we need to continue
to work to build interagency partnerships to ensure that whole-
of-government approach to countering this growing cyber threat.
Let me welcome our witnesses here today: Ms. Jeanette
Manfra, Assistant Secretary for the Office of Cybersecurity and
Communications at the Department of Homeland Security; Mr. Ken
Rapuano, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense
and Global Security, and Principal Cyber Advisor at the DOD;
and Lieutenant General Bradford Shwedo, Director of Command,
Control, Communications and Computers, Cyber, and Chief
Information Officer [CIO] at the Joint Chiefs of Staff. We look
forward to your testimony.
And before I turn to my friend and ranking member, Jim
Langevin of Rhode Island, for his opening remarks, I want to
take a moment to thank him for his hard work and dedication
over the past 2 years of the 115th Congress. It really has been
a highlight of my time in Congress working with you, Jim, and I
look forward to partnering with you in the future in a
collaborative and bipartisan approach.
I now want to recognize my friend, Jim Langevin.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Stefanik can be found in the
Appendix on page 35.]
STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES R. LANGEVIN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
RHODE ISLAND, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS
AND CAPABILITIES, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Chairwoman Stefanik. And I want to
begin by thanking you and Chairman Ratcliffe for convening the
joint hearing on such an important topic. And likewise, I want
to say what a pleasure it has been working with you over this--
for the last 2 years as you chaired the subcommittee, and it
has been collaborative and bipartisan, and I, too, look forward
to continuing our working relationship as well. So thank you
for that also.
So the challenges in cyberspace affect all aspects of our
national and homeland security, and I am glad that these two
subcommittees, both of which--on which I sit, are collaborating
to better understand the cooperation between the agencies that
we oversee.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here today as well,
and I look forward to hearing your testimony.
But before I do go any further, I also must congratulate
Chairman McCaul and Ranking Member Thompson of the Homeland
Security Committee for their work shepherding the NPPD
[National Protection and Programs Directorate] reorganization
bill through the House last night. It has been a bit of a slog,
as it often is with our friends on the other side of the
Capitol, but after 3 years, I am proud they will soon be
officially opening the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency [CISA] at Department of Homeland Security.
The legislation headed by--the legislation headed to
President Trump for his signature reaffirms Congress' intent
that the Department of Homeland Security take the lead role in
protecting civilian government and critical infrastructure,
something I look forward to hearing more about from our
witnesses today.
In particular, I would like to congratulate you, Assistant
Secretary Manfra, and I hope that you will pass along my
congratulations to Under Secretary Krebs as well. The new
agency will be well served, I know, by your leadership as well
as the inaugural executive team. So--and also, let me say what
a pleasure it was to have you up in Rhode Island recently, and
I appreciate your contributions there that you made to our
Cyber Advisory Committee that I put together.
But beyond the implications of this is this existing new
development. We are here this afternoon to discuss
collaboration between two agencies with important but distinct
cybersecurity roles. Now, again, I was privileged enough to
have--to host Assistant Secretary Manfra back in my district
late last month to hear about some of this collaboration with
respect to election security.
Our elections are obviously the cornerstone of our
democracy and it is essential that they be protected from any
interference, foreign or domestic. As we saw in 2016, the
threat is real and it demands a whole-of-government response.
Recognizing this, DHS and DOD worked together in the weeks
leading up to the election to remove any legal or operational
obstacles that would prevent timely defense support of civil
authorities in the case of a cyber incident targeting our
elections that exceeded DHS's asset response capabilities.
I was also pleased that DOD was able to work with National
Guard personnel activated under State Active Duty status,
including some of our excellent network defenders right in
Rhode Island in order to share sensitive intelligence on
Election Day.
The efforts of both those departments paid off. And due to
their work and the diligence of local election officials, last
week's voting went off without any major cybersecurity
incident, but we cannot let the success blind us to the
tremendous challenges that remain ahead.
As highlighted in the recent cyber strategies that have
come out of DHS, DOD, and the White House, our adversaries
continue to look for ways to gain an advantage by exploiting
our vulnerabilities in cyberspace. And while Congress has been
abundantly clear about DHS's primacy in defending civilian
networks in the United States, coordination, collaboration, and
information sharing with the DOD will be critical to the
defense of the homeland.
So I hope to hear from our witnesses today how these
collaborations are succeeding, and, frankly, where more work
needs to be done. I want to better understand how, in a time of
crisis, DOD will be able to prioritize the requests coming from
DHS while achieving its mission to protect the DODIN
[Department of Defense Information Network], the DIB [Defense
Industrial Base], and other defense critical infrastructure,
and maintain capability and capacity for conducting title 10
cyber operations.
So understanding that DHS can and must have the capability
to take on more of the domestic mission without relying
exclusively on DOD for support, I hope that witnesses will
address that--what capability building is and should be going
on to better empower the new CISA. I also hope the witnesses
will talk about how they are ensuring collaboration works its
way down to the operational level, so that Homeland Security
equities are fully considered throughout the entire decision-
making chain.
Recent policy developments from the administration, from
national security policy memorandum 13, to the recently signed
joint memorandum, will help frame the U.S. Government's
collective response to cyber threats, and I trust the
administration will be fully transparent with our committees in
providing these documents and candid assessments of their
implementation.
Finally, I look forward to hearing a status update on the
report required in section 1653 of the FY 2019 NDAA about cyber
civil support teams and the feasibility of using their unique
authorities to better defend the Nation. So cybersecurity is a
team sport; only by working together can we reduce our risk and
ensure a bright future where the internet remains open,
reliable, interoperable, and secure.
So with that, again, I want to thank our witnesses for
being here today, and I yield back to the Chair. Thank you.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Jim.
I want to welcome Chairman John Ratcliffe of Texas from the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection Subcommittee of the
Homeland Security Committee to today's hearing, and now I yield
to him for his opening remarks.
STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN RATCLIFFE, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM TEXAS,
CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION, COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Chairwoman Stefanik. I am excited
to have the opportunity to hold this hearing with you. These
joint events always provide some unique insights and
perspectives that would be hard to explore under a single
committee purview.
We are here today to discuss something that is vital to our
national security. Cybersecurity affects every single American,
every single day. That is because cybersecurity is national
security. So it is imperative that the Department of Homeland
Security and the Department of Defense work hand in glove to
protect our Nation's systems and to provide assistance to our
critical infrastructure partners.
That assistance comes in many forms, and that is part of
the reason why we are here today: to explore the roles and
responsibilities of the two departments, and to better
understand how they can effectively and efficiently work
together to keep our Nation safe from malicious cyber actors.
Whether we are talking about the Chinese stealing sensitive
information on our Navy submarines or the Iranians attempting
to target defense contracting systems, nation-state actors
remain poised to use any cyber vulnerabilities or gaps in our
defense to get a competitive advantage to use against us later.
That is why I am grateful to have representatives from the
Department of Defense here today. I look forward to hearing how
they, as the sector-specific agency, are partnering with the
Defense Industrial Base to ensure that our Nation's capacity to
wage war remains unmatched.
I am also pleased to have a representative from the
Department of Homeland Security here to lay out the multitude
of roles that DHS has in this space, and I am confident that
Assistant Secretary Manfra will do her usual superb job of
illustrating the Department's broad array of responsibilities
and authorities. Those include overseeing all 16 critical
infrastructure sectors, and partnering with industry to share
information and build capacity, and protecting Federal networks
from the daily inundation of cyberattacks.
The Department has statutory authority to carry out all of
these responsibilities, and it is imperative that DHS continues
to take the lead in this regard. A civilian-led system embodies
the foundation that this democracy was built on.
Despite the respective individual roles, the most effective
way to keep our country's cyber ecosystem safe is through DOD
and DHS cooperation. We can't have a stovepiping of efforts; we
can't have a fractured set of agendas; and we cannot have a
disjointed front line in defending against our cyber
adversaries and threats.
We need to ensure cooperative approaches to cybersecurity,
approaches like section 1650 of the NDAA which allows for DOD
personnel to assist Homeland Security with cybersecurity-
related efforts. This was an effective tool that was used to
help bolster DHS's preparedness in the lead-up to the elections
just last week.
There are other approaches, like project pathfinder, which
seeks to keep our financial sector safe by streamlining
information sharing, and using it to defend forward. I have
faith that both departments can and will work through any
growing pains that may be encountered. And I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses today on both the past successes
that we have had at keeping this Nation safe, but more
importantly, on how we can continue that success going into the
future.
Finally, in what is my last hearing as the chairman of this
subcommittee, I want to thank all of the CIP members, both
Republican and Democratic, for their excellent work this
Congress. The 115th Congress has been defined by bipartisan
success when it comes to legislation and oversight on the issue
of cybersecurity, and our committee has paved that path.
I hope that we can continue to carry this momentum and
energy forward into the 116th Congress, and work in a
bipartisan manner to ensure the integrity of our national
security because cybersecurity is national security.
Again, I thank our witnesses and I yield back.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you.
The gentleman from Louisiana, the Ranking Member, Cedric
Richmond--actually, he is here. I was just going to put your
opening statement in for the record. When you get up here, I
will recognize you for any opening remarks.
STATEMENT OF HON. CEDRIC L. RICHMOND, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
LOUISIANA, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY AND
INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
Mr. Richmond. Good afternoon. I want to thank Chairwoman
Stefanik and Chairman Ratcliffe for holding today's joint
hearing to assess interagency coordination of cybersecurity
activities at the Department of Homeland Security and at the
Department of Defense.
Last night, after years of debate and negotiation, Congress
sent H.R. 3359, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency Act, to the President's desk. This bipartisan
legislation confirms, once again, that Congress intends for DHS
to be the primary Federal civilian interface with the private
sector on cybersecurity.
I look forward to working with DHS to help the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency mature into an
operational component and develop the capabilities needed to
meet the challenges ahead, from securing election
infrastructure to protecting the grid. The Department of
Defense will be an integral partner as DHS carries out its
mission to help secure civilian networks.
I understand that DOD and DHS recently signed an agreement
clarifying how they will coordinate certain cyber activities.
Although I have not seen that agreement, I am hopeful that it
will provide clarity for the Department's roles and
responsibilities. I look forward to reviewing the agreement and
ask that it be submitted to our committee as soon as possible.
Moving forward, the success of DOD and DHS's collaboration
rests on whether the following three things happen: One, DOD
and DHS must implement the agreement of understanding at both
the policy and operational levels; two, DOD and DHS must
communicate and adhere to their respective roles and
responsibilities as they engage with agencies across the
Federal Government and with the private sector; and three, the
administration must request and Congress must provide the
funding and the resources necessary for DOD and DHS to carry
out their missions.
To my first point, too often I hear testimony from
principals about how well their agencies are coordinating, only
to learn from folks in the field that it isn't the case. To me,
the problem seems to be that as Federal agencies work to
delineate roles and responsibilities on cybersecurity they
reach an agreement on a policy level without involving the
operational folks. That invites frustration, confusion, and, at
times, mission creep.
Accordingly, I will be interested in learning how DOD and
DHS plan to socialize their new agreement on cyber roles and
responsibilities throughout their organizations, from policy
operations and solicit buy-in.
On the second point, it is important that the respective
cyber missions of DOD and DHS are communicated and clearly
understood throughout the Federal Government and among critical
infrastructure owners and operators. Toward that end, I will,
once again, note my strong concern that the White House has
eliminated the Cybersecurity Coordinator.
A White House Cybersecurity Coordinator would be in the
best position to ensure the full capabilities from across the
Federal Government are brought to bear to protect against cyber
threats without sowing confusion about who should be doing
what.
Finally, we have to provide DOD and DHS with the resources
it takes to do their jobs. As everyone here will acknowledge,
the cyber threats we are facing are evolving, and we have
called on DHS to help secure the Federal Government, State and
local governments, and critical infrastructure from breaches by
state and nonstate actors. But DOD's cyber funding outpaces
DHS's cyber funding by about 8 to 1. If we expect DHS to be
DOD's civilian equivalent for cybersecurity, we need to fund it
that way.
I thank the witnesses for being here, and I look forward to
hearing their testimony.
With that, Madam Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Ranking Member Richmond. Your time
was perfect for your opening statement.
Immediately following the conclusion of this open hearing,
the Members will transition to Rayburn 2212 for a closed,
classified briefing from our witnesses.
Without objection, the witnesses' prepared statements will
be made a part of the record. I ask that the witnesses please
try to keep your remarks to no more than 5 minutes.
And, Ms. Manfra, we will begin with you. You are recognized
for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF JEANETTE MANFRA, ASSISTANT SECRETARY, OFFICE OF
CYBERSECURITY AND COMMUNICATIONS, NATIONAL PROTECTION AND
PROGRAMS DIRECTORATE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Ms. Manfra. Thank you, ma'am.
Chairman Ratcliffe, Chairwoman Stefanik, Ranking Member
Richmond, Ranking Member Langevin, and members of the
committee, thank you for today's opportunity to testify
regarding the Department of Homeland Security's ongoing and
collaborative efforts to strengthen the cybersecurity of our
Nation's critical infrastructure. This is a core Homeland
Security mission.
But first, I would like to thank you for your leadership on
establishing the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency at the Department. The National Protection and Programs
Directorate will now have a name which accurately reflects the
reality of what we do: We secure cyberspace, the institution,
systems, and services that help businesses thrive, and
government, of all levels, operate.
Last night the House passed the legislation by unanimous
consent, and the bill is now headed to the President's desk.
This accomplishment could not have been achieved without the
strong leadership of our partners here in the House of
Representatives, and we know this demonstrates your own
commitment to ensuring our national security.
For the last 10 years, I have worked to advance the
Department's cybersecurity and critical infrastructure mission.
Prior to joining DHS, I was an Army officer, so I believe I
have a unique perspective on how we can better strengthen the
DOD and DHS partnership, and I am personally invested in making
this happen.
I am proud of the progress that we have made to date, and
looking forward to talking more about our progress ahead.
Cybersecurity threats remain one of the most significant
strategic risks for the United States, threatening our national
security, economic prosperity, and public health and safety.
Rarely is a cyber event sector-specific. Our adversaries
target systems that are cross-sector, and the growing
interdependencies of cross-sectors demand an integrated
approach. Establishing CISA highlights the central role we play
across the Federal Government and our responsibility to all
critical infrastructure in making manifest this integrated
approach.
As we have learned, the information in Federal operations
must not be siloed. This is one of the key lessons learned from
9/11. To combat a threat that is transnational and operates in
the seams between agencies and the public and private divide, a
whole-of-nation approach is required. We see these same lessons
applied, amplified by the speed of technological change to
cyberspace.
At NPPD, and soon at CISA, our vision is to fully realize
this national effort, challenging old organizational
institutional divides across the Federal Government and between
the public and private sectors that impede our ability to
provide for a collective defense in cyberspace.
Collective defense, the idea that the risks we face in a
dense, interconnected, technological environment are shared, is
the only model and way forward. Threats and risks do not
conform to our divisions; neither should we. We believe it is
our responsibility to make this a reality. We will forge a
national understanding of threat and risk and coordinate across
the Federal Government and private sector to detect and respond
to cyber threats wherever they occur.
We serve as an information and operations integrator
focused on delivering organization-specific and cross-sector
risk management support to enhance the resiliency of our
Nation's critical infrastructure. Our National Cybersecurity
and Communications Integration Center, or the NCCIC, provides a
broad range of capabilities to assist private sector entities
across all sectors of critical infrastructure, including
energy, finance, communications, emergency services, and health
care.
It is best to think of the NCCIC as the point of fusion for
cybersecurity threat detection, response, and coordination for
both the public and the private sectors. We bring together the
intelligence community, law enforcement, sector-specific
agencies, international partners, the private sector, and the
Department of Defense to carry out this mission.
The challenge of effectively coordinating homeland security
and homeland defense missions is not new, but it is amplified
and complicated by the global, borderless, interconnected
nature of cyberspace where strategic threats can manifest in
the homeland without advanced warning.
DHS and DOD recently finalized agreement, which reflects
the commitment of both departments in collaborating to improve
the protection and defense of the homeland from strategic cyber
threats. This agreement clarifies roles and responsibilities
between our organizations to enhance our government's readiness
to respond to cyber threats and establish coordinated lines of
efforts to secure, protect, and defend the homeland.
In order to achieve these objectives, our departments are
adopting a threat-informed, risk-based approach that ensures
the resilient delivery of national critical functions and
services. We will jointly prioritize a set of high-priority
national critical functions and non-DOD-owned mission critical
infrastructure that is most critical to the military's ability
to fight and win wars, and project power.
Based on this prioritization, we will forge a common
understanding of strategic cyber threats that can enable
private sector network defenders, critical infrastructure
owners and operators, and government actors to proactively
secure their networks and operations.
And finally, our departments are coordinating to inform and
mutually support our respective planning and operational
activities. With our knowledge of the domestic risk landscape
and our work with the private sector we will inform DOD's
``defend forward'' efforts to preempt, defeat, and deter
malicious cyber activity outside the U.S. that is targeting our
critical infrastructure.
And DOD's ``defend forward'' operation will inform and
guide our efforts at DHS to anticipate adversary action,
understand potential risk to critical infrastructure, and
empower our private sector stakeholders with the information
they need to secure their enterprise.
Our vision is to continue to be the central axle for
cybersecurity across the Federal Government, ensuring both
Federal and private sector partners have a full and complete
understanding of the threats we face and are prepared to defend
against them.
I look forward to further outlining our efforts to
safeguard and secure cyberspace. Thank you. I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Manfra can be found in the
Appendix on page 46.]
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you.
Mr. Rapuano.
STATEMENT OF HON. KENNETH RAPUANO, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR HOMELAND DEFENSE AND GLOBAL SECURITY, AND PRINCIPAL
CYBER ADVISOR, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Secretary Rapuano. Chairwoman Stefanik, Chairman Ratcliffe,
Ranking Members Langevin and Richmond, and members of the
committees, thank you for your opportunity to testify on
interagency cyber cooperation between the Department of Defense
and the Department of Homeland Security.
Last week's midterm elections serve as a timely inflection
point to review the close collaboration between our two
departments. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the sea
change in our partnership, and thank you for your broad and
continued support for the Department's cyber missions.
Before reviewing the Department's strategic posture for
cyberspace, I would like to offer a few observations on the
threat environment. As the National Defense Strategy and the
2018 DOD Cyber Strategy make clear, the homeland is no longer a
sanctuary from cyber threats.
The United States strategic competitors are conducting
cyber-enabled campaigns to erode U.S. military advantages,
threaten our infrastructure, and reduce our economic
prosperity. In particular, we are engaged in a long-term
competition with China and Russia. These states have expanded
the competition to include persistent campaigns in and through
cyberspace with activities that individually fall below the
threshold of armed conflict but collectively pose a long-term
strategic risk to the Nation as well as to our allies and
partners.
Nested within the National Security and National Defense
Strategies, the 2018 DOD Cyber Strategy prioritizes the
challenge of great power competition, and recognizes that the
Department must adapt a proactive posture to compete with and
counter determined and rapidly maturing adversaries.
It makes clear that DOD's focus on cyberspace, like in
other domains, is to defend forward. That is, to prevent or
mitigate threats before they reach American soil. This focus
complements the DHS cybersecurity strategy's emphasis on
domestic preparedness and risk management.
Together, the DOD and DHS strategies form a natural,
mutually supporting approach to defense in depth. With these
new strategies in place, DOD and DHS have worked together to
establish a framework to drive domestic preparedness and
critical infrastructure protection efforts.
Secretary Mattis and Secretary Nielsen recently signed a
joint memorandum that frames how DHS and DOD will secure and
defend the homeland from cyber threats. This is a major step
forward in fostering closer cooperation, and marks a sea change
in the level of collaboration between our departments.
Implementation of the joint memo is already underway.
Yesterday, I joined my DHS and Joint Staff colleagues to sign
the joint DOD-DHS Cyber Protection and Defense Steering Group
Charter. Established at the direction of Secretaries Mattis and
Nielsen, this steering group will apply senior leadership
energy to enhance the U.S. Government's readiness against cyber
threats.
This fall, Department of Defense and DHS cooperated closely
to ensure that all appropriate Federal Government tools and
resources were available to protect and defend the 2018 midterm
elections from foreign interference. DOD provided standing
approval for DOD personnel to support DHS cyber incident
response activities in the event a significant cyber incident
impacted elections infrastructure.
The National Guard also played an important role in
election support. Governors from several States used National
Guard personnel in State status to support election
cybersecurity in accordance with State law and policy.
Beyond elections, DOD is focused on how to improve
collaboration with DHS and the critical infrastructure sectors.
Through a series of pathfinder initiatives, we are enabling
private sector entities to defend their networks by sharing
relevant threat information. In turn, these pathfinders will
enable the Department of Defense to leverage private sector
threat information to inform DOD cyberspace operations.
We are also strengthening the Defense Industrial Base
sector partnership to improve the security and resilience of
the Defense Industrial Base critical infrastructure. This
approach aligns with the National Defense Strategy guidance to
enhance joint force lethality and reform departmental
procedures.
DOD is coordinating with DHS's National Policy and Programs
Division to establish a joint plan for future cyber incident
response. By identifying roles, responsibilities, and
coordination mechanisms, we are establishing a baseline for
efficient and effective interagency operations.
Lastly, I would be remiss if I didn't highlight the
National Guard's contribution to DOD and the Nation. We fully
recognize the National Guard's two complementary roles as an
integral part of the total force and as a State capability.
Section 1653 of the FY 2019 NDAA, which requires an
assessment of the feasibility and advisability of establishing
cyber civil support teams, provides an opportunity to review
and refine the role of the National Guard. My team will lead
this review.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you
today. As you can see, the Department has undertaken extensive
work with DHS to improve defense of the homeland and national
critical infrastructure, but there is much left to do. I look
forward to working with Congress as we address the challenges
facing the homeland, and I welcome your questions today. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Rapuano can be found
in the Appendix on page 55.]
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you.
Lieutenant General Shwedo.
STATEMENT OF LT GEN BRADFORD J. SHWEDO, USAF, DIRECTOR FOR
COMMAND, CONTROL, COMMUNICATIONS AND COMPUTERS/CYBER, CHIEF
INFORMATION OFFICER, JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
General Shwedo. Chairwoman Stefanik, Chairman Ratcliffe,
Ranking Members Langevin and Richmond, and members of the
committees, good afternoon and thank you for the opportunity to
testify today on the Department of Defense and Department of
Homeland Security cyber collaboration and information sharing.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Congress for
its quick action in improving the National Defense
Authorization Act for fiscal year 2019, providing new
authorities that allow the joint force to conduct cyberspace
operations to disrupt, defeat, and deter malicious cyber
activities. Thank you for your broad and continued support.
Since the elevation of United States Cyber Command
[CYBERCOM] from a sub-unified command to a combatant command,
cooperation on cyber issues between DOD and DHS have been
streamlined through Cyber Command, and it has prospered. Close
cooperation between the departments has exponentially added
value in areas such as intelligence sharing, cyberspace
operations, and cyber policy development.
As Mr. Rapuano indicated, midterm elections provided a
real-world platform to showcase interdepartmental collaboration
in cyberspace. The cyberspace capabilities of the Department of
Defense and DHS has increased through partnership and working
together to secure the Nation's election systems.
The 2018 National Defense Strategy, 2018 DOD Cyber
Strategy, and the draft 2018 National Military Strategy all
reflect what DOD senior leaders refer to as a changing nature
and character of war. Russian and Chinese military thinkers
have closely studied the United States and devised strategies
to achieve their objectives short of armed conflict. They are
doing this with actions below the threshold of armed conflict,
leveraging propaganda, diplomacy, economic pressures, and
threats to coerce nations.
Our joint forces need the best intelligence, information
technology [IT], and training, and they need it quickly. The
joint force is committed to act in concert with our interagency
partners to share threat intelligence to enhance the whole-of-
government defenses and our collective ability to respond to
malicious cyberspace activities.
Sharing intelligence, indications, and warning are one of
six lines of effort specified in the joint memorandum between
DOD and DHS referenced by ASD [Assistant Secretary of Defense]
Rapuano earlier. Together, the joint memorandum and charter
provide guidelines to vector the departments in sharing
information, reducing the timeline on actionable intelligence,
and paving the way for proactive collaboration in the defense
of our Nation.
This requirement to share intelligence and information is
bidirectional, and it is not confined to the sectors owned and
operated by DOD and DHS. To that end, we are engaged to set
pathfinder efforts with DHS and with sector-specific agencies
charged with the security of critical infrastructure.
The National Defense Strategy establishes the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Dunford, as the global
integrator with the understanding that the evolved nature and
character of war make it unlikely that the impacts of a
conflict will be confined to a single geographic area of
operation.
The U.S. homeland can now be impacted directly by events
that 20 years ago would only generate indirect or collateral
effects. In the cyber domain, this shift requires the joint
force to take on at least two additional roles: one is the
global integration in cyber and the other is coordination of
cyberspace activities.
The Joint Staff is taking on the global integration role to
synchronize collaborative efforts to ensure impacts from one
theater of operations does not affect the other, and are
intentional and supportive rather than collateral.
During the closed-door session, I will provide operational
details regarding ongoing efforts that illustrate the close
cooperation among the departments with regard to election
security and critical infrastructure pathfinders.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you
today. Our relationships with Federal, State, local industry
and international partners is critical to everything the
Department is doing in the cyber domain. We appreciate your
continued strong support in providing the authorities that
allow us to strengthen these partnerships and build strong
programs to protect and defend our Nation.
I look forward to your questions. Thank you.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you to each of the witnesses for your
testimony.
My first question has to do with many of the themes we have
heard already, is this whole-of-government approach. Obviously,
we need to ensure that we are not siloing information, but at
the same time, we also need to ensure that we are not seeing
mission creep, because when it comes to our oversight and our
jurisdiction, we want to make sure that each agency has the
resources available for each department.
But I would like to know what efforts are being taken to
ensure that each department focuses specifically their efforts
on their lanes of responsibility to prevent mission creep. Ms.
Manfra, we will start with you.
Ms. Manfra. Thank you, ma'am, for the question.
I think what we have decided to do is take real-world
scenarios. And so we talked a little bit about the pathfinder
initiatives, also with the elections, but working through
specific real-world areas where we do need to share
information, and having both the lawyers and the operators
working side by side, working with the operators in terms of
what information would be useful for you to have access in
order to do your job, and then working with the lawyers to
ensure that we are not going outside the bounds of what is
appropriate from an authority perspective.
And I defer to my DOD colleagues. We feel very comfortable
that this is the right approach. And as we learn from each one
of these sort of initiatives, whether it is with the financial
sector or the energy sector or elections, we are learning
lessons that can be applied more broadly.
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Rapuano.
Secretary Rapuano. So we are extremely conscious of what
our focus and priority is in terms of defending the Nation
against exigent threats. The transformation in terms of the way
the Department of Defense looks at the homeland with regard to
vulnerability to cyber, particularly with regard to critical
infrastructure, is that significant threat to national critical
infrastructure is a national security concern.
It remains a DHS mission, and the role that we play and
that we very clearly defined in all of our engagements as well
as the memorandum of understanding with DHS is that we provide
civil support to civil authorities in those cases, in those
areas where the needs exceed DHS capability and their unique
skills and capabilities that the Department offers.
Ms. Stefanik. Lieutenant General Shwedo, did you want to
add?
General Shwedo. Sure. You know, just one point that Ranking
Member Richmond brought up. Often, there is a frustration
because we go through exercises to try and figure out some of
the details of these relationships. These elections gave us a
real-world platform where we started working out a lot of these
things.
And we actually had a meeting yesterday where we sat down,
and there isn't always concurrence on a point of view. The good
news is, we are taking these opportunities in a real-world
scenario as opposed to some theoretical wargame, and I feel we
are gaining a lot of ground.
And actually, there was a discussion about letting our
staffs come together and make out the equivalent of a three-
ring binder and figure out so we can move very fast with, ``We
think it is scenario B,'' bang, so we can get them faster, in
their lane, the support they need, and the mission set
associated with it. So once again, we are taking advantage of
the opportunity right now.
Ms. Stefanik. And my last question in the minute I have
left, we have heard in previous hearings and briefings that
there is no common cyber operating picture that is shared
between DOD, DHS, and FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].
What efforts are being taken to address this shortfall?
Ms. Manfra. I can start, ma'am. You know, I think whether
we--there are tools that are available to have a common
operational picture in terms of incidents that we are working
to share, but it does get back to the earlier point, is we have
to be very precise in terms of what information agencies have
the authority to view.
And so we are working very closely--kind of going back to
that--what do the operators need to do their mission and then,
how do we create the environment where we can share the
information appropriately, so ensuring names are anonymized and
those types of things. And so I think we have made more
progress in this area than we have in the previous decade in
just the last few months, very much focused on the elections.
But that is how we are approaching it in terms of we have
great technology that is available to us and that allows us to
share information, that allows us to look for patterns, those
types of things. We want to leverage that, but we have to do it
in the appropriate legal frameworks. And so we are getting all
those lawyers and operators together to work through specific
instances to make sure we can get to that common view.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you. My time is about to expire.
Mr. Langevin, you are recognized.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Manfra, one of the key challenges we face with
interagency cooperation is prioritization given limited
resources and agencies with different mission sets. So how is
the standup of the new National Risk Management Center helping
to inform efforts to understand the vulnerabilities of critical
functions, and how are you ensuring that these lessons are
diffused throughout the interagency, particularly through the
Department of Defense?
Ms. Manfra. So the work of the National Risk Management
Center is filling a key gap that we identified, which was
looking at the systems and the functions across the country. So
it is taking a more functional approach instead of thinking
about specific assets or organizations, but it is looking at
defining what we are calling national critical functions as one
of its key efforts.
And that effort working with industry will then be able to
inform how our department, how other departments and other
sector-specific agencies, such as DOD, are participating in
this. And so we are defining it from a mission and industry
from a business perspective, and then once we have these
national critical functions identified, which we will have by
the end of the year, then we are going to assess the risk to
those. And DHS and DOD will be working this together, and as
well as other agencies that have a role in there.
And then that starts to be able to trickle down, and so
that we can focus on are we prioritizing all of our resources
towards protecting and preparing ourselves for responding to
the, you know, disruption or the denial of some of those key
functions and services. So that is really the--kind of the core
of the National Risk Management Center, and it is how it is
going to help inform myself, but also the other agencies.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. And to both you and to Mr. Rapuano, I
am pleased obviously that Secretaries Mattis and Nielsen have
recently signed a joint memorandum. We have discussed that,
touched on that a bit today, and I certainly look forward to
reviewing it. How are your departments working to ensure that
collaboration goes beyond just the principal level and happens
operationally as well?
Ms. Manfra. From my perspective at DHS, the core of the
collaboration is actually happening at the operational level.
Our Deputy Director for Operations within the NCCIC has been
our lead for collaborating with her counterparts across DOD.
And then we are identifying other collaboration points, so
whether that is on the operation side or the planning elements,
and then the steering group will be that mechanism by which we
oversee that collaboration and ensure that we are actually
making tangible progress on these outcomes. But much--the bulk
of what we are doing is actually happening at the operational
level.
Mr. Langevin. Okay.
Secretary Rapuano. I would echo that. Our staffs work very
closely in terms of in my organization, as well as the Joint
Staff. The real working level work is at U.S. Cyber Command
working with Secretary Manfra's folks on the operational piece
of the equation.
We also have direct interests at the Department of Defense
as the sector lead for the Defense Industrial Base, and we are
collaborating more and more on that, based on the threats that
are manifesting associated with, again, particularly Russia and
China, as well as defense-critical assets for which we have
dependencies on commercial-critical infrastructure. So that is
another area of focus and area of collaboration with DHS.
Mr. Langevin. So I may come back to a couple questions, but
I wanted to get this clarified, too. Mr. Rapuano, what is the
status of the report required in the FY 2019 NDAA on cyber
civil support teams?
Secretary Rapuano. So we are currently working that--the
response to that. I can get you the details in terms of when
specifically we will be getting that to you.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 69.]
Mr. Langevin. Okay. That is something that we would need to
follow up on, and I just want to get a status report, and we
look forward to seeing the final version.
But let me go back. Mr. Rapuano, can you describe your
approach to bringing DHS in on pathfinder conversations with
the financial sector and DOE [Department of Energy]?
And, Ms. Manfra, if we have time, can you--can we better--
how can we better ensure DHS's unique perspective as the
Federal lead for cyber defense is represented in interagency
policy decision making, especially when the Department's--our
relative newness with--the Department's relative newness means
that it has not traditionally been included? Mr. Rapuano.
Secretary Rapuano. I would just start by saying, with
regard to the pathfinder and financial sector, it wasn't a
question of bringing DHS in. We were engaged from the very
beginning with DHS on that, as well as the Department of the
Treasury.
One of the interesting facets of the financial sector is
they have a very sophisticated--significant investments in
cyber protections. And the outlook and approach there was
looking at what best practices may they have developed because
of the time and attention they played that we could be applying
to other critical infrastructure sectors.
And the energy focus for both of us is a high priority,
because energy is considered to be really one of the
fundamental foundational elements of critical infrastructure
for which many of the others depend on. So, again, that has
been something we have been engaging with DHS on from the
beginning.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
Ms. Manfra. I can answer very briefly. We are absolutely
included in all the relevant conversations related to cyber
operations, whether those are at the NSC [National Security
Council] or with DOD or other agencies. While we are new, we--
you know, we have a Secretary who is very knowledgeable in
cyber and myself and my boss, Under Secretary Krebs. We are in
every one of those conversations where we need to be.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Ratcliffe.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Chairwoman.
Ms. Manfra, I want to start with you. It has been publicly
reported that 50 DOD personnel were reassigned to the NCCIC in
the lead-up to last week's midterm elections. Can you go into a
little more detail into the nature of their mission within DHS
during that time? I am curious what operational role DOD
personnel played, if any, that wasn't just situational
awareness.
Ms. Manfra. We had 11 personnel that came over, integrated.
We do have liaison officers that have been long established
with DOD that come from CYBERCOM. They have been integrated.
Part of the conversation that we had in pre--in setting up
pre-negotiating, if you will, the requests for assistance,
should we need it, if we needed search support on Election Day
or after, was that it would be helpful to have some DOD
personnel that would be fulfilling that request to have some
familiarity with our organization. So they came over for a
couple of days just to become a little bit more familiar. They
are still serving in that liaison role, but it was about 11
people that did come over.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. I want to follow up a little bit on
the discussion about pathfinder as it relates to the financial
sector. As you know, Cybersecurity Act of 2015 offered
liability protections to private organizations for sharing
cyber threat information with DHS.
And that protection, of course, was intended to incentivize
the private sector companies to share information with the
Federal Government. But I am not sure--I am a little concerned
that the financial sector organizations are sharing information
directly with DOD, and I am wondering, if that is the case, are
those organizations still offered liability protections?
Ms. Manfra. To be clear, sir, they are sharing it with DHS.
We are partnering with DOD in, as I mentioned, working through
the legal constructs to ensure that DOD can have access to the
information as well. So it is sort of the through the DHS
framework and the construct that we are bringing DOD into being
a part of.
I would defer to DOD on the liability protections.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Do you want to expand on that?
Secretary Rapuano. I am not tracking the liability
protections, but as Secretary Manfra notes, we really work with
and through DHS in terms of the interface with the private
sector. We bring the expertise and unique capabilities that the
Department has, but we are very conscious of not crossing over
the lines in terms of sensitive or proprietary information. So
we really use DHS as a gatekeeper or filter, so to speak.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. So let me follow up on that with you,
Mr. Rapuano, and you, General Shwedo, in terms of, you know,
what we are hearing from DHS stakeholders is that there is a
general agreement about rules of the road at the high level,
but maybe not at the command level. So I am thinking of
responses to domestic cyber activity like the ransomware attack
on the city of Atlanta or NSA's [National Security Agency's]
knowledge about hackers that attacked Sony Pictures.
I guess I want to be real clear: are DOD elements looping
in DHS to ensure civilian cybersecurity equities are considered
before or after the fact?
General Shwedo. So I will tell you, sir, you know, as we
are going through pathfinders, et cetera, we are very cognizant
of all the laws, and that is why you will hear Mr. Rapuano say
we go through DHS. As it stands right now, we follow to the
letter of the law, and that is much of the discussion that you
hear between the two elements as we go forward.
We get requests for support from DHS, and then we turn it
to over to lawyers on both sides of the street to make sure
that we are following the piece. But any belief that somebody
is going VFR direct \1\ [visual flight rules, direct] to the
Department of Defense is not what is happening. We work through
DHS on all of our support.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Air Force slang term concerning a pilot's ability to go
straight to his destination; from aviation term meaning a simple flight
plan.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Secretary Rapuano. Just to add to that, DHS has the
domestic protection mission. DOD is supporting DHS in the form
of defense support to civil authorities through DHS's
authorities. So, again, we are working very closely with DHS.
DHS comes to us if they have got needs that are beyond what
they can within their own capability sets employ, but if we
were to employ them, it would be through DHS authorities.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. I very much appreciate that
clarification. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Richmond.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you.
Lieutenant General Shwedo, you answered pretty much my
first question about collaboration between organizations, so
let me focus for a moment on the funding aspect. With respect
to securing civilian cyberspace, the role of civilian agencies
in the military is well-defined. Congress has decided that
outside of national emergencies, DHS, and not the armed
services or the intelligence community, should lead these
efforts.
So the question is about funding. Right now, DOD has an $8
billion budget for cyber, given DHS has basically $1 billion
for critical infrastructure. Considering that 85 percent of
critical infrastructure is privately owned, how do we balance
that, and at what level would you say that a mission like that
should be funded? And that is for the entire panel.
General Shwedo. So, sir, the first piece is, you know,
comparing the two budgets, first of all, Cyber Command is
responsible for not only defensing--defensive actions here, but
they also have a combatant command responsibility to ensure
cyber warfare going on and the other piece. So that is one
difference.
The other piece is, I think if you look at the
responsibility, and we are still talking about how to fund some
of these things, Mr. Rapuano will talk about it, but we have
talked everything from--and this is part of the pathfinder,
which has been a wonderful experience, is talking about the
equivalent of a cyber Stafford Act and other things, because we
are very cognizant of how funding in a bunch of different
directions could get pretty bad.
The last part is, there is going to be a responsibility for
a lot of these companies and other people that we have been
talking about earlier to have their portion of cyber defense.
For them to just put their hands up in the air and say we are
not going to fund it anymore, I think, would also be a bill
that we could not afford, but I will turn this over to Mr.
Rapuano.
Secretary Rapuano. I would just add that when you look at
the DOD's budget, and the figure $8 billion is often used, the
great majority of that funding does not go to U.S. Cyber
Command. The great majority of that funding goes to development
of weapon systems with cyber resilience and cybersecurity
capabilities to the services.
Cyber Command, I believe, is under $500 million a year in
terms of its funding, closer to $300 million, I believe. We can
check that fact. But it is a very small percentage of the
overall $8 billion, which is going into weapon systems and the
Defense Information System and the CIO [Chief Information
Officer].
Ms. Manfra. From a DHS perspective, sir, we are a, you
know--well, fairly new agency and we have been growing
steadily. I would say that, you know, absolutely support the
President's budget, appreciate the assistance through the
omnibus and additional resources to assist us with the
elections and helping with additional capabilities to civilian
agencies.
But to help understand the scope, there are 99 civilian
agencies that I am responsible for assisting with
cybersecurity. There are--just in, you know, one sector alone,
there are hundreds of thousands of companies that operate our
water and wastewater treatment plants. So there is a massive
scope and scale in what we are trying to secure.
We are very grateful to Congress for the authorities that
we have been given, and we look forward to working with you to
ensure that we have the capability and the capacity to deliver.
Mr. Richmond. Well, this is one of those golden moments.
And, Lieutenant General, you kind of mentioned the Stafford
Act. I am, you know, a survivor of Katrina and Rita. We don't
hold the Stafford Act out to be the great example of anything,
and I really wish this committee had--at least Homeland had
jurisdiction over the Stafford Act so we could improve it.
But, Assistant Secretary Manfra, here is your opportunity
to say, I think we have enough resources to protect the
privately owned critical infrastructure; I think we don't. And
what we don't want to happen--especially since my district is
the first largest petrochemical district in the United States--
what we don't want is Monday morning quarterback to say we
didn't have the resources, we didn't have the support, we
didn't get X, Y, and Z done.
So I guess my question is, as we head into budgeting and
all the other stuff, do you think you have the resources to
accomplish the mission that is so critical to everyone up here?
So that is basically the question.
Ms. Manfra. Sir, what I would say is that, as is
demonstrated with the additional resources that you gave us for
elections, we can do more with more.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you. And I yield back.
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you all, all three for being here. I am
grateful for your expertise and your hard work.
My first question is to General Shwedo, who I have worked
with for quite a while. He has got a lot of experience in cyber
warfare. And I would just like you to explain to our country
and our citizens why this topic is so important that we don't
have seams or overlapping, and if you could put it in the
context of what would you anticipate on day one of a major
cyberattack, say, from Russia or China.
This obviously would be a military directed attack at us,
but will those targets be only towards military, or would you
anticipate it being a wide array of targets in our country? If
you could just elaborate what you would anticipate.
General Shwedo. So I will just give an overview. We can
definitely talk in detail in a closed session. But what we are
seeing is, from both Russia and China, they prefer to stay
below the level of the threshold of armed conflict. And you
will find that we are seeing more and more when we see Ukraine
and other countries, when you see power and other things start
going out.
My concern is sometimes the citizenry is the soft
underbelly, and I think that is kind of where you are going
with the question, is we--and that is why this is so important,
is we need to ensure that we shore up that, and that is part of
the discussion we are having today as opposed to just throwing
up our hands and saying we fight foreign wars.
We are not going to launch in and start taking over things
in the United States. We are very cognizant to what DHS has to
do, and that is why it is so important to make sure that we get
it right when we go through these pathfinders, to make sure we
get it right, that we get them the information and the support
they need as it goes forward.
But I do believe your--the portion of your question is spot
on. I do believe that it is going to be wide ranging. And I
think if they get their way, just like the sons and daughters
of Sun Tzu, they would prefer to not fight force on force. They
would prefer to get their way below the level of the threshold
of armed conflict, because the world has seen what happens when
they go toe to toe with us, and that is not the preferred COA
[course of action] they would like to go with.
Mr. Bacon. So just to resummarize, it would be a military
attack from their own cyber capabilities, but very likely the
focus will be on areas covered by DHS. And this is why it is so
important that we don't have these seams or overlapping things.
It is very important that we have it right, because we know day
one will not be a December 7 type attack. They will be going
after our energy grid, our financial sector, all those things
that would create havoc. And so it requires significant
cooperation between DOD and DHS to get this right.
And my next question will be to Ms. Manfra. We passed a
bill earlier this year that gave DHS responsibility over
industrial control systems. It is sitting in the Senate right
now. How important is it to you and DHS that we get this out of
the Senate and signed by the President?
Ms. Manfra. Well, first of all, sir, I want to thank you
all for recognizing the uniqueness of industrial control
systems. These are the systems that really underpin most of our
critical infrastructure. And DHS has had a unique role to play
in industrial control systems, having some of the most
recognized globally experts in our ICS-CERT [Industrial Control
Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team]. So very much appreciate
the acknowledgment that we need to have this leadership role
and looking forward to continuing to work with the Senate and
others to codify that.
Mr. Bacon. We need to give a nudge over there, I think, get
that signed--or voted on and sent over to the President.
My final question is this, and it gets back to really the
focus of your-all's time here today. Do any of you see where we
have overlapping responsibilities where it is creating
problems? Do you need more delineation through legislation? Do
you have any recommendations for us in that area? So do we have
areas of overlap or do we have areas of seams that we need to
do better on? Thank you.
Ms. Manfra. Sir, I don't see any areas of overlap. We have
definitely identified that there is a potential for seams and
so we are working to address those, going back to starting at
these national critical functions. And I know DOD is thinking
about what is critical to their capability as well.
And so working together to ensure that we are bringing the
full force of both of our authorities. I do believe that they
are very complementary. I don't believe that they are
duplicative or overlapping in any way. And so we are just going
to continue to ensure that we can operationalize those
authorities so that we can both do our missions.
Mr. Bacon. Mr. Rapuano, anything to add?
Secretary Rapuano. So as Secretary Manfra notes, we are in
the process right now of looking at what our critical national
functions are. And typically, because we looked at the homeland
as a sanctuary traditionally over time and with the threat of
cyber in particular, the homeland is no longer that sanctuary.
We are looking at all of our dependencies as the Department of
Defense and our ability to project power, where they are in
critical infrastructure and how we can better ensure their
resilience, so in the event of a conflict----
Ms. Stefanik. Time is expired.
Secretary Rapuano [continuing]. We will be able to leverage
them. Thank you.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. I yield.
Ms. Stefanik. Mrs. Demings, you are recognized for 5
minutes. Mrs. Demings, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much, Madam Chair. And thank you
to our witnesses for being with us today.
This question is really for the entire panel, and I do
appreciate the information that you shared with us thus far in
this very critical area. And my question goes back to
collaboration, cooperation. A question was asked earlier about
resources, and I think we do better when we have the ability to
share information and better work together.
So my question is, how are DHS and DOD working together on
supply chain risk, especially in light of the growing overlap
between the Defense Industrial Base and traditionally civilian
sectors of U.S. critical infrastructure?
Ms. Manfra. I can start, ma'am. This is actually one of our
key areas of focus, given the exact point that you just made,
that the many civilian agencies use many of the same companies
that are in the Defense Industrial Base and that DOD uses.
There is a series of actions, some of which we can talk about
in the closed hearing as well, that we are ensuring that we are
coordinating. So that we are using our authorities to drive
better risk practices, both with the agencies that I have the
directive authority under with civilian FISMA [Federal
Information Security Management Act] agencies, as well as on
the DOD side, but that we are also sharing information, and
that we are coordinating and ensuring that if we are aware of a
compromise of a vendor for one agency, that both of our
agencies are aware of that and we can take coordinated action.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you.
Secretary Rapuano.
Secretary Rapuano. I thank you for the question. It is a
very significant focus and concern, in terms of the supply
chain and the dependency that we have on it for our weapon
systems and communications capabilities.
We are focused in the interagency with DHS, but other key
agencies, Commerce and others, in terms of identifying where
the vulnerabilities are and how do we identify how we can
restructure and better protect critical supply elements
necessary for the economy and the military.
Mrs. Demings. And General Shwedo.
General Shwedo. Yes, ma'am. So this clearly falls under the
information sharing piece, and we are aggressively looking for
these back doors, et cetera. And as soon as we find one, we go
back to the relationship with DHS, or dependent on who is the
recipient of this back door, to ensure that we start sharing
the information, because we understand that there's multiple
actors in this realm and we are trying to get after it.
Mrs. Demings. How would you say the White House is
coordinating these efforts, and how are roles and
responsibilities currently aligned?
Ms. Manfra. The National Security Council is working
through much of this. As Mr. Rapuano noted, there is OMB, the
Office of Management and Budget. When you are thinking about
Federal procurement policy, legal teams need to get together
from Department of Justice, et cetera.
So this is a whole-of-government effort that is being
managed by the White House. Then there are specific things that
DHS and DOD are committing to do with each other because of our
unique authorities and oversight over the networks that we have
the oversight on.
Mrs. Demings. Secretary Rapuano, would you like to add
anything to your original answer?
Secretary Rapuano. I would just concur with Secretary
Manfra that this is a whole-of-government focus, because there
are a number of different agencies with authorities and
responsibilities and expertise, and it has been working very
closely, at least from my observation.
General Shwedo. I would just end with it has to be a whole-
of-government approach. We have got to make sure that we track
it down in all aspects. So absolutely, that is where it has to
come from, and it has to go down to the lowest levels.
Mrs. Demings. And you feel like you are on target with
reaching your mission and your goals in that area?
General Shwedo. So, ma'am, you know, the supply chain
challenge is incredibly hard. And this is one of those ones we
cannot fall off the target. We have got to stay focused on this
the entire time.
And I unfortunately hate to tell you we will never, quote,
``get there.'' We are going to have to continually, because
there are always going to be bad guys that are going to be
shaking windows and shaking back doors, trying to get into our
systems, weapon systems, any supply chain piece, commercial
off-the-shelf. They are going to do anything that they can.
Sons and daughters of Sun Tzu, they will go like water to the
least defended place and try to place their back door there.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you all.
And, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Mrs. Demings.
Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And, ma'am, when you mention the word ``procurement'' in
this particular field, I imagine you could spend weeks in
committee meetings on that, and we will be looking forward to
your input on how we best handle procurement.
I want to mention one other thing before I get to my
specific question. We have got people effectively doing the
same job from different agencies. And my question gets back to
compensation and employee benefits and managing a workforce
that comes through different agencies. If you have got
tremendous discrepancies in pay, that can lead to problems in
the management of your team.
Is that an issue that you have been able to address or is
that something that you are going to need legislative help
with?
Ms. Manfra. Sir, we actually have received legislative help
on this in a bill passed a few years ago.
Mr. Scott. Okay.
Ms. Manfra. We are working to create what we call the Cyber
Talent Management System. We have been able to leverage some
existing authorities, direct-hire authority, retention
incentives, to reward those who have achieved certain
certifications in difficult-to-retain positions, those types of
things, that have really reduced our attrition rate.
The Cyber Talent Management System, I really believe once
we get this in place, it will really just be a complete
revolution in how you think about public service and civil
service, and we are really excited to get that on board. And I
am working with Suzette Kent, the Federal CIO, to think about
how do we ensure that all civilian agencies have the ability to
recruit and retain quality talent. And so that is also a big
initiative. You will see some of that in the National Cyber
Strategy as well, thinking about that workforce of the future.
Mr. Scott. It is certainly an area where in the private
sector, they can make significantly more money, and they are
truly public servants in doing the work that they are.
My question gets specifically to the National Guard. I know
the Army Guard and the Air Guard have established cyber units
to support U.S. Cyber Command. In what cases can these units
support their home States under State authority or other States
on a State-to-State basis?
And, General, that may be best for you. How do you expect--
--
General Shwedo. Actually, I will defer to Mr. Rapuano. He
is working on this issue right now.
Mr. Scott. Okay. That is fine. Perfect. Thank you.
Secretary Rapuano. So as recently as the elections, we had
a number of circumstances where State National Guard were
supporting the State elections process with their cyber
expertise and skills. As I noted in my statement, we are
looking at the orientation and structuring of National Guard
support to the civil side of the equation, and that would be
with Federal assistance, in terms of a mission force
capability.
But I think as you know, the National Guard, we go with the
total force construct in the Department of Defense, which means
that you want to have maximum flexibility to utilize all of
your force structure to hit your priorities. And if you are
segmenting significant chunks of it for particular missions for
particular supported elements, you might lose that.
So we are balancing in the assessment what the gain/loss is
associated with dedicating certain elements of the Guard to
cyber domestic missions versus having them in reserve for
military missions. So that is a work in progress.
General Shwedo. All I would say just on the end is this is
really where the come together with DHS, because we have to
have that whole-of-government approach before we throw too many
National Guard members. DHS may be having support teams in
there, so that is going to be part of the calculus in covering
down on all of our bets to a cyber incident. So those are some
of the conversations.
The last part, we are learning a lot as it goes forward
with--just in one scenario, Mr. Rapuano had to sign a waiver to
a policy to allow National Guardsmen to get TS/SCI [Top Secret/
Sensitive Compartmented Information] information when, because
they were in Guard status, they were limited to Secret. So,
once again, we are learning a lot as we go through.
Mr. Scott. It is certainly a different type of mission, but
I think that as time goes on, we are going to need to pull on
the Guard just for the manpower that it is going to take to
handle this mission. But thank you for what you do.
And, ma'am, I yield the 15 seconds.
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you. Thanks for coming out.
I want to build on what Mr. Scott said, Mr. Rapuano. So in
your testimony you say that you are responsible for leading
this with the DHS, but are you the leader on this, looking at
[section] 1653? Are we calling you when there is a question?
Secretary Rapuano. Well, we work with the Joint Staff, and
we work with----
Mr. Larsen. Yeah, but you are doing the evaluation?
Secretary Rapuano. Yes, yes.
Mr. Larsen. Your name will be on----
Secretary Rapuano. OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense]
policy is----
Mr. Larsen. OSD policy. Then do you have a timeline for the
evaluation?
Secretary Rapuano. I don't. I can come back to you with a
timeline.
Mr. Larsen. You don't yet have an estimate of when you are
going to get back to us?
Secretary Rapuano. February.
Mr. Larsen. February?
Secretary Rapuano. Hot off the presses.
Mr. Larsen. As part of the budget or separately?
Secretary Rapuano. Separately.
Mr. Larsen. Separately. Thank you.
And you mentioned a few criteria. Have you outlined the top
criteria that you will use to evaluate the pilot program?
Secretary Rapuano. Well, it is really a trade space
analysis, looking at the various missions and capabilities,
looking at the contingency planning, looking at the global
synchronization/prioritization process that the Joint Staff
runs, to best understand what the best return on investment is
in terms of military capability invested against a certain
range of problems and contingencies.
Mr. Larsen. It sounds like a pretty broad--a fairly broad
answer then still.
Secretary Rapuano. Well, the study has--I have not plugged
into the study in the last several weeks, so it has advanced
beyond the last element of information I have from it.
Mr. Larsen. Okay. So I think there are three States,
including my State, that are in the pilot. If I am not
mistaken, Washington--I am sorry, I am not mistaken that my
State is Washington. Washington, Ohio, and Hawaii I think are
the States.
Are you looking at different models for the CSTs [civil
support teams] or are they all using the same model?
Secretary Rapuano. I don't have that level of detail.
Mr. Larsen. Thanks. And you are looking at cost, obviously,
Federal portion versus State portion?
Secretary Rapuano. Costing is part of the assessment.
Mr. Larsen. Cost is part of the assessment.
And then as part of this, are you embedded with the CSTs,
with the pilot projects in each State, or are you providing
them an evaluation tool, they are getting back to you on that?
Secretary Rapuano. I don't have that level of detail. I can
come back to you with more of the framing in terms of how the
study is being worked.
Mr. Larsen. Could you do that, please?
Secretary Rapuano. Yes.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 69.]
Mr. Larsen. It is essentially the gist of my questions. And
if either General or Ms. Manfra have any comments with regards
to the questions I have, that is fine. Great.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Hice.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Secretary Manfra, let me begin with you. The cybersecurity
strategy places some emphasis on the issue of supply chain
risks, and that, of course, is a big concern to many of us,
particularly in recent weeks, as there have been some reports
of at least possible compromise in some microelectronics.
So I am curious what you all are doing, what you plan to do
in this regard, specifically with Federal networks, but also
with other stakeholders, national as well as global.
Ms. Manfra. Thank you for the question, sir. We are
addressing both the civilian network challenge as well as the
national and, frankly, global issue.
On the Federal side, what I mentioned is both working,
started with things like requiring the removal of Kaspersky
last year when we directed that all agencies had to remove
Kaspersky-branded products.
And what we have been doing since then is working with the
intelligence community, the Department of Defense, GSA [General
Services Administration], OMB, and working through what are the
barriers to civilian agencies being able to best manage third-
party risk.
It is a fairly monumental problem and it does require
thinking about things like procurement and, which, you know, is
challenging, but we are taking it on, and we are doing it with
all agencies at the table.
On sort of in the complementary effort, one of the other
National Risk Management Center initiatives is actually about
supply chain specifically. So we have an entire initiative. We
stood up a supply chain task force with our partners in the IT
and the communications industry. Every major player that has a
role in delivering technology both to the government and to the
broader citizenry in our country and, frankly, globally.
And we are working through both to get their perspective on
what the Federal government could be doing better, but also how
can we make the ecosystem more secure so we are not so
dependent on technology that is developed and delivered from
countries that we are not okay with the laws that they have in
place. It is a very challenging problem, but I think we have
the right mechanisms in place.
Mr. Hice. So you are pleased with the direction things are
going?
Ms. Manfra. I am absolutely pleased. I always wish that you
could revise procurement policy a little bit faster, but it is
a process that we have to go through.
Mr. Hice. Mr. Rapuano, would you like to respond to that as
well?
Secretary Rapuano. Just very quickly. We are very focused
on the vulnerabilities with regard to supply chain. We have
concerns about the DODIN, the DOD information system; defense
critical assets, in terms of looking very closely at potential
vulnerabilities in the supply chain; and the Defense Industrial
Base, in terms of the contract relationships. What are the
requirements? How do we reduce the risk associated with
contaminated supply, essentially.
Mr. Hice. Are you likewise satisfied with the direction we
are going to have an appropriate defense?
Secretary Rapuano. We have a lot of time and effort focused
on it right now. It is a big challenge.
Mr. Hice. It is.
Okay. Madam Chair, I see the clock says I am expired. I
don't know if that is accurate.
Ms. Stefanik. You have 1 minute, 30 seconds.
Mr. Hice. Okay.
Ms. Stefanik. Actually, it reset, so I will give you 30
more seconds, Jody.
Mr. Hice. Okay. Well, 30 more seconds isn't going to give
me time to go into another question. But General, let me just
ask you your perspective on the supply chain issue.
General Shwedo. Sir, as said, this is a huge problem, and
the bottom line is this is where the info sharing is so
powerful. And we need to make sure that we get it rapidly to
all the affected players. And that is one of the strengths of
this exercise we are going through right now, because in the
past, on our side we weren't always able to share it as well as
we are right now. So yes, it is a much better future, but we
have got a lot of work to do, sir.
Mr. Hice. Well, I am pleased to hear that. And, again,
thank you for the work that each of you are doing. Obviously,
this is an issue that impacts every agency and every department
across the board, and at the heart of it is the defense and
national security issues. So thank you for what you are doing
in that regard.
And thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Mr. Hice. Sorry about the time,
but glad you got your questions in.
Ms. Jackson Lee, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you to the Chair and multiple Chairs
and multiple Ranking Members. Thank you to the panel that has
made this presentation for us.
I am not eager to engage in hyperbole, but I do think that
a potential cyberattack is something that we all should be
concerned about as much as it would be pervasive enough to
cross all of the elements of which we would be concerned,
whether it deals with the question of war and peace, whether it
is a domestic internal action, or whether or not it happens to
impact the Nation's electric grid, water and sewage, the normal
functions, transportation. It is an amazing reach that we have
that I think this hearing is extremely important.
And I do think it is important to raise the question
regarding the creation of the cyber defense, and to start off
with my first question, which I think has been asked, but I
would like to hear how effective the collaboration is with the
cyber responsibilities of DHS and those of DOD. So we have DHS,
we have DOD, and if you could just take a quick moment. Do you
think it is fully integrated, it is parallel, that the
distinctive duties are clear, the commands are clear, the
working relationships could be better, or they are growing? I
would be interested in that, Secretaries, and then to our
Lieutenant General.
Ms. Manfra. Ma'am, thank you for the question. From my
perspective, I think we have come a very, very long way. And
while there is absolutely room to continue to grow, I am very
confident that we are on the right path.
As I briefly mentioned before, our approach is really about
bringing the policy personnel, the legal teams, and the
operators in the room together and thinking about what is it we
need to accomplish our missions and how can we use our
complementary authorities and capabilities to best do that. And
I think that is the right approach.
We have already realized a great deal, whether that is on
elections or in other spaces. There is definitely room to
continue to integrate our teams and we are setting the stage to
make that happen, but I think we have demonstrated that this
can work in real-world scenarios, and I am very satisfied with
the track that we are on.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Secretary Rapuano. I would agree with every point that
Secretary Manfra made. We are looking at and moving out on
integrating the policies, plans, and the implementation at the
operational level.
As noted throughout this testimony, there are a lot of
challenges in this space. There are a lot of cross-cutting
equities within the government and between the government and
the private sector. That is what we are focusing on and
prioritizing amongst them and then really focusing our efforts
at the highest priorities.
Ms. Jackson Lee. General.
General Shwedo. Yes, ma'am. I would just follow up with the
good thing about what we are going through right now is it is
not theoretical. We are actually going through real-world
scenarios and we are seeing results, not just at the
operational, but at the tactical level.
Whenever you see a Kaspersky or election manipulation, et
cetera--and we will talk more about this when we go to the
closed door--we are seeing at the lowest levels this
information is getting where it needs to be and we are seeing
results of what happens when the information gets there.
So we have got more work to do on where we get the
relationship so we can be faster, because in the world of cyber
it is all about speed, but I would say we are on a good path
right now.
Ms. Jackson Lee. In your next answer, you might mention--
when you said ``speed,'' I spent a day with Aspen Institute
dealing with cybersecurity, and quantum was a very major aspect
of it and how fast it is.
So let me ask this question very quickly, if the Chair
would indulge me. First of all, I introduced H.R. 3202, the
Cyber Vulnerability Disclosure Reporting Act, and it passed the
House. And it is to create a safe place for the private sector
to feel safe enough or secure enough to submit to the
government its vulnerabilities, since we know they have 85
percent or more of our cyber in the hands of the private
sector.
So I appreciate as I ask this question if you would
incorporate the concept of zero day possibilities, but working
with the private sector, but specifically I want to ask about
the WannaCry and NotPetya attacks as examples of disruptive
cyber events that may have--or that had far-reaching
implications. The impact of these type attacks were felt most
acutely abroad, with much of the U.S. cyber infrastructure not
seeing the full effect of these attacks.
But can you give examples of some of the far-reaching
consequences for WannaCry and NotPetya to the United States,
and what are some of the more pressing issues regarding Russia
interference in the recent Federal election? If you could do
that, incorporated with the potential of fast quantum
technology and how we should be looking at that in terms of our
defense. Secretary.
Ms. Stefanik. We will have to take those answers for the
record. The time is expired.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 69.]
Ms. Stefanik. We will now move to the closed session in
Rayburn 2212 immediately and get through as much of that as
possible before they call votes.
Thank you very much to the witnesses.
[Whereupon, at 4:30 p.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session.]
=======================================================================
A P P E N D I X
November 14, 2018
=======================================================================
=======================================================================
PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
November 14, 2018
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING
THE HEARING
November 14, 2018
=======================================================================
RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. LANGEVIN
Secretary Rapuano. Section 1653 of the National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 requires an assessment of the
feasibility and advisability of establishing State Cyber Civil Support
Teams. My team, in collaboration with the Department of Homeland
Security, is as of November 14, 2018, in the final stages of drafting
that report and our intent is to deliver the final version to Congress
in 2019. [Note: the final report was submitted to Congress in May
2019].
[See page 16.]
______
RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LARSEN
Secretary Rapuano. Washington, Ohio, and Hawaii National Guard
personnel are participating in a pilot program to evaluate the utility
of using National Guard (NG) cyber elements to support DOD missions.
The NG pilot program employs select Army National Guard (ARNG) and Air
National Guard (ANG) personnel to conduct DOD cyber training
activities, both on and off the DOD Information Network (DODIN), with
the incidental benefit of helping to protect defense critical
infrastructure. DOD is cooperating with DHS on this program.
The pilot program currently underway differs significantly from the
cyber civil support team (CST) concept as described in Section 1653 of
the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019. Most
importantly, Section 1653 directs the Department to assess the
feasibility and advisability of CSTs ``organized . . . for the purpose
of assisting State authorities,'' which would ``[operate] principally
under the command and control of the Chief Executive of the State.''
The cyber elements are participating in the NG pilot program for the
purpose of accomplishing DOD training while providing incidental
benefit to DOD mission assurance.
As of November 14, 2018, my team, in collaboration with the
Department of Homeland Security, is in the final stages of drafting the
report required by Section 1653, and our intent is to deliver the final
version to Congress in 2019. The report will include cost assessments
for several different models considered in the assessment, including
the NG pilot program currently underway. [Note: the final report was
submitted to Congress in May 2019].
[See page 26.]
______
RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. JACKSON LEE
Ms. Manfra. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
[See page 29.]
Secretary Rapuano. In May 2017, WannaCry infected hundreds of
thousands of computers around the world, causing extensive damage. In
June 2017, NotPetya encrypted and essentially ruined hard drives on
thousands of Ukrainian computers, and then quickly spread well beyond
Ukraine, causing billions of dollars in damages to businesses across
Europe and as far away as the United States. Both WannaCry and NotPetya
exploited a vulnerability in Windows that the Microsoft Corporation had
patched weeks earlier.
We currently have no indication that any foreign adversary intended
to manipulate votes or attack elections infrastructure in the 2018 U.S.
midterm elections. However, we continue to see a pervasive messaging
campaign by Russia to try to weaken and divide the United States.
Quantum computing has the potential to increase information
processing speed exponentially. The addition of quantum computing
affects both exploit and counter-exploit activities. The increased
speed for an adversary to identify vulnerabilities and develop exploits
could be matched by the speed in which security researchers identify
exploitable products and notify the vendor, who would produce a
software update or service patch.
[See page 29.]
General Shwedo. [The information is retained in the subcommittee
files.]
[See page 29.]
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING
November 14, 2018
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. STEFANIK
Ms. Stefanik. Ms. Manfra, you are likely aware of the DOD's
SharkSeer cybersecurity program, which orchestrates 23 commercial
technologies to provide automated cyber defense for the DOD information
network. It is my understanding that since becoming fully operational,
SharkSeer has increased DOD detection rates by 886 percent and has
discovered over 2 billion unique cyber events. I also understand that
SharkSeer's automated means for detecting, analyzing and responding to
nation-state cyber events has replaced the need for nearly 90 personnel
to generate mitigations; now, only a few personnel are needed to
approve automated work flows and interactive mitigations are executed
in minutes rather than days--this means that DOD's security
architecture is not only more secure, it's also more cost effective. In
short, by any measurement, this a very successful program that could be
replicated to protect a broader range of Federal networks.
Ms. Manfra, based on what I have described and what you know
independently about the SharkSeer program, do you think there's an
opportunity to leverage a similar architecture consisting of
commercial-off-the-shelf technologies to protect civilian networks? Are
you planning to collaborate with DOD on such an architecture?
Ms. Manfra. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Ms. Stefanik. What are DOD and DHS doing individually and
collectively to manage risk associated with Internet of Things (IOT)
and Operational Technology (OT) devices that are already deployed on
government networks but lack sufficient security capability?
Ms. Manfra. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Ms. Stefanik. DHS has worked hard over the past few years, via the
CDM program, to ensure that all internet-enabled devices that connect
to a Federal civilian network can be identified and that such devices
comply with network policies. I understand that DOD has developed a
similar program referred to as Comply to Connect that is used by
several of the service branches and DOD agencies, but is not fully
rolled out enterprise-wide.
Please give me a sense as to how important it is that civilian
networks be able to identify all of the devices, including IOT devices
and Operational Technology devices, that seek to connect and that all
such devices comply with network policies?
Ms. Manfra. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Ms. Stefanik. In September, the President signed an election
security executive order that requires the Director of National
Intelligence, in consultation with the heads of any other appropriate
executive departments and agencies, to conduct an assessment on any
election interference by a foreign government. This assessment is due
45 days after the election.
As an action from this hearing, we would like to request a copy of
that assessment, when complete. If appropriate, the results of the
assessment may also be included in the next quarterly cyber operations
briefing.
Ms. Manfra. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Ms. Stefanik. In September, we had a briefing that discussed the
DOD efforts to protect the 2018 midterm elections. In this closed
setting, can you provide an update on the DOD and DHS efforts?
Ms. Manfra. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Ms. Stefanik. We have heard anecdotally that many of the current
interagency cyber relationships have been ad hoc and are based on
personal connections. Can you describe any frameworks that could be
used to formalize these relationships and interactions? What level
would these frameworks best be applied at?
Ms. Manfra. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Ms. Stefanik. The FY19 NDAA authorized a pilot program to provide
Department of Defense technical personnel to the Department of Homeland
Security to improve critical infrastructure cybersecurity. Can you give
a status of this pilot program? What lessons have we already learned?
Ms. Manfra. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Ms. Stefanik. Where do you see the most value in expanding our
current partnerships? Are there lessons learned from our interagency
interactions that could be applied to strengthening our international
partnerships?
Ms. Manfra. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Rapuano, you are likely aware of the DOD's
SharkSeer cybersecurity program, which orchestrates 23 commercial
technologies to provide automated cyber defense for the DOD information
network. It is my understanding that since becoming fully operational,
SharkSeer has increased DOD detection rates by 886 percent and has
discovered over 2 billion unique cyber events. I also understand that
SharkSeer's automated means for detecting, analyzing and responding to
nation-state cyber events has replaced the need for nearly 90 personnel
to generate mitigations; now, only a few personnel are needed to
approve automated work flows and interactive mitigations are executed
in minutes rather than days--this means that DOD's security
architecture is not only more secure, it's also more cost effective. In
short, by any measurement, this a very successful program that could be
replicated to protect a broader range of Federal networks.
Mr. Rapuano, can you please share your general views on both the
efficacy and the cost-effectiveness of the SharkSeer program? Has the
DOD shared its learnings from the SharkSeer program with DHS as you
coordinate on cybersecurity best practices?
Secretary Rapuano. The National Security Agency (NSA) Sharkseer
cybersecurity program integrates commercial-off-the-shelf technologies
and threat intelligence to provide real-time detection, alerting,
analysis, and mitigation of malware activity on national security
systems and other government organization end point operations. In
October 2016, NSA, in partnership with Defense Information Systems
Agency (DISA), completed the worldwide deployment of Sharkseer
perimeter defense capabilities at the ten DOD NIPRNet Internet Access
Points. Section 1641 of the National Defense Authorization Act for
Fiscal Year 2019 directs the transfer of the Sharkseer program from the
NSA to DISA no later than March 1, 2019, for continued enterprise-wide
operations. Sharkseer has been successful and cost effective to date.
Yes, DOD shares lessons learned from Sharkseer with DHS. Also,
there are more than 800 registered users of the Sharkseer program,
including DHS.
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Rapuano, in the 5 years since Edward Snowden's
theft of classified information from the National Security Agency (NSA)
became public, insider attacks--both malicious or accidental--have
continued to embarrass and damage U.S. national security. One of the
most recent insider attacks on a Federal agency involved a former NSA
developer, Nghia Hoang Pho, who was found guilty of illegally
exfiltrating a high volume of classified material, including
sophisticated collection tools, between 2010 and 2015. According to
former NSA Director Admiral Mike Rogers, Mr. Pho's actions ``left the
NSA with no choice but to abandon certain important initiatives, at
great economic and operational cost.'' The human element in
cybersecurity is a critical weakness and our efforts to date have not
been sufficiently effective.
As we modernize our networks and move to a cloud environment with
shared services, what are the Department of Defense and the Department
of Homeland Security doing individually and together from a people,
process, and technology perspective, to better manage risk from
insiders in near real time while avoiding undue infringement upon the
civil liberties of employees and contractors that support the
government?
Secretary Rapuano. In accordance with Executive Order 13587,
Structural Reforms to Improve the Security of Classified Networks and
the Responsible Sharing and Safeguarding of Classified Information,
dated October 7, 2011, DOD is implementing a strategic and layered
approach to strengthen the mitigation of insider threats as it relates
to technology, people, and processes, including the governance and
management of efforts to counter insider threats.
First, with respect to technology, the Department is actively
improving both user and network monitoring to mitigate insider threats
more effectively. DOD organizations are employing user activity
monitoring tools to monitor individual user activities on computers
accessing and storing information and analyzing that activity. In
addition, we are developing new tactics, techniques, and procedures
that increase our ability to detect and report cyber insider threat
events on information networks.
Second, with respect to people and processes, the insider threat
must be addressed through understanding individuals and their
interaction points with the Department. Thus, the Department is
investing in the area of insider threat social and behavioral sciences
(SBS) and considers this one of its strategic pillars. DOD researchers
and social scientists have partnered with industrial and academic
entities to conduct a number of SBS projects that will help understand
the human behaviors of DOD personnel and contractors. Building on the
outcome of these projects, we are modernizing and strengthening the
hiring process and changing organizational processes and culture to
encourage reporting (including identification for self-help). We must
be able to detect and manage at-risk employees to mitigate potential
threats as early as possible.
Lastly, the Department takes a proactive approach to ensure
appropriate protections of the privacy and civil liberties of DOD
personnel and contractors. Accordingly, all insider threat and cyber
security-related policy and procedures are reviewed and cleared by the
DOD Privacy, Civil Liberties, and Transparency Division prior to
release or implementation
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Rapuano, network traffic traversing both civilian
and military IT systems is increasing exponentially in volume. As the
overall volume increases, Gartner predicts that by 2019, 80% of that
traffic will be encrypted. What are the DOD and DHS doing to ensure
that appropriate network traffic, whether inbound, outbound, or moving
laterally, can be de-crypted, inspected by the appropriate
cybersecurity tools, and re-crypted?
Secretary Rapuano. The Department of Defense is testing a number of
ways that we might improve cybersecurity. The Defense Information
Systems Agency is conducting a pilot program for inbound and outbound
traffic designed to inspect encrypted traffic exiting and entering DOD
enclaves at Internet Access Points (IAPs). We are learning a great deal
from this pilot program and are making adjustments to enhance both
performance and security based on what we are learning.
For lateral traffic, the Joint Regional Security Stack (JRSS)
team--a network enclave security capability that monitors and inspects
network traffic--is testing capabilities and working on solving
significant performance challenges from the greater traffic volumes.
Decisions on undertaking a pilot program and specific deployments are
not yet finalized.
Ms. Stefanik. What are DOD and DHS doing individually and
collectively to manage risk associated with Internet of Things (IOT)
and Operational Technology (OT) devices that are already deployed on
government networks but lack sufficient security capability?
Secretary Rapuano. DOD established cybersecurity policy in 2014,
articulating security expectations for all DOD information technology
(IT), including IOT and OT devices, as described in DOD Instruction
8500.01, Cybersecurity, and DOD Instruction 8510.01, the Risk
Management Framework (RMF) for DOD Information Technology (IT). Through
implementation of these policies, DOD is actively managing risk on
systems already deployed on government networks, based on the
criticality of the system. DOD will continue to update these policies
to strengthen cybersecurity requirements for all end points, reducing
the ``weak links'' in DOD networks and rewarding makers of OT and IOT
devices for prioritizing security as much as cost and convenience.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) is
leading the development of commercial cybersecurity standards and
national cybersecurity standards, and DOD is engaged in the development
of both standards to ensure that DOD security requirements are
integrated into future generations of products.
Ms. Stefanik. DHS has worked hard over the past few years, via the
CDM program, to ensure that all internet-enabled devices that connect
to a Federal civilian network can be identified and that such devices
comply with network policies. I understand that DOD has developed a
similar program referred to as Comply to Connect that is used by
several of the service branches and DOD agencies, but is not fully
rolled out enterprise-wide.
What further resources does DOD need to ensure that Comply to
Connect is utilized throughout the DOD network and what other
impediments may exist?
Secretary Rapuano. Comply-To-Connect (C2C) is a unified
cybersecurity framework designed to reduce the Department's network
attack surface through identification of all connected devices and
enforcement of proper device configuration. C2C maintains continuous
situational awareness of all device types connecting to the network and
regulates access for devices with the greatest network exposure in
accordance with DOD cybersecurity policies. DOD employs many of the
cybersecurity toolsets used by the Continuous Diagnostics and
Mitigation program.
The Department has programed funding to support the deployment of
key elements of a C2C model starting in fiscal year (FY) 2020. Efforts
in FY 2019 will lead to decisions about final product solutions, the
number of cybersecurity frameworks the Department will support, and
whether the Department will embrace a managed service construct to
accelerate C2C deployment across all DOD networks. The Department's
priorities for C2C were reflected in the President's FY20 Budget.
Ms. Stefanik. In September, the President signed an election
security executive order that requires the Director of National
Intelligence, in consultation with the heads of any other appropriate
executive departments and agencies, to conduct an assessment on any
election interference by a foreign government. This assessment is due
45 days after the election.
As an action from this hearing, we would like to request a copy of
that assessment, when complete. If appropriate, the results of the
assessment may also be included in the next quarterly cyber operations
briefing.
Secretary Rapuano. On December 21, 2018, Director of National
Intelligence Coats submitted the Intelligence Community's report on
foreign interference in the 2018 U.S. midterm elections to the
President and appropriate Executive departments and agencies, as
directed by Section 1(a) of Executive Order 13848, dated September 12,
2018, Imposing Certain Sanctions in the Event of Foreign Interference
in a United States Election.
According to that report, ``the Intelligence Community does not
have intelligence reporting that indicates any compromise of our
Nation's election infrastructure that would have prevented voting,
changed vote counts, or disrupted the ability to tally votes. Russia
and other foreign countries, including China and Iran, conducted
influence activities and messaging campaigns targeted at the United
States to promote their strategic interests.''
I defer the request for a copy of this report to the Office of the
Director of National Intelligence.
Ms. Stefanik. In September, we had a briefing that discussed the
DOD efforts to protect the 2018 midterm elections. In this closed
setting, can you provide an update on the DOD and DHS efforts?
Secretary Rapuano. [The information is retained in the subcommittee
files.]
Ms. Stefanik. We have heard anecdotally that many of the current
interagency cyber relationships have been ad hoc and are based on
personal connections. Can you describe any frameworks that could be
used to formalize these relationships and interactions? What level
would these frameworks best be applied at?
Secretary Rapuano. There are a number of means, both formal and
informal, through which DOD interacts with other departments and
agencies on matters related to cyberspace. In accordance with the
Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015 and PPD-41 (United States
Cyber Incident Coordination), DOD actively characterizes and assesses
foreign cybersecurity threats and informs DHS of current and potential
malicious cyberspace activity. DOD intelligence components may provide
technical assistance to U.S. Government departments and agencies upon
request through established relationships. In addition, the Secretary
of Defense may approve providing DOD support to civil authorities in
accordance with applicable law and policy. Further, the President has
issued national policy that provides a framework for interagency
consultation on certain types of cyber operations.
The Secretaries of Defense and Homeland Security signed a joint
memorandum on defending the homeland from strategic cyber threats in
October 2018. This memorandum frames how DHS and DOD will secure and
defend the homeland. Specifically, it created a Cyber Protection and
Defense (CPD) Steering Group (SG) to guide DOD-DHS cyber collaborative
efforts. The CPD Steering Group recently approved its charter to
formalize DOD-DHS collaborative efforts and prescribed next steps with
the Department of the Treasury on engaging with the Financial Sector.
Section 1650 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal
Year 2019 authorizes the Secretary of Defense to provide, assign, or
detail up to 50 technical cybersecurity personnel to DHS on a non-
reimbursable basis to enhance cybersecurity cooperation, collaboration,
and unity of Government efforts. DOD is currently in the process of
drafting and coordinating Section 1650 implementation requirements and
identifying priority areas for collaboration between DOD and DHS
personnel.
In addition, it is worth noting that, in 2008, National Security
Presidential Directive-54/Homeland Security Presidential Directive-23
established the National Cyber Investigative Joint Task Force (NCI-JTF)
as the focal point for all government agencies to coordinate,
integrate, and share information related to all domestic cyber threat
investigation. NCI-JTF is composed of more than 20 partnering agencies
across law enforcement, the Intelligence Community, and DOD.
Ms. Stefanik. The FY19 NDAA authorized a pilot program to provide
Department of Defense technical personnel to the Department of Homeland
Security to improve critical infrastructure cyber security. Can you
give a status of this pilot program? What lessons have we already
learned?
Secretary Rapuano. Section 1650 of the National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 authorizes the Secretary of
Defense to provide, assign, or detail up to 50 technical cybersecurity
personnel to the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) on a non-
reimbursable basis to enhance cybersecurity cooperation, collaboration,
and unity of Government efforts. Use of this authority requires the
establishment of procedures relating to U.S. persons information.
DOD is currently in the process of coordinating Section 1650
implementation requirements, including procedures for the protection of
U.S. person information, and identifying priority areas for
collaboration between DOD and DHS personnel. We are leveraging lessons
learned from the placement of DOD personnel at DHS during the 2018 U.S.
midterm elections as we develop the implementation procedures for
Section 1650. For example, the protocols and processes employed by DOD
personnel at the National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration
Center (NCCIC) during the elections can be used by DOD personnel
provided, assigned, or detailed to DHS pursuant to Section 1650.
Similarly, our experience during the elections validated the utility of
placing a DOD coordination element at the NCCIC when national-level
crises arise.
Ms. Stefanik. Where do you see the most value in expanding our
current partnerships? Are there lessons learned from our interagency
interactions that could be applied to strengthening our international
partnerships?
Secretary Rapuano. DOD strives to improve cooperative efforts with
its partners but also sees value in expanding the ways in which those
partners can inform and enable DOD missions. For example, DOD leverages
its intelligence and operational capabilities to provide indications
and warning of malicious cyber activity to other Federal partners and,
as appropriate, the private sector. However, for these partnerships to
be effective, DOD's partners also must provide information and threat
intelligence to DOD to inform DOD's conduct of cyber operations.
The importance of mutual information sharing applies in the
international context as well. Many of the United States' allies and
partners possess advanced cyber capabilities that complement our own.
The Department will seek to strengthen the capacity of these allies and
partners, and, at the same time, increase DOD's ability to leverage its
partners' unique skills, resources, capabilities, and perspectives.
Information-sharing relationships with allies and partners will
increase the effectiveness of combined cyber operations and enhance our
collective cybersecurity posture.
Ms. Stefanik. What are DOD and DHS doing individually and
collectively to manage risk associated with Internet of Things (IOT)
and Operational Technology (OT) devices that are already deployed on
government networks but lack sufficient security capability?
General Shwedo. [The information is retained in the subcommittee
files.]
Ms. Stefanik. In September, the President signed an election
security executive order that requires the Director of National
Intelligence, in consultation with the heads of any other appropriate
executive departments and agencies, to conduct an assessment on any
election interference by a foreign government. This assessment is due
45 days after the election.
As an action from this hearing, we would like to request a copy of
that assessment, when complete. If appropriate, the results of the
assessment may also be included in the next quarterly cyber operations
briefing.
General Shwedo. [The information is retained in the subcommittee
files.]
Ms. Stefanik. In September, we had a briefing that discussed the
DOD efforts to protect the 2018 midterm elections. In this closed
setting, can you provide an update on the DOD and DHS efforts?
General Shwedo. [The information is retained in the subcommittee
files.]
Ms. Stefanik. We have heard anecdotally that many of the current
interagency cyber relationships have been ad hoc and are based on
personal connections. Can you describe any frameworks that could be
used to formalize these relationships and interactions? What level
would these frameworks best be applied at?
General Shwedo. [The information is retained in the subcommittee
files.]
Ms. Stefanik. The FY19 NDAA authorized a pilot program to provide
Department of Defense technical personnel to the Department of Homeland
Security to improve critical infrastructure cyber security. Can you
give a status of this pilot program? What lessons have we already
learned?
General Shwedo. [The information is retained in the subcommittee
files.]
Ms. Stefanik. Where do you see the most value in expanding our
current partnerships? Are there lessons learned from our interagency
interactions that could be applied to strengthening our international
partnerships?
General Shwedo. [The information is retained in the subcommittee
files.]
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BROOKS
Mr. Brooks. In 2017, Congress realized that there was a pressing
need for someone to take the reigns and develop a capability that would
allow for real time active cyber defense methods to be operationally
fielded to protect small and medium sized businesses and organizations
within the critical defense and industry infrastructure arena. SAC-D
appropriated, and Congress funded, both in FY18 and FY19, the creation
of a Cyber Security Operations Center (CSOC) to utilize DOD
capabilities and experience to provide this capability to industry as
an active defense measure, incorporating and leveraging off of a number
of previously funded government and private initiatives. In light of
the recently published National Cyber Strategy, and more pointedly the
recently signed joint DOD/DHS MOA mandating the cooperation of these
two Agencies in the cyber domain, what are the current plans for DHS to
jointly utilize the Congressionally funded DOD CSOC being developed
under the oversight of the Threat Systems Management Office (TSMO)
within the PEO STRI to provide active defense cyber security measures
to industries and organizations within the DOD/DHS realm of critical
infrastructure?
Ms. Manfra. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Brooks. In 2017, Congress realized that there was a pressing
need for someone to take the reigns and develop a capability that would
allow for real time active cyber defense methods to be operationally
fielded to protect small and medium sized businesses and organizations
within the critical defense and industry infrastructure arena. SAC-D
appropriated, and Congress funded, both in FY18 and FY19, the creation
of a Cyber Security Operations Center (CSOC) to utilize DOD
capabilities and experience to provide this capability to industry as
an active defense measure, incorporating and leveraging off of a number
of previously funded government and private initiatives. In light of
the recently published National Cyber Strategy, and more pointedly the
recently signed joint DOD/DHS MOA mandating the cooperation of these
two Agencies in the cyber domain, what are the current plans for DHS to
jointly utilize the Congressionally funded DOD CSOC being developed
under the oversight of the Threat Systems Management Office (TSMO)
within the PEO STRI to provide active defense cyber security measures
to industries and organizations within the DOD/DHS realm of critical
infrastructure?
Secretary Rapuano. [The information is retained in the subcommittee
files.]
Mr. Brooks. In 2017, Congress realized that there was a pressing
need for someone to take the reigns and develop a capability that would
allow for real time active cyber defense methods to be operationally
fielded to protect small and medium sized businesses and organizations
within the critical defense and industry infrastructure arena. SAC-D
appropriated, and Congress funded, both in FY18 and FY19, the creation
of a Cyber Security Operations Center (CSOC) to utilize DOD
capabilities and experience to provide this capability to industry as
an active defense measure, incorporating and leveraging off of a number
of previously funded government and private initiatives. In light of
the recently published National Cyber Strategy, and more pointedly the
recently signed joint DOD/DHS MOA mandating the cooperation of these
two Agencies in the cyber domain, what are the current plans for DHS to
jointly utilize the Congressionally funded DOD CSOC being developed
under the oversight of the Threat Systems Management Office (TSMO)
within the PEO STRI to provide active defense cyber security measures
to industries and organizations within the DOD/DHS realm of critical
infrastructure?
General Shwedo. [The information is retained in the subcommittee
files.]
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SUOZZI
Mr. Suozzi. Please describe the current process for sharing cyber
threat intelligence information between DOD and DHS, including
classified indications and warnings. How is this done with other U.S.
departments and agencies?
In your open testimony, you stressed the importance of receiving
threat intelligence back from these partners. What is the process for
receiving that information?
Ms. Manfra. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Suozzi. Please describe the current process for sharing cyber
threat intelligence information between DOD and DHS, including
classified indications and warnings. How is this done with other U.S.
departments and agencies?
In your open testimony, you stressed the importance of receiving
threat intelligence back from these partners. What is the process for
receiving that information?
Secretary Rapuano. In accordance with the Cybersecurity Information
Sharing Act of 2015 and Presidential Policy Directive 41, United States
Cyber Incident Coordination, DOD actively characterizes and assesses
foreign cybersecurity threats and informs DHS of current and potential
malicious cyberspace activity. DOD intelligence components, such as the
National Security Agency (NSA), may provide technical assistance to
U.S. Government departments and agencies when requested. In addition,
the Secretary of Defense may approve providing DOD support to civil
authorities in accordance with applicable law and policy. Specifically,
three DOD centers are part of the established Federal Cybersecurity
Centers designed to enhance information sharing, maintain situational
awareness of cyber threats and incidents, and serve as conduits to DHS
through its National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration
Center (NCCIC) and Office of Intelligence and Analysis. These centers
include NSA's Cybersecurity Threat Operations Center (NCTOC), the DOD
Cyber Crime Center (DC3), and U.S. Cyber Command's (USCYBERCOM's) Joint
Operations Center (JOC).
The NCTOC is the 24/7/365 NSA element that characterizes
and assesses foreign cybersecurity threats, and informs partners, such
as DHS, of current and potential malicious cyberspace activity through
its analysis of foreign intelligence with a focus on adversary computer
network attacks, capabilities, and exploitations.
DC3 supports DOD's law enforcement, counterintelligence,
information assurance, network defense, and critical infrastructure
protection communities through digital forensics, focused threat
analysis, and training. The Secretary of Defense may elect to use DC3
to provide analytical and technical capabilities to DHS mission
partners conducting national cyber incident response.
The USCYBERCOM JOC directs the U.S. military's cyber
operations and defense of the Department of Defense Information Network
(DODIN). USCYBERCOM manages both the threat and asset response for the
DODIN during incidents affecting the DODIN and shares cyber threat
intelligence information as needed.
DOD shares cyber threat intelligence information with other Federal
departments and agencies using a similar process in close collaboration
with the Intelligence Community and the remaining Federal Cybersecurity
Centers. Operated by the Office of the Director of National
Intelligence, the Cyber Threat Intelligence Integration Center (CTIIC)
is central to intelligence integration, analysis, and supporting
activities for the Federal Government. The CTIIC has DOD participation,
including by the Defense Intelligence Agency and NSA, and provides
integrated all-source analysis of intelligence related to foreign cyber
threats or related cyber incidents affecting U.S. national interests.
CTIIC coordinates development of Federal intelligence information for
the other Federal cybersecurity centers and Federal stakeholders. In
coordination with the Defense Intelligence Enterprise, this could
include pursuing declassification of intelligence and/or ``tear-line''
reports at different classification levels, as appropriate to the
circumstances of the incident and to overall U.S. equities. DOD is also
a member of the Cyber Unified Coordination Group that leverages DOD
centers for their enhanced coordination procedures, above steady-state
capacity, and/or operational or support personnel used to share cyber
threat intelligence information.
The requirement to share intelligence and information is bi-
directional, and it is not confined to DOD and DHS. Although the
National Cyber Incident Response Plan outlines the when, what, and how
to report cyber incidents to the Federal Government, most industry and
private sector entities are reluctant to share related cyber threat
information or submit a request for technical assistance. Private
sector entities experiencing cyber incidents are encouraged to report a
cyber incident to DHS's NCCIC, the local field offices or national
centers of Federal law enforcement agencies, or their sector specific
agency. DOD is prepared to work with other Federal departments and
agencies, when authorized to do so, to help affected entities
understand the incident, link related incidents, and share information
to resolve the situation rapidly and in a manner that protects privacy
and civil liberties.
Mr. Suozzi. Please describe the current process for sharing cyber
threat intelligence information between DOD and DHS, including
classified indications and warnings. How is this done with other U.S.
departments and agencies?
In your open testimony, you stressed the importance of receiving
threat intelligence back from these partners. What is the process for
receiving that information?
General Shwedo. [The information is retained in the subcommittee
files.].