[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
.
[H.A.S.C. No. 116-30]
HEARING
ON
NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
AND
OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES
HEARING
ON
EVOLUTION, TRANSFORMATION, AND
SUSTAINMENT: A REVIEW OF THE
FISCAL YEAR 2020 BUDGET REQUEST
FOR U.S. SPECIAL OPERATIONS FORCES AND COMMAND
__________
HEARING HELD
APRIL 9, 2019
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
37-497
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES
JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island, Chairman
RICK LARSEN, Washington
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
JIM COOPER, Tennessee
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas
RO KHANNA, California
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
ANDY KIM, New Jersey
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
JASON CROW, Colorado, Vice Chair
DON BACON, Nebraska
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan
JIM BANKS, Indiana
LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
Lindsay Kavanaugh, Professional Staff Member
Peter Villano, Professional Staff Member
Caroline Kehrli, Clerk
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
Langevin, Hon. James R., a Representative from Rhode Island,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Intelligence and Emerging Threats and
Capabilities...................................................
1
Stefanik, Hon. Elise M., a Representative from New York, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Intelligence and Emerging Threats and
Capabilities...................................................
4
WITNESSES
Clarke, GEN Richard D., USA, Commander, U.S. Special Operations
Command........................................................
7
Mitchell, Mark E., Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Special Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict......
6
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Clarke, GEN Richard D........................................
46
Langevin, Hon. James R.......................................
31
Mitchell, Mark E.............................................
34
Documents Submitted for the Record:
[There were no Documents submitted.]
Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:
Mr. Bacon....................................................
63
Mr. Langevin.................................................
63
Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:
Mr. Bacon....................................................
73
Mr. Langevin.................................................
67
EVOLUTION, TRANSFORMATION, AND SUSTAINMENT:
A REVIEW OF THE FISCAL YEAR 2020 BUDGET REQUEST FOR U.S. SPECIAL
OPERATIONS FORCES AND COMMAND
----------
House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Intelligence and Emerging Threats and
Capabilities,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, April 9, 2019.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:05 p.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. James R.
Langevin (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES R. LANGEVIN, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM RHODE ISLAND, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND
EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES
Mr. Langevin. The hearing will come to order.
First of all, I want to welcome our witnesses here today.
Welcome to the hearing on the fiscal year 2020 budget request
for the United States Special Operations Command and special
operations forces.
It is an understatement to say that the world has changed
since the establishment of the command in 1987. 9/11
dramatically altered the national security landscape. SOF
[special operations forces] personnel have been deployed for
almost two decades, and despite policy shifts and planned
drawdowns, even today they continue to deploy in support of
Operation Inherent Resolve and Operation Enduring Freedom.
Outside of declared theaters of active armed conflict,
geographic combatant commanders [GCC] have what some would call
an insatiable appetite for SOF to achieve their objectives in
their campaign plans, and they have made use of congressional
authorities granted to the Department over the last decade
including security cooperation, support of ongoing operations,
exercises, and other activities to do so.
The Department has recognized that GCC requirements are a
major contributor to the high OPTEMPO [operation tempo]. For
instance, one stated purpose for the Africa Command force
optimization effort announced in November 2015 was to decrease
the burden on SOF. However, optimization relies upon events
that may not transpire anytime soon, such as assignment of a
security force assistance brigade to the continent. And I am
concerned that this optimization may be happening without an
adequate plan to continue to support our partners and allies in
Africa and beyond.
For years, I have highlighted this ever-increasing demand,
and SOF have critical skill sets and conduct activities that
can be employed across the full spectrum of conflict and
against all types of warfare. They are the force of choice. Yet
we must be prudent about how the force is employed or we risk
breaking the tip of the spear.
General Tony Thomas, the previous commander of SOCOM [U.S.
Special Operations Command], took action to manage the demand
for SOF. To that end, the deploy-to-dwell ratio has improved
for a substantial percentage of the force. Yet more must be
done to continue this positive trend and reduce the burden on
our SOF personnel. As SOCOM aligns to the National Defense
Strategy, continuing to understand and manage that demand, not
just increasing the size of the force, will remain a key
component of readiness.
Prior to his retirement, General Thomas, along with the
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Low-Intensity Conflict, Mr.
Owen West, began an effort related to professionalism and
ethics training in the force. The effort is to understand and
correct what they identified as a disordered value system in
the force, and I applaud his efforts in that respect. This
committee is committed to maintaining a sound culture our quiet
professionals can thrive in, and I look forward to hearing from
our witnesses on how they plan to continue to build on the
efforts that are underway.
The fiscal year 2020 budget request for USSOCOM totals
$13.8 billion. As in years past, there is more than $4 billion
of SOCOM funding requested in the overseas contingency
operations account, or OCO. Approximately 90 percent of SOCOM
funding in OCO is for activities and programs that are
enduring.
This concerns me because baseline funding is crucial to
providing USSOCOM stability. Furthermore, when base funding is
improperly classified as contingency, it prevents Congress from
fulfilling its oversight role and considering the totality of
enduring defense spending in current and future years.
So I am pleased that the SOCOM request includes SOF-
peculiar investments in technologies outlined in the NDS
[National Defense Strategy], such as directed energy, cyber,
and space capabilities. However, as I recently noted in the
subcommittee's hearing on science and technology, I remain
concerned that policy is not being developed as fast as the
technology. So maturation of policy and technology must occur
simultaneously so that we can field the latest and greatest
capabilities to our warfighters.
SOCOM's proposed investments in behavioral health and
family support under the Preservation of the Force and Families
initiative has certainly increased, but tragically, in 2018
suicide rates amongst SOF nearly tripled. This troubles me.
Family support and behavioral health should be considered as
important, if not more important, as the physical well-being
aspects of the initiative. So we must take care of our people
and our families.
SOCOM's budget request also includes investments for
implementation of some of the recommendations from the Niger
investigation like those related to training. This is important
progress, and I am glad to see the command is not resting on
its laurels with respect to the incident in Niger.
However, I remain disappointed and dismayed that the
Department has not yet provided the families of the fallen or
the American people with the final decisions on awards and
reprimands and is conducting yet another review almost a year
and a half later.
SOCOM's budget request also is only 2 percent of the
Department's total request. When coupled with funding requested
by the military departments and other agencies for support, the
total requested funding related to SOF is over $20 billion or
about 4 percent of the total DOD [Department of Defense]
request in fiscal year 2020.
The military departments' budget request and efforts have a
profound impact on SOF. Since release of the NDS, we have
carefully scrutinized SOCOM's alignment to the outlined
priorities, but we haven't been as diligent in ensuring the
services continue to support SOF SOCOM requirements for a
sustainable counterterrorism campaign and fully account for SOF
equities in budget decisions related to future capability
development and posture. This hearing provides us an
opportunity to understand where there may be a mismatch in the
budget request and how service challenges, like recruiting and
retention, impact title 10 responsibilities of SOCOM.
So, with that, testifying today is Mr. Mark Mitchell, the
Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, Special
Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict [SO/LIC].
Secretary Mitchell is a decorated Army combat vet from the
SOF community who was amongst the first U.S. soldiers on the
ground in Afghanistan after 9/11. For his actions in battle
alongside the Northern Alliance during November 2001 he was
awarded the Distinguished Service Cross, our Nation's second-
highest military award. He commanded a Joint Special Operations
Task Force in Iraq from 2010 to 2011.
In 2014, Mr. Mitchell served in the National Security
Council as the Director for Counterterrorism on the National
Security Council, where he was a critical player in the effort
for the Presidential policy review of hostage policy.
Mr. Mitchell, welcome back, and I want to thank you for
your service to our country.
Mr. Mitchell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Langevin. I certainly look forward to hearing from you
about continued implementation and execution of section 922 of
the fiscal year 2017 National Defense Authorization Act. This
legislation elevated the role and responsibility of the
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low-
Intensity Conflict to a service-like secretary for SOCOM.
So welcome to you.
Also before us is General Richard D. Clarke. General Clarke
assumed command of SOCOM less than 2 weeks ago.
General Clarke, I want to welcome you, and I want to thank
you for being here.
General Clarke has served the Nation for nearly 35 years.
His most recent assignment was on the Joint Staff as Director
of Strategy, Plans, and Policy, J5. He served as the commanding
general of the 82nd Airborne, spent 6 years in the 75th Ranger
Regiment in CENTCOM [U.S. Central Command] and EUCOM [U.S.
European Command], and was the Director of Operations at Joint
Special Operations Command from 2009 to 2011, including during
the Osama bin Laden raid.
General Clarke was also the Commandant of Cadets at West
Point. He has deployed countless times to Iraq and Afghanistan
and deployed in support of Operation Desert Storm. He is a
recipient of the Distinguished Service Medal and the Defense
Superior Service Medal. He appears before us today as the 12th
commander of SOCOM.
General, I want to welcome you here today.
General Clarke. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Langevin. General, I just again want to thank you for
your service. And with your background, you are well-poised to
ensure that SOCOM is structured appropriately and ready to
effectively execute the NDS as well as to fulfill coordinating
authority responsibilities.
And before I turn to the ranking member, I also want to
take the opportunity to thank Mrs. Clarke, who I know is here
with you today. I just had the opportunity and the pleasure of
meeting your wife. And I just want to thank her for her
commitment to our Nation and for lending you to us and
supporting you in your work.
So welcome to you, Mrs. Clarke.
With that, before we go to opening statements, I want to
now recognize Ranking Member Stefanik for her remarks.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Langevin can be found in the
Appendix on page 31.]
STATEMENT OF HON. ELISE M. STEFANIK, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM NEW
YORK, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND EMERGING
THREATS AND CAPABILITIES
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Chairman Langevin. And thank you
to our witnesses for being here today.
Let me begin by welcoming back Mr. Mitchell to our
committee. And, also, I want to echo Mr. Langevin's remarks in
congratulating General Clarke on assuming command of U.S.
Special Operations Command.
While Jim highlighted many of your leadership roles within
the U.S. military, he skipped over a very important chapter
that is near and dear to my heart. I want to thank you for your
service at Fort Drum as the deputy commanding general and thank
Mrs. Clarke for her years of service as well. I am the proud
Representative of the 10th Mountain Division in Congress, so I
just wanted to note your leadership for my constituents who are
watching here today.
Today's event continues our series of traditional posture
hearings as we examine the fiscal year 2020 budget request for
U.S. Special Operations Command and prepare for the National
Defense Authorization Act.
I am pleased to see continued support for special
operations forces in this budget request. This force remains
very much at war, directly and indirectly deployed to more than
80 countries at any given time. They continue to bear an
outsize burden, absorbing some 40 percent of recent combat
casualties, while we also witness significant increases in
suicides across the force.
And amidst this continued strain and heavy combat
commitment throughout the Middle East and Africa, we are now
also asking our special operations forces to position
themselves to counter and mitigate nation-state threats such as
Russia, China, North Korea, and other emerging national
security threats.
While the fiscal year 2020 budget request for Special
Operations Command is seemingly a modest 2.8 increase to $13.38
billion, when taken in aggregate, this year marks yet again
continued and seminal growth for our special operations forces.
In particular, we are seeing nearly 18 consecutive years of
end-strength growth, which will now approach 74,000 personnel.
And for context, that is almost as large as the Department of
State and roughly twice the size of the FBI [Federal Bureau of
Investigation].
Make no mistake, this growth was needed after 9/11 and,
indeed, can still be justified today due to the continued and
morphing national security threats we face. But while our 21st
century challenges demand high-end capabilities that only SOF
can provide, we must continually work to ensure that this force
remains balanced and modernized and that we are adhering to one
of the most central of all the SOF truths, that quality is
better than quantity. On this point, we can never compromise.
We should also remember that most of the realized growth of
our special operations forces was originally envisioned to
support heavy and continued demands for counterterrorism and
direct action forces and skill sets. How much of those
experiences will shape our thinking about future conflicts
remains to be seen.
Considering this, I would also like to highlight that now,
more than ever, as we consider the growth of this force, we
must also ask ourselves if we are truly building the force of
the future rather than just the force of today and yesterday.
What unique and strategic contributions can only special
operations make to our national security to counter and
frustrate peer adversaries such as China and Russia? To date, I
do not think that we have thoughtfully answered this important
question.
I have long said that a large part of this subcommittee's
charge is looking far ahead to consider what is next. And in
doing so, I see great opportunity for special operations forces
to leverage emerging technology in novel and forward-leaning
ways. Artificial intelligence, quantum and high-performance
computing, nanotechnology, and 5G communications, if leveraged
right, will all provide a significant battlefield advantage for
special operations forces and the broader joint force. Rest
assured, our adversaries are already aggressively exploring the
development of these exponential technologies, which present us
with both economic and strategic national security challenges
for our Nation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this important
hearing. I look forward to the dialogue in both the open and
closed session. And I will yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Ranking Member Stefanik.
And before we go to our witnesses, I would just mention
that we are expecting votes to be called any minute. I am
hoping that we can get through both the opening statements. And
we will recess once votes are called and then be back right
after that to continue the hearing.
So, with that, we will now hear from our witnesses and then
move into the question-and-answer session. And then, after the
open session, the committee will reconvene in a closed
classified session.
With that, your opening statements in full will be
submitted into the record, without objection, and you each now
are invited to summarize your statements.
With that, let me begin by recognizing Secretary Mitchell.
STATEMENT OF MARK E. MITCHELL, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR SPECIAL OPERATIONS AND LOW-INTENSITY
CONFLICT
Mr. Mitchell. Chairman Langevin, Ranking Member Stefanik,
and other members of this committee, especially my former
colleagues Andy Kim, Elissa Slotkin, and Mike Waltz.
Congratulations on your election and your service on this
committee.
I am grateful for the opportunity to testify on our global
posture for the Department of Defense special operations
enterprise. My remarks will focus on SO/LIC's statutory
authority within the administrative chain of command for SOCOM
overseeing the SOF enterprise.
I am honored to testify alongside General Richard Clarke,
with whom I have had the privilege of serving in a combat zone
and hold in the highest regard. I would also like to recognize
his lovely wife, Ms. Suzanne Clarke, and thank her for her long
service. I believe she is a lifelong member of the Army family,
and that doesn't come without a cost.
The breadth and capability of our SOF force is astonishing.
Operating in over 80 countries, this vanguard force tackles our
most pressing challenges in the most hostile environments.
In the past 2 years, 25 members of the SOF community have
been killed in action and many more have sustained life-
altering injuries. While SOF accounts for just 3 percent of the
joint force, it has absorbed over 40 percent of the casualties
in this time. The families of those men and women carry the
burden of the individual tragedy so that we can help prevent a
national tragedy.
This is a unique time for service in the SOF enterprise
because it is an inflection point. First, section 922 has
reinvigorated SO/LIC's partnership with SOCOM. And secondly,
the National Defense Strategy has challenged us to increase our
focus on long-term strategic competition with Russia and China.
The SOF enterprise is in the midst of a transformation,
something special operators have always done very well. In
November, General Clarke's predecessor General Thomas and
Assistant Secretary West issued the first-ever joint vision for
the SOF enterprise, challenging our professionals to innovate
relentlessly in pursuit of a decisive competitive advantage.
To improve SOF's readiness for contingencies across the
vast spectrum of warfare, we continue to make tremendous
progress in reducing the strain caused by high operational
tempo and demand. At the height of the wars, a large portion of
our force was spending as much time overseas as in the United
States. This year, over 90 percent of our force will spend at
least twice as much time at home as they will in deployment.
I am proud to report to you that our SOF force is healthy,
poised, and eager to defend the Nation against increasingly
adaptive foes.
Building out our 2019 trajectory to develop a more
resilient, ready, and lethal SOF enterprise, the fiscal year
2020 budget requests the resources necessary to sustain our
readiness while supporting recapitalization and modernization
of SOF-peculiar capabilities.
As called for in the NDS, we have prioritized investments
in technology to enhance lethality and effectiveness of the
force, focusing our modernization on precision strike, directed
energy, artificial intelligence, close-combat lethality, cyber,
and space operations.
Our $13.8 billion baseline budget request embraces
innovative capabilities that result in greater lethality,
increases in efficiencies and flexibility, and strengthens our
ties to allies and partners. The request supports an end-
strength increase of approximately 2.2 percent while we
continue to mitigate shortfalls in certain enablers.
As we continue to make progress in meeting these
challenges, ASD [Assistant Secretary of Defense] West and I
share the committee's concerns about the serious ethical
failings of some members of our SOF community. While they don't
reflect the true nature of the SOF professional, such incidents
erode morale and the confidence of our partners and our elected
representatives and our moral authority. I can assure you that
these incidents have our full attention.
Last year, SOCOM and SO/LIC jointly issued clear guidance
to the force, and our office recently provided a report to
Congress on a review of our professionalism and ethics. We
continue to explore ways to enhance oversight and
accountability by senior leaders, and we will continue to be
held to the highest standards, including professionalism and
ethics.
Finally, I would like to thank this subcommittee for its
continued strong support of our mission and personnel. The
sustained funding and authorities you provide are central to
our success in advancing national security interests at home
and abroad and in caring for our service members and our
families.
Mr. Chairman, I am grateful for the opportunity to testify
today, and I look forward to your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mitchell can be found in the
Appendix on page 34.]
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Secretary Mitchell.
General Clarke, you are now recognized for your opening
statement.
STATEMENT OF GEN RICHARD D. CLARKE, USA, COMMANDER, U.S.
SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND
General Clarke. Chairman Langevin, Ranking Member Stefanik,
and distinguished members of the committee, I am grateful for
the opportunity to speak to you today and honored to work with
ASD and SO/LIC in guiding our special operations force during
this time of change and challenge.
I am glad to be here with my teammate Mark Mitchell, who
mentioned that we have served together in combat in Iraq in the
past.
USSOCOM fields ready and capable forces that conduct
special operations globally to support geographic combatant
commanders as an integral part of the joint force. We have
extraordinarily dedicated and talented men and women who
relentlessly fight and sacrifice for our country and our way of
life.
This morning, we interred at Arlington National Cemetery
CW2 [Chief Warrant Officer] Jonathan Farmer, a special forces
officer from South Florida who was killed in action in Manbij,
Syria, on January 16 of this year.
Jon was a seasoned soldier, with six combat deployments to
Iraq and Afghanistan. He leaves behind a wife and four
children. Their devotion and courage are representative of the
surviving teammates and families. On their behalf, let me say
thank you for your consistent support from Congress in their
endeavors.
Command Sergeant Major Pat McCauley is here with me today,
our SOCOM senior enlisted leader. And I fully understand that
the support is contingent upon the trust and faith that you
place in us to execute our missions to the highest professional
standard and ethical and moral obligations.
We are also aware that members of our SOF units have failed
in recent times to always meet these standards. This misconduct
erodes that trust. While the vast majority of USSOCOM teammates
serve with honor and distinction, as our ethos demands,
perfection is our goal where our values and our laws are
concerned. We will push forward with our efforts to reinforce
our core values. You have my commitment that I will hold people
accountable and preserve the trust that America has in its
special operation forces.
USSOCOM's mission is to defend the homeland from the
continued threat of violent extremist organizations as we
deter, disrupt, or defeat threats from revisionist and rogue
states, in line with the priorities laid out in our National
Defense Strategy. We are postured to address these challenges
by providing unique capabilities alongside our interagency
colleagues and international partners.
My chief assigned task is to organize, train, and equip SOF
to fight and win against these threats, many of which are
advancing a technological and tactical capability. To this end,
we are reshaping and refocusing our current forces and
capabilities while developing new means and methods for future
missions. As Secretary Mitchell mentioned, our joint SO/LIC-
SOCOM SOF vision moves us forward in this regard.
Our SOCOM 2020 budget aligns with this vision and reflects
the drive for innovative capabilities that increase
efficiencies, improve lethality, and strengthen ties to allies
and partners. We are prioritizing the right capabilities
required for these NDS priorities and sustaining investments in
advanced training infrastructure to support program force
structure.
None of these initiatives are possible without Congress's
watchful eye and support in securing the authorities and
resources needed to sustain the world's most capable special
operations forces. So let me thank you again for your support
of USSOCOM and our time before you today. I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Clarke can be found in
the Appendix on page 46.]
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, General and Secretary, for your
opening statements. I want to extend my condolences, too, to
the SOF community for their most recent loss. And thank you for
highlighting that today, the ceremony at Arlington.
With that, the votes have been called. We are going to
stand in recess. We will stand in recess subject to the call of
the Chair, which will be within 10 minutes after votes.
[Recess.]
Mr. Langevin. The committee will come to order.
Again, I want to thank the witnesses for the opening
statements. I thank both of you for your service to the
country.
And, General Clarke, if I could, I would like to begin with
you for questions, and then I will yield to the ranking member.
In 2001, SOCOM comprised approximately 46,000 military
personnel and civilians. Since that time, SOCOM has grown to
almost 27,000, with additional proposed end-strength increases
this year.
Now, some of that growth can be attributed to new SOCOM
responsibilities such as becoming the coordinating authority
for weapons of mass destruction and other growth intended to
increase our readiness of SOF and address growing demand.
However, as I noted in my opening statement, SOCOM cannot
solely rely on growth of the force to alleviate the high
operational tempo of SOF, especially when recruiting and
retention plague the services and demand continues to increase.
Further, 1:2 deployment-to-dwell ratios may be a goal of
SOCOM, but much of that time is spent preparing for the next
mission. So it is unclear to me why that is considered optimal
when there is no time off between deployments unless you are
actively preparing for the next one.
So stress and strain on the force is significant, and I
wanted to know what steps you are going to take to manage the
growing demand on the force and ensure preparedness for
assigned missions, to include sustainable terrorism operations
and alignment to the NDS.
General Clarke. Chairman, a couple things that I would
highlight.
I am glad you brought up the 1:2 dwell ratio that the
Department guidance has moved us to. The feedback that I have
gotten is that it has been exceptionally helpful for our force,
gives them time. But I would look--that is more of a minimum
that we are striving to. Many of the forces are actually at
1:3, which is our goal. And that is for the Active Component.
So that would be the first point. And that ability for us
to be predictable and allow the additional training time has
greatly increased the readiness, which goes to the point you
said in terms of the mission and the preparedness for the
mission.
I think it is key to note for this committee that we are
looking hard at what missions we actually are going to take
part in at the request of the geographic combatant commands,
that those missions to which we are committed are in our vital
national interest, that, in fact, no other force can do those.
So could a conventional force actually do those, or could that
mission go to our allies or our partners in a specific region?
And so the manner in which we look at these missions and employ
those SOF forces forward on behalf of the geographic combatant
commanders will be key.
And I think, to note, our reduction in forces over a 5-year
trend is actually down between 15 and 20 percent right now,
using a 5-year average of numbers deployed. So we are actually
trying to optimize the force across SOF.
Mr. Langevin. What percentage of the force is at 1:3 now?
And when do you think you will reach your goal?
General Clarke. Congressman, of the, as you talked about,
the 70-plus thousand, there are some that don't necessarily
fall in that pattern at all. I would have to come back to you
to say which forces overall are 1:3, but there are a good
amount of our forces that are already at that 1:3 today.
Mr. Langevin. Good. Yeah. I mean, it would be helpful to us
to quantify 1:3, 1:2, and then the 1:1 ratio, what----
General Clarke. The 1:2 is a minimum, and then 1:3 is our
goal.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. All right. Thank you.
So, on that point, will you conduct a comprehensive review
of SOF organization capabilities and structure to determine
adequacy, like the one conducted in 2013-2014, as mandated by
Congress? And should there be another relook since the NDS has
been published since this assessment?
Mr. Mitchell. Mr. Chairman, we have a report that is
currently being prepared--it is in staffing within the
Department--that is looking at that, doing a comprehensive
review of USSOCOM roles and missions. And we expect to deliver
that report on time in May.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. And as a followup to that, what action
do you believe the Department can take to better balance the
workload across the joint force?
Mr. Mitchell. In addition to the steps that General Clarke
has already outlined, for our part, we are looking across the
globe at prioritizing, again, those strategic engagements for
the force.
And I would point out that the whole point of the NDS is to
compete in peacetime, you know, short of armed conflict. And
our SOF forces in that environment are really multidimensional.
In other words, you can't look at a CT [counterterrorism]--you
know, what is ostensibly a CT deployment to Africa is also a
part of that great power competition against the Russians and
the Chinese, where we are the force of choice.
So we are trying to look at our employment of the SOF force
from a holistic view to ensure that we are maximizing the
return on that investment, both, again, to our CT mission and
our great power competition.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. And as a followup for you,
Secretary Mitchell, so what role do you actually play in
allocation of SOF to the global special operations
synchronization effort, since allocating force is not solely a
military matter, obviously, but a political-military task, as
stated by the NDS Commission?
And, also, how are you approaching managing the high demand
for SOF?
Mr. Mitchell. So our Secretariat for Special Operations,
which was created in response to section 922 and which is
expanding, they actively participate in the SOCOM global
special operations synchronization process. And we get another
vote when the SECDEF [Secretary of Defense] Orders Book comes
up for staffing with those deployments.
And that is really where we, as the special operations
enterprise, and ASD(SO/LIC) has an opportunity to influence
those high-demand items, because if they are not at a 1:2
deployment ratio, it requires a Secretary of Defense waiver.
And as a management tool, we can request that the Secretary
decline that waiver. And that is really our main management
tool for that.
Mr. Langevin. Has that happened often, where the waiver is
requested?
Mr. Mitchell. So this is the first year that we have had
with the formal 2:1 ratio. And the SECDEF Orders Book is in
processing for next fiscal year, for fiscal year 2020--I am
sorry, the current process for fiscal year 2021.
And so that is where we are exerting that influence, and we
are looking very closely at those forces to make
recommendations. So it is a process that is ongoing as we
speak.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Secretary.
With that, I will hold. I have additional questions, but I
will hold there and yield to the ranking member for questions.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you.
I wanted to follow up on what I mentioned in my opening
statement, the fact that approximately 40 percent of all recent
casualties are SOF, and we are also seeing increases in suicide
rates and ideations that we have seen in 2018 most recently.
I am pleased that the budget request increases the
Preservation of the Force and Families program by more than 30
percent, with continued funding for the Defense Health Program.
That said, I wanted to ask you, General Clarke, how,
specifically, do we plan on addressing increased suicides, this
pressure on the families? It is tied into Chairman Langevin's
question regarding the 1:2, 1:3 ratio.
And how do we also address other problems, such as lapses
in ethics and discipline, that are symptoms of a force under
tremendous strain of 18 years of high operational tempo
deployment?
General Clarke. To the first point on behavioral health and
the suicide rate, I think it is important to note that the
suicide trend from 2013 to 2018 was actually statistically
down. But one suicide is far too many, and we continue to put
the emphasis on each and every one of our service members that
are in need.
I am glad you mentioned specifically the Preservation of
the Force and Family, because in this year's budget request we
asked for additional funds from Congress. The majority of those
additional funds are in the behavioral health arena. They are
to put at the brigade group level to make sure we have an
additional behavioral health assistant at each and every one of
those groups to help identify not only for that group but also
to help the family members. Because, many times, we find that
the person that is best able to sense or see a change in a
service member is actually the spouse. So that is why the
``force and family'' aspect of this is really critical in that
program. And so thanks to Congress for continuing to support
that initiative and for behavioral health.
On the lapses in discipline, obviously for--ASD(SO/LIC)
submitted a report to Congress addressing that issue
specifically. But internal to SOCOM, we conducted a 90-day
review. It was initiated by General Thomas in January. That
review is in.
I will meet with all--next week, I am hosting a commanders
conference with all the component commanders. And that is one
of the top topics that we will discuss next week, now that the
report is in from ASD(SO/LIC), is, how do we view this problem,
and how are we going to in fact get after the root causes of
any ethical lapses we have had in the past, and what do we do
going forward.
Ms. Stefanik. And I wanted to ask a followup on the 90-day
review that has been completed. This committee is very
interested in getting briefed on what was found in that review
and recommendations moving forward. So I would ask for your
commitment to make sure that the findings of the most recent
90-day review are briefed to this subcommittee.
General Clarke. You have my commitment to that.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you.
My next question is sort of at a 30,000-foot level. I
talked about in my opening statement the importance of building
a force for the future rather than of today and yesterday.
And we have been very focused on the CT mission, but as we
face growing threats from nation-states like China and Russia,
can you talk to me, both Mr. Mitchell and General Clarke, how
this budget request and our overall strategy does that?
And what specifically--what are the unique and strategic
contributions that only special operations can make to our
national security when it comes to combating nation-state
adversaries?
Mr. Mitchell. So let me start off with the 30,000-foot view
on what those strategic contributions are.
We have grown accustomed in the special operations
community to being the supported force for most of the last 18
years because we have been the tip of the spear in the CT
fight. However, moving forward, particularly in great power
competition, our special operations forces are not necessarily
going to be in that fight, because the whole idea of the
strategy is to avoid a kinetic fight.
And in that regard, I have urged and the command has
responded by looking to CYBERCOM [U.S. Cyber Command], to
STRATCOM [U.S. Strategic Command], to TRANSCOM [U.S.
Transportation Command], and the global combatant commands, and
seeing how we can best integrate our forces and provide support
to those in those other domains.
And I think the special operations community is uniquely
suited to build networks of partners and allies around the
globe to put us in a position, first of all, to compete for
that influence and legitimacy in peacetime and, secondly, to be
in a position, should armed conflict arise, that we can help
support our conventional forces, which will be the decisive
force in a conflict with Russia or China, to be successful and
also help to defeat the strategies that our adversaries would
impose.
Ms. Stefanik. General Clarke.
General Clarke. Taking that and--I think there are two
specific things that I would highlight to the committee that
allow us to compete.
Number one is the authority to train foreign forces,
irregular forces, with the 1202 authority that was granted by
Congress. We do that on behalf of the geographic combatant
commander. And in a closed session, I can talk some of the
details of that that allow us to compete. But I think that is
something we should talk to the committee about, how we can
compete in a narrow focus, coordinated with our interagency
partners, that allow us to be in that competition sphere.
The second thing that I would highlight for the committee
is the MISO, which is inherently--our military information
support operations--which is inherently a special operations
force task with our SIOP [single integrated operational plan]
forces.
With this Congress giving the funding for the Joint MISO
WebOps Center, which the Department determined would be
resident in Tampa, that would cut across the geographic
combatant commanders so that we can get our messages out that
are aligned with Department of State's Global Engagement Center
and allow us to compete in that space ahead of time and make
sure that we are countering some of the vitriol that is coming
out of Russia at this time and the falsehoods.
And I can talk more about that in closed session.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Elise.
And I want to also reiterate what the ranking member had
brought up in terms of continued work with the committee on the
professionalism and ethics review. I think that is important.
We need to make sure that we get that right. It goes right to
the heart of the health, also the force, and make sure they
have the right training and support.
With that, Mr. Kim is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kim. Well, thank you so much for coming on out here. I
am going to probably reserve most of my questions for the
closed session, but I just wanted to go off of what the ranking
member just brought up.
I think that is critically important for us on this
committee to be able to articulate well, both to our colleagues
as well as to our constituents, the mission of what it is that
your organizations are doing going forward as we see the near-
peer conversation and this great power competition become more
and more in our lexicon once again.
So with Mr. Mitchell, I just wanted to go back to what you
were saying. You were talking about some of the efforts that
you are working on with CYBERCOM. And I guess I just wanted to
ask, you know, how is that integrating in? How is SOCOM
integrating in with CYBERCOM? And how are those roles and
responsibilities being, you know, deconflicted there?
Mr. Mitchell. So I would just start off by saying that I
believe that CYBERCOM has been an important addition to our
Nation's arsenal. Long overdue, and happy to see that there and
actually out now working on behalf of the Nation.
As I stated earlier, we have a responsibility to help
coordinate with that. We do have liaisons there at Cyber
Command, SOCOM does, and works very closely with them to ensure
that we are integrated.
And I will let General Clarke address some of the----
General Clarke. Some of the specific details that we work
with CYBERCOM, I can talk more in detail in a closed session.
But, Congressman Kim, I think the key for me with General
Nakasone going forward is that we have a relationship that is
clear in our division. There is no overlap with CYBERCOM and
SOCOM, but, in fact, it is a relationship that gets after our
national security interest.
Mr. Kim. Thank you. I mean, we will look forward to picking
that back up in the closed session.
Just, again, continuing on this thread, some of the
different roles and responsibilities that you talked about
coming under this NDS, MISO and some of the other efforts that
you mentioned, a lot of these are ones that SOCOM had been
conducting previously as well.
So I guess I am questioning, does the NDS actually change
anything for SOCOM? Do you feel like there are new missions or
new entities within what it is you are doing that are coming up
because of this now greater focus on near-peer and great power
competition?
Mr. Mitchell. Let me just say, I do think there will be. We
are in the early stages of implementing the NDS. I point out
that the NDS calls for a focus on great power competition, but
it recognizes that the fight against violent extremist
organizations is not going away and we have to balance that.
I do think we will see some new concepts for employment of
special operations forces moving forward. And we are working
with the services to ensure that we are integrated with their
development efforts. A lot of them are implementing experiments
with employment and making sure that we are tied in with them.
Because the fifth SOF truth is that successful special
operations requires support from general purpose forces.
Mr. Kim. Appreciate it. Anything else to add?
General Clarke. The asymmetric advantage that we have over
the two great power competitors of Russia and China is our
allies and partners.
And Mr. Mitchell mentioned it, but as we look at where we
posture our force to be in that great power competition and as
we place forces at the right time to compete on the edges with
those near-peer competitors, I think that alone sends a signal,
but then if you bolster it with the information operations--and
a small team, small element of special operations forces can
bring a significant impact----
Mr. Kim. Yeah.
General Clarke [continuing]. Working with foreign forces.
Mr. Kim. The other thing I will just add there, just, you
know, from my time seeing how SOCOM and our special forces have
been operating, I would add to it, just saying that the
coalitions that you have built with our partners around the
world, I have seen the special ops side of things have deeper
ties with other forces across our partners, more so than pretty
much anything else that I have witnessed.
And I think that would be a great place for you to be able
to build that out going forward as we try to realize the true
potential of SOCOM there with this new strategy.
I will yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Kim.
And Mr. Bacon is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank both of you for being here today.
And we ought to just say right up front, our special forces
are the best in the world--battle-proven, battle-hardened
virtually every day, going back 18 years. And I was fortunate
enough to have served with you all in the conventional air
forces, supporting you with ISR [intelligence, surveillance,
and reconnaissance], electronic warfare, but then also a year
in Iraq, more or less part of your team. And I would just say,
the results day in and day out were remarkable, and I know it
continues. So my hat is off to you and your team.
My first question is about light attack aircraft, and I
defer to which one is best to ask. But, as you know, the Air
Force had signaled that it was going to produce a light attack
aircraft, whether it be a light attack bomber or a ground
attack fighter-type aircraft. And now it subsequently looks
like it has changed directions on that.
It is my position that there is still a need for it,
though, because F-35s, F-22s are high-end. We need something
for that permissive environment that is cheaper to operate or
more efficient to operate.
So is there a requirement for SOCOM for a light-attack-type
platform, and should this fall in your bucket?
General Clarke. I will take first attempt at this one.
First, concur, light attack aircraft is a need for SOCOM,
and I think it is a need for our Nation. And I see it for two
primary reasons. One, it will help our special operators on the
ground for identification and protection from and of enemy
forces.
Second reason, as we look at the foreign internal defense
[FID] of other nations, many nations are now developing their
own air forces. In many cases, they are light attack. And so to
train with those nations, as developing countries, with SOCOM
FID forces is something that is really inside our jar job,
inside SOCOM.
We will work with the Air Force. I will work with General
Goldfein to look at the timing and the mix and where we go
forward with that. So you have my commitment to do that with
the Chief of Staff of the Air Force and his team. I don't know
specifically some of the programmatics at this point in time to
be able to address that, but I identify it as a need.
Mr. Bacon. Secretary Mitchell.
Mr. Mitchell. Yes, I would like to add that, you know, from
our perspective, the NDS calls on us to have a more cost-
effective counterterrorism effort. The most cost-effective CT
effort is the one done by our partners and allies, if we can
help them be successful. And many of them simply don't have the
resources to put into, you know, fifth-generation fighters.
And from a strategic perspective, we think the flight hours
for those fifth-generation fighters are best spent preparing--
--
Mr. Bacon. Right.
Mr. Mitchell [continuing]. And deterring our near-peer
competitors.
So we see a real important need for a light attack moving
forward and are hopeful to come up with a suitable solution
with the Air Force.
Mr. Bacon. Right. Second question is on DCGS, the
Distributed Common Ground System, for intelligence and
exploitation. As you may recall, the Army had done investments
but did a lot of internal R&D [research and development] and
then found they were not in compliance, lost a couple of court
cases. I think there have been some efforts by SOCOM to do
something similar with your own DCGS capabilities.
And so, are we confident we are doing the right thing, that
we are not looking at commercial-off-the-shelf capabilities
first and then going internal? And I just want to make sure
that you feel like you are in compliance and doing that right.
Mr. Mitchell. I am going to have to take that back for the
record.
Mr. Bacon. Okay.
Mr. Mitchell. My understanding of where we are at, though,
is that the systems that are going into the DCGS SOF are
commercially available software and systems. But we owe you a
more in-depth answer on that.
Mr. Bacon. Okay.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 63.]
Mr. Bacon. One last question, as I have about, like, 1
minute left here. You know, there are some various allegations
on civilian casualties in AFRICOM [U.S. Africa Command]. Can
you just tell us about the processes that you go through to be
as safe and as smart about this as possible? Because I know how
hard you try, but I think it is important for the committee to
hear and, you know, our citizens.
Mr. Mitchell. So, first, let me say that from ASD(SO/LIC),
we have responsibility for civilian casualties as part of our
portfolio. Even though the Deputy Under Secretary, Dave
Trachtenberg, has been named as the senior civilian official,
we provide him support.
We go through extensive measures, typically many, many
hours of ISR, watching targets, trying to ensure with the
highest level of certainty that there are no noncombatants in
there.
In the case of the AFRICOM casualty estimate--or civilian
casualties, unfortunately, the command, in reviewing their
film, identified that but failed to report it up, and that is
why so much time went through.
But we take it very seriously. We are in the process of
developing a department-wide directive on mitigating civilian
casualties, reporting, tracking, and responding. So it is
something that Secretary Mattis and Secretary Shanahan take
very seriously.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you so much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Appreciate the time.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Bacon.
Mr. Crow is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Mr.
Mitchell and General Clarke, for your long and distinguished
service to the country.
I know, General Clarke, last time we saw each other was at
Bagram in 2005 when we were both members of the 75th Ranger
Regiment. Rangers lead the way.
And thank you, Mrs. Clarke, for your long history of
service to the country as well.
And as a former captain, when I walk into a room, I
immediately try to identify the command sergeant major. So,
Sergeant Major McCauley, thank you. I understand you are
retiring next month, so congratulations on that retirement. And
thank you for your long history of service to our country as
well.
We are at our 18th year of war now. There are twice as many
SOF forces deployed as there were before 9/11. We are operating
in over 80 countries, as you indicated earlier, Mr. Mitchell.
The suicide rates have been well documented. It is a theme that
you are picking up from the committee here. I and many of my
colleagues are gravely concerned with the stress that we are
putting on our force.
You know, undoubtedly, as Mr. Bacon indicated, our special
operations forces are the best in the world. And when people
are very good at what they do, they are often asked to do a
lot.
And we have continued to add to that mission over the last
18 years. And I know SOCOM now does the counter-WMD [weapons of
mass destruction] mission, the synchronization of plans and
operations for a global terrorist network operations, lead for
DOD's security force assistance, all in addition to traditional
CT and foreign internal defense and direct action missions.
Simply put, I am gravely concerned that we are over-tasking
SOF. And as we pivot to great power competition, I just see no
scenario under which SOF isn't asked to pick up more of the
burden for our legacy operations.
So, all of that said, which of those new mission sets least
align with the historical mission set in the mission of SOCOM?
And if you had a magic wand today, which ones would you take
off of your plate so that we could reduce stress and burden on
our troops and remain good at what we are asked to do?
General Clarke. In terms of the mission----
Mr. Crow. Correct.
General Clarke [continuing]. I believe at this time the
counterterrorism mission for our national mission force is the
most important mission that we do, number one priority, and
that is because that is to protect the homeland.
I think that within that mission, much like some of the
aspects we have done with the Africa optimization, it is not
necessarily take away a mission, but I see reduction internal
to some of these missions, rather than take a mission off the
plate.
You specifically mentioned the countering weapons of mass
destruction mission. For SOCOM, that is largely a staff and
look-at process, where the resources for that actually came
completely from our Strategic Command. And so it hasn't
increased a burden on the force. But I am glad you asked it.
And so I think it is a rightsizing of the missions internal
to make sure we have the right force allocation against it. You
have my pledge to look at do we have the right forces at the
right place and are they overstressed, and if they are, I will
call that signal bell immediately.
Mr. Crow. Okay. I appreciate that. And I know you are the
quintessential professional, so you won't ever ask for things
to be taken off your plate, but it is our responsibility to
ensure you are not being over-tasked. And what I am hearing is
the CT mission should remain the primary focus.
Mr. Mitchell.
Mr. Mitchell. I would echo General Clarke's comments,
particularly about the CWMD/counter-VEO [violent extremist
organization] coordination mission being a mostly headquarters
function and not requiring deployment of forces.
To return, also, back to the discussion earlier about the
2:1 dwell time ratio as the floor that we are seeking, I think
having a department-wide policy with respect to that is an
important tool in our management toolbox to say no to those
missions that aren't priority missions for the Nation and to
protect the force moving forward. And I think that is going to
be our main tool.
We, as the civilian leadership, have to set the priorities
for the missions and help shape and protect the force. But that
tool of the dwell time is extremely----
Mr. Crow. And other than that dwell time tool, are there
other tools that you are missing that allow you to make that
prioritization?
Mr. Mitchell. No, I don't think--in terms of tools missing.
We have a role in the development of policy. Obviously, SO/LIC
is dual-hatted both as a service secretary and a policy, and I
think in our policy role we can advocate for the appropriate
prioritization of the missions.
Internal to the Department, the Secretary has asked us to
take a look at how we view, globally, our CT efforts and how we
are managing those. And we expect to change the way that the
Department is looking at those. Again, that is our main tool
for shaping employment.
Mr. Crow. Thank you.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Crow.
Before I go to Mr. Gallagher, you know, we hear a lot about
what is a priority SOF mission, but what, in your minds, is not
a priority mission for SOF?
General Clarke. Chairman, the way I look at it, it would
be: What are those security-force-assistance-type missions that
could in fact pivot to another force?
And an example would be our security force advisory
brigades. SOF should be in places where it is a light
footprint, it is politically sensitive, with a small team that
is training other special operations forces primarily.
But I think there are opportunities going forward with the
element that I just mentioned that the Army has developed
where, in fact, a security force advisory brigade that has
company commanders and battalion commanders that have been
trained conventionally can train conventional forces from other
forces if we can have a footprint.
So I think that would be an example of something that SOF
doesn't have to do any longer going forward. And, obviously, I
will work very closely with the Army and with the Department to
make sure that we have the right force applied.
Mr. Langevin. Secretary, comment on that?
Mr. Mitchell. I would echo that comment. I think that is
really the major area. Of course, our CT forces, there is
nobody else in the Department that can provide that mission and
that effective a force.
And the security force assistance, whether it is in Joint
Staff exercises or other types of engagements, we need to be
very selective in which ones of those that we take on and make
sure that we maximize our support from our general purpose
forces.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. And lastly, I wanted to ask, when
will the Army brigades be available outside of Afghanistan?
Mr. Mitchell. Well, I think we will have to take that one
for the record. I don't have enough visibility on the Army's
force generation process to answer that.
Mr. Langevin. Okay.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 63.]
Mr. Langevin. I wanted to get those in, so thank you. I am
sorry.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Gallagher for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to follow up on Mr. Crow's line of questioning
as well as the ranking member's line of questioning.
I think we sort of have bipartisan agreement around the
conceptual shift embedded within the NDS. Sort of, we are
moving towards the near-peer fight, great power competition.
Therefore, counterterrorism cannot be ignored, but it is not
the top priority.
You have both stated that counterterrorism is your bread
and butter. But as you look at that shift, right, I mean, as we
try and implement the National Defense Strategy, not only sort
of throwing around heady terms like ``great power competition''
but specifically to move from a paradigm of deterrence by
punishment to deterrence by denial, particularly in the Indo-
Pacific region, just in as specific terms as you can, what role
do you think SOCOM will play in that effort?
And if the answer is you will cover the CT mission while
other forces do deterrence by denial in the Pacific, that is
okay as well. Just help us flesh that out.
Mr. Mitchell. I would offer a couple thoughts.
As we talked about earlier, our special operations forces
excel at building partner capacity with similar forces. And as
we look to shift to that denial, I think we will find our SOF
forces being involved in that.
Remember, the Chinese and the Russian threats are global
threats, and that is one of the reasons why--part of the reason
why we are in 80 countries, because we are addressing those
threats and trying to gain influence and legitimacy with those
partners.
Again, I think we will play a significant role in that. We
have a built-in advantage as a preferred partner for providing
security assistance, and I think we need to leverage that,
again, to build our influence.
The one example I would give right now: In the Philippines,
this committee, the chairman of the HASC [House Armed Services
Committee] recently agreed to allow us to move forward with an
important CT effort, but that is also a critical component of
building influence with that country and maintaining--keeping
Chinese at arm's length.
Mr. Gallagher. And, General Clarke, if you could comment.
And, also, building upon that, I mean, besides the
relationship with the Philippines, as you look at the INDOPACOM
[U.S. Indo-Pacific Command] region in particular, what
partnerships jump out to you as ones that SOCOM in particular
but DOD in general should prioritize with the long-term China
threat in mind?
General Clarke. Right. Immediate to mind comes in Korea and
Japan. We have a special operations Korea theater Special
Operations Command that not just assists with a conflict on the
peninsula but they can also look broader. We have special
operation forces in Okinawa in Japan that can help with that
great power competition and have a sense for around the
country. But those are two where we have a large U.S. presence.
I think the other countries that fall into that: Singapore,
Thailand, Vietnam, Malaysia. And in the future, I think India
is a great partner, specifically, for us. We don't have a great
SOF presence there now, but my predecessor, General Thomas,
traveled to India earlier this year specifically to engage the
Indians for the future.
It is a great question. Thank you.
Mr. Gallagher. So that might be an area where we could
grow, going forward.
So just a final one. The other big conceptual shift that I
am struggling to understand in the NDS is this idea of sort of
a contact, a blunt layer, a surge layer, and a homeland layer.
How should we think about where SOF sort of fits in that
taxonomy?
Mr. Mitchell. I think we fit in the contact layer, day in,
day out, across the globe, making contact with partners and
allies and being in a position to reduce the influence of the
Russians and the Chinese.
I would just point out that they are willing to fill a
vacuum. Anytime we leave somewhere or move out, they are more
than willing to get in. And so I think it is a primary role
that we play in that contact layer.
General Clarke. If I could, the only other thing I would
say--I agree with Secretary Mitchell's comments. But against
Russia and China, we don't have to compete ``mano a mano''
[hand to hand]. There are places where China and Russia exist--
Djibouti, in South America--that our actions there could also
work in that layer that I think we should consider going
forward.
Mr. Gallagher. Yeah. I mean, to the extent you are talking
about subconventional gray-zone-type competition, I would
completely agree.
Thank you both, gentlemen. My time has expired.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Gallagher.
Mr. Brown is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, gentlemen, for your presence today and for your
service to our Nation.
Maybe about 6 or 7 weeks ago, I wrote a letter to Secretary
Shanahan, joined by a number of members in this committee,
where we expressed our deep concern on the use of military
service members and Department of Defense resources for
operations on the southwest border and construction of a border
wall.
As you know, the President invoked section 2808 of title
10, which allows unobligated MILCON [military construction]
funds to be used as a source of funds for the border wall.
So my question is, how does this impact SOCOM? How many
projects are unobligated? How does this compound the unfunded
requirements by further delaying unfunded projects?
Mr. Mitchell. It is my understanding that there are--no
decisions have been made with respect to taking any SOCOM
MILCON funding. There are a number of projects--I believe the
number is six--that are on the list of potential projects, but
there has been no decision made on those specific projects. So
it has not, to date, had any impact on SOCOM.
Mr. Brown. And assuming that one or more of those six would
see funds taken away, what would be the impact?
Mr. Mitchell. I would have to reevaluate at the time on the
specific project and how long it would be delayed.
General Clarke. And I would voice and echo Mr. Mitchell's
point. I would weigh in from the impacts if it were decided
that one of our MILCON projects was there.
But I would also highlight, Congressman Brown, to your
first question, there are no SOCOM forces on the border. There
has been no impact to SOCOM thus far because of the border
employment.
Mr. Brown. Another question. How would deferred counter-
drug programs under section 284(c) of title 10, how would that
impact SOCOM and counter-transnational-organized-crime efforts?
Mr. Mitchell. So SO/LIC also has responsibility for
counternarcotics and transnational organized crime. All of our
DOD counternarcotics efforts are, at this time, fully funded.
And none of the funds that have gone from 284 have been
actually taken from our counternarcotics budget.
We distributed all of our funds to our National Guard. Our
DOD Demand Reduction [Program] is fully funded. And we are
continuing to support our law enforcement partners around the
globe using our 284 authorities.
Mr. Brown. Okay. Because in a response that I received just
recently to my inquiry--and the response was from Kenneth
Rapuano--he did indicate that activities supporting counter-
drug and counter-transnational-organized-crime activities under
section 284(c) of title 10 would be deferred to the end of the
current fiscal year or fiscal year 2020.
So what you are saying is that--but SOCOM effort in that
program wouldn't be impacted.
Mr. Mitchell. So no impact to SOCOM. And ASD Rapuano is our
ASD for Homeland Defense and Global Security. At the time that
that letter was written, there was discussion within the
Department and with the White House about potentially holding
those funds pending a decision. Those funds have all been
released by OMB [Office of Management and Budget] and the
Comptroller. And so the letter was accurate at the time, but
the situation has changed since then.
And, again, has no impact on SOF forces.
Mr. Brown. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Brown.
Mr. Waltz is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I just want to echo my colleagues' gratitude--really, I
know you are in your dream job, so really to your families, who
are putting up and once again suffering with your service. But
thank you.
And thank you, ma'am, as well.
I just want to go back to Africa for a moment, where I
understand you are going through optimization, which is really
a reduction of a footprint. What are we not doing there? Where
are we taking risk?
I have served in Niger, Nigeria, all along West Africa. I
mean, the geography is just intense, vast. Libya, I understand
the operations that are going on there in terms of the
evacuation; East Africa, the Kony mission. I mean, it has
been--it was already, I think, chronically underresourced.
So what are we not doing? Then what are we doing with
optimization of those forces if we are not increasing dwell
time? Where are they shifting to? Just walk us through what we
are no longer going to do or do as much in that theater.
General Clarke. I will take first stab at it.
On the Africa optimization, I am glad you raised it,
because it was looked at through the lens of threat to our
homeland and the specific CT mission that we were conducting.
And any force that was decided they were no longer needed were
the only forces that came out.
And I can talk specific numbers in the closed hearing as to
what came out, but it really did go to what is important in our
vital national interest and then could another, in this case an
ally, do it. Because it is clearly in, in particular, our
European allies' best interests because of migration into their
area of operations and specific to their populations.
So that is really the lens at which the Africa optimization
did--and some of these programs were enduring programs that
truthfully just needed a relook.
Mr. Waltz. Okay.
General Clarke. So that is the way I would address----
Mr. Waltz. I will look, you know, for more detail perhaps
in the closed session. I hope we can get there.
It just occurs to me that that is--if we are looking at a
shift to great power competition, that there is a confluence
there between resource competition, China's involvement,
Russia's re-involvement, and the CT space, where half the
world's population is going to be by 2050. I think it was
already an underresourced area.
But just in the interest of my few minutes, I want to go
back to light attack. Do you need that capability now?
General Clarke. I would say we have some capability now,
but we need to continue to grow it.
Mr. Waltz. You know, the Air Force went through this,
started a program in 2009. You know, that did not come to
fruition. Now we are looking at a continued experimentation.
And I have been pretty vocal on the record that, while we of
course as a Nation need things that fly far, fast, and high, we
need things that fly low, armored, and can loiter and can land
in places like West Africa.
So I will continue to press, frankly, the Air Force on that
capability. We need it now. And while we shift to great power--
I think that is a comfort zone for lots of places in the
building--that we can't forget those operators like Chief
Farmer--I was at the funeral this morning as well--that are out
there in 70, 80 countries as we speak.
CIV/CAS [civilian casualties]. Is--does--let me ask you
this way. Do the geographic combatant commanders feel like they
have full responsibility with the shift? I guess what I am
trying to get at is, with the shift of the Theater Special
Operations Command in, what, 2013, 2014, the reporting to
SOCOM, I just sense, is there a disconnect?
I know, obviously, you are responsible for the training.
You hand them off to the geographic combatant commander. There
is an operational line there. But, you know, I am thinking back
to the ongoing Niger investigation; now in East Africa. It
seems to be a trend there. I think in Afghanistan, in those
combat theaters, they seem to have more pieces in place for
oversight.
Do you sense a disconnect there, number one?
And then, number two, I am very mindful of an overreaction,
where we tend to pull flexibility away from the ground force
commanders. What are your thoughts?
And I would welcome from both of you.
General Clarke. I don't see any disconnect. You
specifically mentioned the theater Special Operations Command.
They are COCOM to me, they are assigned to me, but they are
actually under the operational and tactical control of the
geographic combatant commanders.
So that strike approval process and the CIV/CAS that is
monitored and watched to prevent is all done based upon the
intent of the geographic combatant commander. So, Congressman,
I don't see any disconnect at all.
Mr. Mitchell. From a policy perspective, the combatant
commanders are solely responsible for the conduct of operations
within their AORs [areas of responsibility]. And we hold them
accountable for implementing the Department's measures with
respect to civilian, noncombatant casualties.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time has expired.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Waltz.
Ms. Slotkin is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Slotkin. Thanks.
It is great to see you guys. I know everyone has lauded you
and said how happy they are to see you, but I know that, for a
lot of us, we sleep easier knowing that you two are in the jobs
that you are in. So thank you for that.
A lot of my questions have been asked, so I am going to
take it in a slightly different direction.
I was asking a number of the service chiefs last week about
the value of allies and partners and, in particular, the SOF
world. And I know, from my time, we watched a number of
countries go from being sort of middling to being better and
being able to conduct and perform operations with us.
Can you help us understand what would happen if those
allies and partners, let's say, with us in West Africa, in the
Middle East, decided not to support those missions? What would
your budget request look like? How would it be different?
General Clarke. Congresswoman, the number one thing that I
look at from what you are raising is our--what our allies and
partners give us is the access and placement and the posture to
be able to project our power going forward. And, specifically,
we do that from a CT and a VEO aspect, focused on the high-end
threat, but it also allows us, as both of us have said, to
actually compete with Russia and China.
In terms of what that could mean for budget, I think it
looks to the posture aspect of what would we then have to do
differently where we couldn't get into a specific country. And
there are a lot of variations on this depending on where and
when that happened. You may need additional ships; you may need
additional long legs for some of your aircraft. So having the
posture that can be allowed by our allies or partners is
critical.
Ms. Slotkin. Uh-huh.
Mr. Mitchell. I would just offer that we also have
responsibility for U.N. [United Nations] peacekeeping. And a
recent study looked at the cost of deploying a battalion from
another troop-contributing country in lieu of a similarly sized
U.S. organization. The cost to deploy that U.S. force would be
eight times as much as the support that we offer through the
U.N.
So we very much value the contribution of our partners and
allies. As I said earlier, that is the most cost-effective way,
is having competent and willing partners and allies.
Ms. Slotkin. Uh-huh.
Let me shift gears. The designation on Monday of the IRGC
[Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps] as a terrorist
organization, a foreign terrorist organization, and then the
retaliatory declaration that CENTCOM is a foreign terrorist
organization.
What contingency plans have you all put in place? How do
you think this is going to affect you? What work have you done
to prepare yourselves for what may be--I don't know--a
different world based on how Iran plans to act?
Mr. Mitchell. We don't want to address any specific force
protection measures in this forum.
But what I would say is that the IRGC has been a threat to
U.S. forces for decades, since the 1983 bombing, through
Khobar, and then into Iraq, where they are responsible for the
deaths of hundreds of American service men and women. And so we
have been aware of the threat for a long time and have factored
that into our protections.
And, again, we would be happy to talk a little bit more in
detail in the closed session on that.
Ms. Slotkin. But so you supported the designation?
Mr. Mitchell. The Department offered its views during the
interagency process. The decision has been made by the State
Department to designate them and we are supportive of that.
Ms. Slotkin. Okay.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Ms. Slotkin.
And now, last but not least, Mr. Conaway is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Conaway. Thanks, Chairman. Appreciate that.
Just real quickly, on a whole lot more mundane subject but
nevertheless important, and that is auditing the Department of
Defense books involves everybody. And could you help me and the
rest of us understand where your role is and how important it
is to you that we get that done? And are you going to make it?
Mr. Mitchell. So, from a macro perspective, SOCOM underwent
its first audit. They were unable to give any kind of real
grade.
One of the challenges that we face is that the SOCOM
accounting systems are dependent upon the service accounting
systems. And so, to the degree that we are depending on them,
it is very difficult for us to get to that complete
auditability.
Don't get me wrong; we are very much interested in making
sure that we get to that point. But the limiting factor on us
right now, the most significant one, is the service
accountability procedures.
Mr. Conaway. General Clarke.
General Clarke. Yes, sir. One, SOCOM welcomes the audit. It
helps us see ourselves, and I think it is actually a good thing
when you can look at yourselves and get an outside look to help
us get better.
There were 69 internal controls identified in the audit
that we will look at strongly and come up with a path to try to
reduce those down. Because, at the end of the day, this is a
good thing. It will help us get better and actually save some
money in the long run.
Mr. Conaway. So have you actually assigned somebody either
in uniform or a civilian specific responsibility for
shepherding each of those to completion?
General Clarke. I can't tell you today in----
Mr. Conaway. But the idea is, if everybody is responsible,
then nobody is responsible.
General Clarke. But, Congressman, we will have someone
responsible. Ultimately----
Mr. Conaway. I understand.
General Clarke [continuing]. Myself, reporting to the
Secretary, is responsible for getting it done. And I assure you
we will get that done.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. Well, again, it is important on lots of
levels. I appreciate both your attitudes to that.
And I will add my congratulations to both of you.
And, Sergeant Major, thank you for your long years of
service.
There are an awful lot of hash stripes on all three of you-
all's sleeves. I can't see the Air Force sleeves. But that is
an awful lot of time away from Mom and Dad and the kids and a
lot of birthdays missed and a lot of anniversaries missed and a
lot of once-in-a-lifetime opportunities back home that were
missed.
And so you are doing the fun part. I try to thank the
families more than anybody else, because they bear the largest
brunt of keeping you in the fight. And so, on behalf--please
thank your families for what all they have put up with over all
these years of your long service.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Conaway. And I, too, echo
those comments.
I want to thank you, Secretary Mitchell and General Clarke,
for your testimony here today, for your service to our Nation.
Mrs. Clarke, it was an honor to meet you as well. I am glad
you could attend today's hearing.
And before I close out the hearing, I, too, want to
congratulate Command Sergeant Major Patrick McCauley on your
retirement.
And the command sergeant major began his career as a Marine
in 1986. Joined the SOF community and went to assessment and
selection and a special forces qualification course.
And now you retire as the SOCOM senior enlisted leader. A
great deal to be proud of, and many great years of service to
our country, for which we are all grateful. And I wish you well
in the next chapter in your life.
With that, I thank you all again for your service. And I
hope you express our appreciation, the committee's
appreciation, to all of those under your command and all of the
SOCOM family, both the families themselves and the men and
women who wear the uniform. We are all grateful and indebted to
you for your service. Thank you for what you do.
This hearing will now--the public hearing will now adjourn,
and we will reconvene in closed session.
[Whereupon, at 4:19 p.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session.]
=======================================================================
A P P E N D I X
April 9, 2019
=======================================================================
PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
April 9, 2019
=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING
THE HEARING
April 9, 2019
=======================================================================
RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. LANGEVIN
Mr. Mitchell. A Security Force Assistance Brigade (SFAB) is already
working outside Afghanistan now. Currently, the 2nd SFAB from Fort
Bragg, North Carolina, is deployed to the U.S. Central Command
(USCENTCOM) area of responsibility executing train, advise, and assist
missions in support of Operation INHERENT RESOLVE (OIR) (Iraq) and
Operation FREEDOM'S SENTINEL (OFS) (Afghanistan). The deployment of the
SFAB to the USCENTCOM area of responsibility has allowed for the
reduction of one Infantry Brigade Combat Team (IBCT) in support of OFS.
USCENTCOM is the only combatant command sourced with the SFAB
capability. As designed, the SFAB can be trained and equipped for any
theater of operations. USCENTCOM is currently the priority for SFAB
employment.
[See page 19.]
______
RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. BACON
Mr. Mitchell. U.S. Special Operations Command's (USSOCOM) decision
to pivot from the previous All-Source Analytical Environment capability
to the National Reconnaissance Office's (NRO) Fusion Analysis and
Development Effort (FADE) platform is based on substantial research,
evaluation, and collaboration. FADE is an established commercially
developed and Government-owned platform with connections across the
Intelligence Community (IC) and other Federal agencies. The more
salient aspects of the platform are its advanced analytics maturity;
underlying modern architecture; use of proven agile software
development methodologies; quantity and quality of data sources;
established partnerships; and cost effectiveness.
USSOCOM is committed to fielding and deploying all components of
the DCGS-SOF capability in a fiscally efficient and operationally
effective manner. The DCGS-SOF acquisition strategy consistently
leverages existing SOF programs as well as DOD and other Government
agencies' programs to integrate commercial-off-the-shelf, Government-
off-the-shelf, and other mature technologies into the Program of
Record. In January 2018, USSOCOM provided written certification that
all DCGS-SOF program increments procured after enactment of the
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 will be carried
out in accordance with 10 U.S.C. Sec. 2377. Our strategy involving the
selection and integration of FADE into the DCGS-SOF POR complies with
this section of the U.S. Code.
[See page 16.]
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING
April 9, 2019
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LANGEVIN
Mr. Langevin. What are the top five most high-demand/low-density
skill sets in SOCOM currently? How are personnel being selected to
attend training for these skills? How long, on average, are personnel
in these skill sets staying in SOCOM? What is the average deployment-
to-dwell ratio and PERSTEMPO for these personnel?
Mr. Mitchell. While I would defer to Commander, USSOCOM, for the
specific details, in general, Special Operations Forces' (SOF) high-
demand/low-density (HD/LD) skillsets are concentrated in the
intelligence, aviation, joint fires communities, psychological
operations, and civil affairs career fields. These career fields, most
of which are found across the SOF Service Components, are among the
most stressed communities in USSOCOM in terms of deploy-to-dwell ratios
and personnel tempo ratios. Unlike core special operations specialties,
identifying the retention in the SOF community of these HD/LD skill
sets in SOF is difficult due to service-specific personnel policies
which may require mandatory reassignments. The Services' recruitment
and training processes provide uniformed personnel with the baseline
skills and qualifications needed to perform similar roles in the
conventional forces (such as intelligence analysis or an aircrew role).
Typically, personnel in those Service communities volunteer for SOF
and may undergo additional selection, training, and education in order
to fulfill SOF-unique requirements. Irrespective of the additional
training, however, the services are not obligated to preserve these
individuals in SOF assignments. Nevertheless, retention of experienced
personnel with HD/LD skillsets is a high priority for the SOF
enterprise given the lengthy training pipelines and the small number of
qualified candidates. The retention rates may also vary over time based
on Geographic Combatant Command requirements and USSOCOM's capacity.
Mr. Langevin. Please provide the percentage of SOCOM personnel who
are below a 1:1 dwell ratio, between a 1:1 and a 1:2 dwell ratio,
between a 1:2 and 1:3 dwell ratio and at a 1:3 or greater than 1:3
dwell ratio? Is there a disparity between core special operators (i.e.
SEAL, 18 Series, Marine Raider) and enabler populations and if so, what
does that disparity look like?
General Clarke. 1. The following is a breakdown of Special
Operations Forces (SOF) deployment-to-dwell (D2D) percentages.
a. D2D below 1:1 = 1.8%
b. D2D 1:1-1:2 = 3.9%
c. D2D 1:2-1:3 = 3.3%
d. D2D 1:3 or greater = 91.0%
2. Three of the four SOF Service Components have D2D disparities
between SOF critical skills operators and SOF Combat Support (CS)
populations due to force structure and differing generation rates for
major operator force elements versus support personnel. Examples
follow:
a.
Marine Special Operations Command's Marine Special
Operations Companies' force generation ratio is 1:3. However,
their CS forces generate at a 1:2 ratio based on current force
structure. Examples of combat support specialties with low D2D
are Joint Terminal Attack Controllers, Dog Handlers, and
Signals Intelligence specialists. MARSOC's ``get well'' date is
Fiscal Year (FY) 22 following the realization of programmed
growth of 368 Combat Support/Combat Service Support (CS/CSS)
personnel. This growth will address the current organizational
imbalances.
b.
Air Force Special Operations Command's Remotely Piloted
Aircraft (RPA) Combat Support community (launch and recovery
personnel) continue to deploy with less than 1:2 D2D but are
expected to reach 1:2 D2D by early FY20 with the implementation
of pending government-owned, contractor-operated launch and
recovery elements.
c.
U.S. Army Special Operations Command's force generation
rate for operator units of action does not create a major
disparity between combat and CS forces, primarily because the
organic CS personnel are only applied in support of the parent
battalion or its subordinate units' deployments. The exception
to this model is the Group Support Battalion (GSB) designed to
support the Special Forces Group and its organic battalions.
When the battalions are deployed separately from the group,
they receive a ``slice'' from the GSB, at times overburdening
the low density/high demand CS personnel. These assets are
carefully managed to prevent overutilization and are rarely
directed to support another SOF component requirement.
3. Naval Special Warfare Command's (NSWC) 24-month force generation
model is comprised of an 18-month Inter-Deployment Training Cycle
(IDTC) and 6 month deployments. NSWC deploying force elements, both
operator and CS personnel, maintain a 1:3 force generation ratio which
equates to the majority of personnel deploying above 1:2 D2D.
Mr. Langevin. Is there a personnel tempo (PERSTEMPO) restriction in
place to prevent SOCOM personnel from going TAD for extended periods of
time while in CONUS? If so, what is that restriction and is it
adequate? How is that restriction waived for personnel who volunteer to
attend training or deploy at a higher pace than the rest of the
community?
General Clarke. 1. Yes, there is a PERSTEMPO restriction in place
to prevent USSOCOM personnel from going on extended temporary duty.
This restriction is contained in SOCOM's Personnel Tempo Policy 17-24
and is adequate.
2. The USSOCOM PERSTEMPO threshold in the policy is 480 days away
from home station (defined as head away from pillow) in a 24 month
period (730 days) utilizing a rolling scale that looks at all PERSTEMPO
events in the previous 18 months and projects upcoming PERSTEMPO events
6 months forward.
3. PERSTEMPO events include, but are not limited to: operational
deployments; Temporary Duty Assignments (TDY); night training or field
exercises where the service member cannot sleep at his/her normal
residence; performing service as a student or trainee at a school
(including any government school); performing administrative, guard, or
detail duties in garrison at their permanent duty station or home port;
or unavailable as a result of hospitalization or as a result of
disciplinary action.
4. When a Commander (CDR) identifies an individual who will break
the USSOCOM PERSTEMPO threshold due to current or projected duty
status, the CDR must either change the projected schedule for that
individual or initiate a waiver request to be staffed through the
individual's chain of command to CDR USSOCOM as early as practicable.
The waiver request can be disapproved by any CDR in the chain of
command, but only CDR USSOCOM can approve the waiver. This waiver
process is for directed PERSTEMPO events or those for which an
individual volunteers.
Mr. Langevin. What is the average number of deployments, broken
down by grade and component, of SOCOM personnel? Is there a correlation
between retention and deployment/PERSTEMPO?
General Clarke. 1. Determining an average number of deployments is
very difficult; some deployments are less than a week while others
range from four to twelve months. There are a number of other factors
that also make determining averages and identifying impacts on
retention difficult including the following:
a.
Deployment rates vary between special operations rated
personnel and enabling support personnel who have very
different deployment timelines, cycles, and lengths. The number
of deployments generally correlates to time in service,
particularly for SOF and combat arms.
b.
Differing deployment lengths across Services generally
result in Army personnel having greater number of deployed
months when compared to individuals in other Services with an
equal number of deployments.
c.
Navy includes time away from home port while on sea duty in
its deployment tracking.
d.
NSW can only track deployments for FY 15-19. These numbers
are artificially low as personnel often depart the unit
following completion of a deployment.
e.
Special operators in special mission units deploy much more
often than the rest of the Special Operations Force and are
excluded from these averages.
2. Given the considerations outlined above, the list below shows
the average number of deployments across all SOF Service Components:
Enlisted grades E3-E6 average from 1-4
Enlisted grades E7-E9 average from 4-5
Warrant Officer grades W2-W3 average from 1-6
Warrant Officer grades W4-W5 average from 9-16
Officer grades O1-O4 average from 1-5
Officer grades O5-O6 average from 5-6
3. The current relationship between deployments and retention is
unclear. Previous studies conducted by RAND had indicated both positive
and negative correlations with deployments. Most of this work was
completed prior to 2009 and is not special operations specific. A 2009
RAND news release does indicate that Army had been effective in its use
of retention bonuses to maintain retention against the otherwise
negative effects of deployment. USSOCOM will require at least 180 days
to conduct a study of the relationship between deployment and retention
for personnel serving in special operations specialties.
Mr. Langevin. Do all SOCOM components use the same parachutes and
airborne equipment? If not, why and is there an effect on the
interoperability of SOF components?
General Clarke. 1. No, USSOCOM Components use several different
types of military personnel parachute systems and ancillary airborne
equipment to conduct static line and military free fall (MFF) training
and operations. While SOF does conduct airborne operations, USSOCOM is
not the only element within DOD that possesses this capability.
2. Parachute systems and ancillary equipment are typically Service
Common or Service Approved Commercial-off-the-Shelf (COTS). They are
funded by the individual Services using either MFP-2 or MFP-4 funds and
provided to USSOCOM service components. Each Service also maintains its
own airborne related ``authorized for use list'' (AUL) based on its
specific needs and mission essential tasks, all of which have been
rigorously tested and approved by the appropriate Service Research,
Development, Testing and Experimentation organizations. Although the
Services and USSOCOM Components use different parachutes and airborne
equipment, interoperability is generally not affected in operations due
to the make-up of the insertion force, which is typically composed of
personnel from the same unit using the same equipment. However, the
four AULs cause a lack of standardization of airborne equipment across
the USSOCOM Components and does impact training efficiencies and
interoperability. Recognizing the potential benefits for a single point
of contact, the USSOCOM Director of Operations is coordinating with the
Department to designate a single entity responsible for DOD-wide
airborne related programs.
Mr. Langevin. Do all SOCOM components use the same individual dive
equipment (i.e. closed circuit UBA, BCD)? If not, why and is there an
effect on the interoperability of SOF components?
General Clarke. 1. Yes, all USSOCOM components use the same
individual dive equipment (i.e. SCUBA, closed circuit Underwater
Breathing Apparatus (UBA), Buoyancy Competency Device (BCD)).
2. The SOF diving capability (Combat Diving and Maritime
Infiltration) is standardized for two reasons. First, there is an
established Authorized-for-Navy (military)-Use (ANU) list that USSOCOM
components can choose equipment from to meet their requirements. For
example, while all SOF use the Draegar MK25 as the primary UBA, there
is a family of UBAs components can choose from (i.e. MK25, MK16, MODE).
Similarly, there are multiple BCDs from different manufactures on the
list. All items on the ANU list have been tested to nationally
recognized standards set by the Navy Experimental Diving Unit and
approved by NAVSEA OOC3. Secondly, the Navy Dive Manual (NAVSEA SS521-
AG-PRO-010 Rev 7) is universally recognized as the authoritative
reference publication for all diving. Organizationally, the DOD
Instruction (DODI) 3224.04, Single Manager Responsibility for Joint
Service Military Diving Technology and Training (MDT&T), establishes an
effective chain of command with military dive training and safety
reporting requirements, while directing the Secretaries of Military
Departments and USSOCOM to conduct all actions necessary to satisfy
Service or SOF-unique requirements. USSOCOM coordinates its actions
through the N97 and PMS-NSW and reports to the MDT&T as required.
Mr. Langevin. Do all SOCOM components use the same ground mobility
vehicles? If not, why and is there an effect on the interoperability of
SOF components?
General Clarke. Yes, USSOCOM equips each of the components with the
same tactical ground mobility vehicles. USSOCOM tactical vehicles are
designed to provide varying degrees of performance, protection, and
mobility based on mission, threat, and geographic terrain. There is a
minimal number of select USSOCOM National Mission Force units that
maintain unique mobility capabilities for executing time sensitive
missions.
Mr. Langevin. Over the past 5 years, what is the range of special
duty incentive pay paid to SOCOM personnel broken out by component?
Within each component, please delineate between rank and occupational
specialty.
General Clarke. 1. USSOCOM components utilize both special duty
assignment pay and assignment incentive pay. Below are the assignment
pays categorized by Service Component:
2. Special Duty Assignment Pay
a. Army
Enlisted Operators: $375/month
75th Ranger Regiment/Military Information Support
Operations ``V'' Coded Positions: $300/month
160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment ``F''
qualified: $150-$300/month
Special Mission Unit (SMU): $375-450/month
b. Air Force
Combat Controllers, Pararescue, Tactical Air
Control Party Specialist, and Special Operations Weather
Technician, SD6: $450/month
Career Enlisted Aviators Remotely Piloted Aircraft
Sensor Operator, SD2 to SD4 based on assigned aircraft: $150-
$300/month
Special Mission Unit operators, SD3 to SD6: $225-
$450/month
SMU support, SD3 to SD5: $225-$375/month
c. Navy
SEAL: $450/month
Special Warfare Combatant-Craft Crewman: $300/month
d. Marines
$75-375/Month
3. Assignment Incentive Pay
a. Army
E-9 Over 24 years of service: $500-$1000/month
E-9 Nominative billet: $1250 per month
SMU: $750-$1000/month
b. Air Force
SMU: $750-$1000/month
c. Navy
SMU: $500-$1500/month
d. Marines
NA
* Greater detail is available in the chart attached in question 8
[The chart referred to is retained in the committee files and can
be viewed upon request.]
Mr. Langevin. Over the past 5 years, what is the range of retention
or accession bonuses paid to SOCOM personnel broken out by component?
Additionally, within each component, what is the range of retention or
accession bonuses paid within each occupational specialty broken down
by rank? [Question #8, for cross-reference.]
General Clarke. 1. Recruiting and retention programs are specific
to each Armed Service with varying compensations. USSOCOM provides
generalized responses below for recruitment and retention to give a
general sense of the bonuses:
a.
Service Initial Enlistment Bonuses:
Army: Up to $10K
Air Force: Up to $15K
Navy: Up to $12K
Marines: N/A, as Marines do not recruit directly into
Special Operations
b.
Current Retention Bonuses: Retention bonuses are paid based
on eligibility zones. Zone A is personnel with 17 months to 6
years of service. Zone B is personnel with 6 to 10 years of
service. Zone C is personnel with 10 to 14 years of service.
Navy and Marines use a Critical Skills Retention Bonus for
personnel with more than 14 years of service. Army uses a
Written Bonus Agreement for senior personnel and Air Force
currently has no program for senior personnel. Attachment 1,
SOF Pay Comparison Chart, illustrates Enlistment, Accession,
and Retention bonuses delineated by each Service, rank, and
occupational specialty. [The chart referred to is retained in
the committee files and can be viewed upon request.]
c.
Historic Retention Bonuses: Retention bonuses are paid from
Service monies and are not tracked by USSOCOM headquarters.
Mr. Langevin. Over the past 5 years, what is the range of hazardous
duty incentive pay paid to SOCOM personnel broken out by component?
Within each component, please delineate between rank and occupational
specialty.
General Clarke. 1. While the Services have some discretion with
respect to who is paid and the amounts paid, the authorized range of
Hazardous Duty Incentive Pay (HDIP) pay has remained fairly constant
over the past five years. The Department of Defense Instruction for the
Hazard Pay Program restricts payment to three or less hazard incentives
per individual. The Service authorized HDIP is the same across USSOCOM
components, ranks, and specialties. The amounts are:
a.
Flying Duty--Aircrew: $250/month; Non-aircrew: $150/month
b.
Parachute Duty--Static line: $150/month; Freefall: $225/
month
c.
Demolition Duty--$150/month
d.
Diving Duty--up to $240/month (Master Diver Skill Incentive
Pay for enlisted Soldiers is up to $340)
2. For the Air Force, including the Air Force Special Operations
Command, DOD approved a three-year pilot program for Battlefield Airman
Skill Incentive Pay (BASIP). This program replaces individual hazardous
duty pays (jump, dive, demo, etc.) with one combined monthly pay. Rates
are based on individual skill level, advanced qualifications, and duty
requirements. The program became effective September 1, 2017 at the
following rates:
a.
Combat Control/Special Tactics Officer: $525-600/month
b.
Pararescue/Combat Rescue Officer: $540-615/month
c.
Special Operations Weather Officer: $300-$525/month
d.
Tactical Air Control Party/Air Liaison Officer: $150-525/
month
3. Naval Special Warfare Skill Incentive Pay (SKIP). SKIP will be
used in lieu of hazardous duty incentive pays to minimize costly
training interruptions in the NSW inter-deployment training cycle
(IDTC), minimize the strain on force Personnel Tempo System (PERSTEMPO)
during the IDTC, and remove financial disincentives associated with NSW
operators seeking medical care. Specialties: SO, SWCC (O/W/E) up to
$715/month.
Mr. Langevin. Do SOCOM personnel conduct periodic peer reviews of
their team members and if so, how does this affect personnel
management?
General Clarke. 1. USSOCOM units do not conduct periodic peer
reviews for the purposes of evaluations or personnel management.
2. Many commanders use 360 degree reviews as a means of obtaining
feedback for their own leaders' development. For example, within Naval
Special Warfare Command (NSW), Navy officers attend the Naval
Leadership and Ethics Course (NLEC) prior to taking command or serving
as an Executive Officer. The NLEC curriculum integrates a contracted
``360 Feedback'' peer review program to solicit individual feedback as
an assessment tool. This opportunity provides the member the chance to
get anonymous feedback from direct reports, peers, and managers in
order to help refine their leadership style prior to assuming their
leadership job. NSW's training curriculum also utilizes this same
program to conduct peer reviews for future Officer and Enlisted SEALs
as well as Special Warfare Combatant Craft Crewmen.
Mr. Langevin. How has the optimization of AFRICOM affected SOCOM?
Has this improved PERSTEMPO and dwell ratios for force providing
components?
General Clarke. 1. AFRICOM's Counter-Violent Extremist
Organizations (C-VEO) Optimization implementation remains underway,
consisting of various Special Operations Forces moves within AFRICOM
and redeployments from AFRICOM.
2. The in-theater moves have had no effect on PERSTEMPO or
Deployment to Dwell ratios to date.
3. The redeployments occur between May and October 2019. USSOCOM
will realize improved PERSTEMPO and dwell ratios during FY20 based on
the redeployment dates.
Mr. Langevin. What is the language training requirement for SOCOM
personnel? What programs are in place for distance learning? [Question
#13, for cross-reference.]
General Clarke. 1. There are four sources of language training
requirements:
a.
USSOCOM Directive 350-17--This language, regional
expertise, and culture (LREC) directive prescribes minimum
annual language training for SOF. It also articulates the
minimum training required as a part of pre-deployment training.
b.
Theater Special Operations Commands (TSOC)--The TSOC
language capability requirements articulated in plans and
current operations are validated by USSOCOM and inform the
Service SOF Component training programs.
c.
Commander's Training Guidance (CTG)--The CTG prioritizes
the Joint and Component institutional and unit training
programs in terms of capacities and skill levels.
d.
Service or military specialty driven requirements--organic
cryptologic language analysts, Army human intelligence
linguists, and Army SOF specialties (18, 37, and 38) are
required to maintain minimum skill levels.
2. Generally, regionally aligned SOF units whose primary tasks
include Unconventional Warfare, Security Force Assistance, Foreign
Internal Defense, Civil Affairs Operations, or Psychological Operations
will have a mix of skill level 1 and skill level 2 capability and non-
regionally aligned SOF will have a mix of SOF capability at skill level
1. These needs are addressed in basic language training courses in the
Army SOF, Air Force SOF, and Marine SOF pipelines and sustained at unit
level. Crypto-linguist, human intelligence, and Foreign Area Officers
assigned to SOF receive basic language training from their Service and
sustainment training at the unit.
3. The minimum formal sustainment training is 120 hours annually
for category three and four languages and 80 hours annually for
category one and two languages. Formal sustainment training must
include a program of instruction developed by an expert in a unit or
school language training program tailored to the individual student.
This training will also include interaction with an instructor or
computer based program and yield an academic score. Training is not
limited to sustainment training programs work to enhance the students'
skill level to meet the CTG level 2 requirement.
4. The primary distance learning platform for SOF is the Special
Operations Forces Tele-training System (SOFTS). The SOFTS platform uses
web video conferencing to place students from anywhere into a classroom
with qualified instructors. About 1,300 students receive basic through
advanced training through SOFTS annually. Army SOF also uses Polycom, a
virtual tele-conference system, in their local language training
facilities to connect students to language training centers
(specifically from the University of Montana). USSOCOM personnel also
have access to Service, Defense Language Institute, and Joint Language
University on-line language and culture resources.
Mr. Langevin. How many current SOCOM personnel have graduated from
the Joint Fundamentals Course (CEP-1)? Please delineate the number by
duty status (i.e. Active, Reserve, Guard) and component command (i.e.
AFSOC, USASOC, NAVSPECWAR, MARSOC). [Question #14, for cross-
reference.]
General Clarke. The table below provides the response for Questions
13-17 and outlines current number of USSOCOM personnel trained in CEP
1-4 courses.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7497.036
.epsMr. Langevin. How many current SOCOM personnel have graduated
from the Enterprise Management Course (CEP-2)? Please delineate the
number by duty status (i.e. Active, Reserve, Guard) and component
command (i.e. AFSOC, USASOC, NAVSPECWAR, MARSOC). [Question #15, for
cross-reference.]
General Clarke. See response to Question 13 [above].
Mr. Langevin. How many current SOCOM personnel have graduated from
the Joint Special Operations Forces Senior Enlisted Academy (CEP-3)?
Please delineate the number by duty status (i.e. Active, Reserve,
Guard) and component command (i.e. AFSOC, USASOC, NAVSPECWAR, MARSOC).
[Question #16, for cross-reference.]
General Clarke. See response to Question 13 [above].
Mr. Langevin. How many current SOCOM personnel have graduated from
Summit (CEP-4)? Please delineate the number by duty status (i.e.
Active, Reserve, Guard) and component command (i.e. AFSOC, USASOC,
NAVSPECWAR, MARSOC). [Question #17, for cross-reference.]
General Clarke. See response to Question 13 [above].
Mr. Langevin. What are the top five most high-demand/low-density
skill sets in SOCOM currently? How are personnel being selected to
attend training for these skills? How long, on average, are personnel
in these skill sets staying in SOCOM? What is the average deployment-
to-dwell ratio and PERSTEMPO for these personnel?
General Clarke. 1. The top five high demand/low density skill sets
are: intelligence (multiple types including counter-intel, cryptologic,
signals and imagery/geographic); combat medics and corpsman; fire
support specialists; cyber; and logistics (including water treatment,
electronics maintenance, and submarine ratings to support Dry Combat
Submersible (DCS)/SEAL Delivery Vehicle Teams (SDVT)).
2. Personnel are selected to attend training for these skills in
accordance with their respective Service career timelines and
professional development benchmarks, ability to hold security
clearances, General Technical scores, and career experience within
their occupational specialty.
3. The average time these high demand/low density skill personnel
stay assigned to USSOCOM units is driven by a combination of each
occupational skill specialty's career development timeline, total force
requirements, and individual availability. Calculating the average time
that personnel stay in these specialties in SOCOM will require
additional time for data collection and analysis (180 days).
4. Based on the wide variety of specialties across the Services,
the PERSTEMPO by specialty is difficult to calculate. While these
specialties are high demand, USSOCOM leaders have proactively managed
personnel so that USSOCOM has required zero waivers for the last 12
months.
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BACON
Mr. Bacon. Does SOCOM have the ability to bed-down additional
squadrons of Light Attack Aircraft today? What are the primary
operational, infrastructure, personnel and resource considerations
necessary to establish a SOCOM Light Attack Aircraft force structure?
Mr. Mitchell. USSOCOM currently has the ability to bed-down the 2-3
Light Attack Aircraft that are the USSOCOM portion of the USAF Light
Attack experiment continuation and can absorb a total of five aircraft
in support of Air Force Special Operations Command's Aviation Foreign
Internal Defense mission.
If directed to support Joint Force requirements for close air
support and precision strike, USSOCOM would require additional
manpower, infrastructure/military construction, and maintenance support
as well as sufficient basing to provide access to airspace and ranges.
A sustainable force structure is essential to establishing a USSOCOM
Light Attack Aircraft capability that would provide an economical and
effective means to counter external threats and to conduct persistent
counter-VEO operations in support of National Defense Strategy
objectives.
Mr. Bacon. What do you believe are the critical steps to
establishing a Light Attack Aircraft capability for SOCOM?
Mr. Mitchell. The first critical step going forward would be for
the Rapid Fielding Document (RFD) to be refined to ensure that it, in a
cost effective manner, adequately accounts for the following
requirements:
1) able to operate from austere, dirt surfaces and shorter runway
lengths;
2) can be operated with small operational and logistical footprints
in support of disaggregated teams;
3) can employ cost-effective precision-guided munitions;
4) can employ standard intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance payloads; and
5) has the capacity to share data-linked information with partnered
forces.
Once the RFD is approved, the acquisition process would need to
continue with a request for proposal, contract award, and initial
production. In parallel, a manpower and basing analysis needs to be
conducted to ensure USSOCOM receives the necessary force structure and
infrastructure to sustain continued combat engagements.
Mr. Bacon. In your testimony, you stated that you believe SOCOM
needs a Light Attack Aircraft. What are the priority SOCOM missions
that a Light Attack Aircraft is needed to perform?
General Clarke. 1. A Light Attack Aircraft program could fulfill
two primary missions supporting Joint Force requirements. These
missions are: 1) to build partnerships and indigenous air support
capacity; and 2) to conduct low-cost irregular warfare operations in
support of U.S. and partnered ground forces.
2. Air Force Special Operations Command requires the ability to
train partner nation air forces in close air support operations as part
of an Aviation Foreign Internal Defense mission. A light attack
platform could serve as a training platform for combat aviation
advisors preparing to deploy to advise partners who operate a similar
type of aircraft.
3. The second mission is close air support in austere locales where
U.S. and partnered ground forces are conducting irregular warfare
operations. A platform of this type could reduce risk to small
disaggregated teams in remote locations, providing armed overwatch and,
if necessary, close air support during mission execution.
Mr. Bacon. What are the key performance attributes of a SOCOM Light
Attack Aircraft? Would a SOCOM Light Attack Aircraft be required to
conduct sustained operations from austere and unimproved operating
locations? What type of data would a Light Attack Aircraft be required
to share to ensure interoperability with other SOF, conventional, and
partner operating forces?
General Clarke. 1. A light attack platform should be affordable to
buy and operate (to both U.S. and partner nations) and able to deploy
to remote areas with a small logistics footprint. It should have the
ability to employ precision guided weapons while also being equipped
with an electro-optical targeting system with full-motion video and
standard intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance capabilities.
2. SOF frequently operate at great distance from main operating
bases, thus a light attack platform would be required to forward stage
near or with small disaggregated ground teams to reduce response time
and increase loiter over the target area by minimizing enroute flight
time. This type of platform would be expected to conduct sustained
operations from austere and unimproved fields and have the flexibility
to reposition rapidly as the threat environment evolves. USSOCOM
defines austere operations as operating from dirt runways with
associated forward refueling and rearming areas. Dirt surfaces with
lengths between 4,000 to 6,000 feet are expected to be commonly used.
3. USSOCOM anticipates using Service-common and USSOCOM-established
data-link programs alongside commercially off-the-shelf procured
systems, ensuring secure voice and video connectivity between U.S. and
partnered forces.
Mr. Bacon. What do you believe is the minimum viable force
structure for a SOCOM Light Attack Aircraft capability?
General Clarke. 1. For the Aviation Foreign Internal Defense
mission, SOCOM has established a requirement for five light attack
platforms.
2. For the mission in support of U.S. and partnered ground forces
conducting irregular warfare operations, our minimum requirement would
be dependent on the size of a larger service-common acquisition effort.
SOCOM has not conducted detailed analysis on the force structure needed
in the absence of a larger service acquisition program.
Mr. Bacon. Do you believe an organically operated SOCOM Light
Attack Aircraft would reduce the requirement to deploy advanced 4th and
5th generation aircraft to support SOCOM forces? Can you quantify the
operational benefit to DOD of procuring a low-cost Light Attack
Aircraft to support SOCOM forces worldwide?
General Clarke. USSOCOM continues to team with the Air Force as it
proceeds with the Light Attack Experiment to determine the force
employment options and possible operational benefits of a light attack
aircraft program. There are several potential benefits to the joint
force which could accrue as a result of a light attack aircraft
program. These include: 1) cost-effective support to irregular warfare
operations; 2) reduced demand on fourth and fifth generation fighters;
and 3) increased partner capacity to conduct these operations.
Mr. Bacon. Does SOCOM have the ability to bed down additional
squadrons of Light Attack Aircraft today? What are the primary
operational, infrastructure, personnel and resource considerations
necessary to establish a SOCOM Light Attack Aircraft force structure?
General Clarke. 1. As with all weapons systems, USSOCOM does not
have organic infrastructure, but relies on the Service-provided
infrastructure for support. Any USSOCOM program would require service
basing action to bed down additional force structure.
2. If directed to field light attack force structure, USSOCOM would
require additive manpower, infrastructure/military construction,
maintenance support, and accompanying sustainment funding in order to
conduct economical and effective Aviation Foreign Internal Defense and
irregular warfare operations.
Mr. Bacon. What do you believe are the critical steps to
establishing a Light Attack Aircraft capability for SOCOM?
General Clarke. A key step when considering a Light Attack Aircraft
program will be to work with the Air Force to ensure any requirements
documents adequately account for the following capabilities: 1)
operable from austere, dirt surfaces and shorter runway lengths; 2)
requires a small operational and logistical footprint in support of
disaggregated teams; 3) possesses the ability to employ cost-effective
precision guided munitions; 4) includes standard intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance payloads; and 5) has the ability to
share data-linked information with partnered forces. Additionally,
additive manpower and basing analysis is critical in ensuring this
force has the necessary force structure to sustain continued
engagements along with the basing--to include adequate training areas--
to prepare for combat operations.
Mr. Bacon. I understand that in summer of 2017 USSOCOM cancelled
its software development effort which had been funded to satisfy the
All Source Information Fusion component of the Distributed Common
Ground System-Special Operations Forces (DCGS-SOF). What was the total
cost of the cancelled ASIF development effort? What were the specific
reasons for program cancellation?
General Clarke. 1. From 2015 to 2018, USSOCOM obligated $30.6M on
development and integration efforts associated with the DCGS-SOF ASIF
requirements and All Source Analytic Environment (ASAE) contract.
2. USSOCOM continuously monitors schedules, materiel acquisition
costs, performance, and risk to mission. To that end, we conducted a
progress check of the openly-competed ASAE contract that was attendant
to the DCGS-SOF ASIF requirements in the summer of 2017. Although
significant progress was evident, USSOCOM user assessments determined
the ASAE contract materiel solution was not sufficient to support the
requirements of both SOF Operators and intelligence analysts within
acceptable cost and schedule.
Mr. Bacon. I understand that in February 2018 the USSOCOM Commander
selected the Fusion Analysis Development Effort (FADE) as the new
solution to meet the ASIF requirement. What do you estimate it will
cost to develop and fully field FADE as the solution to meet SOCOM's
ASIF requirement? When do you estimate FADE will reach full operational
capability?
General Clarke. 1. The transition to the National Reconnaissance
Organization (NRO) FADE platform in 2018 allowed the DCGS-SOF program
to consolidate the Enterprise (ENT) and ASIF requirements into a
singular, more capable and cost effective materiel solution. The
estimate to enhance the FADE platform to reach Full Operational
Capability for ENT and ASIF by 3QFY20 is $36M. Additionally, the
integration of the DCGS-SOF ENT and ASIF requirements into the singular
FADE solution provides a cost avoidance of $125M over the Future Years
Defense Plan of the original DCGS-SOF ENT and ASIF acquisition
strategies.
2. We estimate FADE will reach full operational capability in the
3rd Quarter of FY20.
Mr. Bacon. Given the failure of the first development effort to
meet the ASIF requirement, what specific factors give you confidence
that another government development effort like FADE will succeed?
General Clarke. 1. USSOCOM has joined eighteen other Government and
Intelligence Community (IC) agencies and over 85K+ registered users of
the NRO's FADE platform. We have confidence that this commercially-
developed, government-owned capability provides the foundation for
achieving all remaining DCGS-SOF ENT and ASIF program requirements with
the planned USSOCOM modifications to the system.
2. USSOCOM's decision was based on substantial research,
evaluation, and assessment by USSOCOM intelligence operators and
intelligence support analysts. The more salient aspects of the platform
are its advanced analytics maturity, underlying commercial and cloud
based modern architecture, the prevalence of open commercial software
solutions, the use of proven agile software development methodologies,
the quantity and quality of DOD and IC data sources, the established
DOD/IC partnerships, and the cost effectiveness of the partnership
model. USSOCOM is confident that based on these fundamental
characteristics the DCGS-SOF program has the appropriate foundation to
enhance the FADE platform to fully realize a materiel solution that
supports the DCGS-SOF ENT/ASIF requirements.
Mr. Bacon. Please describe specific performance gaps that currently
exist between FADE and USSOCOM's ASIF requirement. Please provide
estimated timelines to resolve or mitigate these performance gaps.
General Clarke. 1. Two major requirement gaps existed at the time
of the transition decision to the NRO FADE platform. The first gap was
a lack of Human Intelligence (HUMINT) reporting data sources that SOF
all source analysts predominately rely on for all source analysis. The
second gap was the lack of a fielded Disconnected, Intermittent, and
Low-Bandwidth (DIL) capability that intelligence operators and
intelligence support analysts could use in forward edge locations under
denial of services conditions.
2. The FADE platform has since added the primary HUMINT data
sources the DCGS-SOF ENT/ASIF was targeting for inclusion into the FADE
data fabric. At Trident Spectre 2019, the FADE team successfully
demonstrated a DIL laptop prototype to the SOF enterprise. Based on the
successful demonstration of the DIL prototype, three SOF Components
will begin pre-deployment training with the DIL capability in July
2019.
3. Additional secondary tier gap requirements existed at the time
of the transition decision. The DCGS-SOF program envisions at least an
additional 12 month effort to complete these SOF enhancements to the
FADE platform. Full Operational Capability is estimated as 3QFY20.
Thereafter, the DCGS-SOF ENT/ASIF component envisions a steady state
enhancement effort based on user feedback, new data sources, and the
agile software development process.
[all]