- GRADING COUNTERTERRORISM COOPERATION WITH THE GCC STATES
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
GRADING COUNTERTERRORISM COOPERATION WITH THE GCC STATES
=======================================================================
JOINT HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON TERRORISM, NONPROLIFERATION, AND TRADE
AND THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
APRIL 26, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-128
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
29-967PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas
KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama
AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
Amy Porter, Chief of Staff
Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director
Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade
TED POE, Texas, Chairman
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
PAUL COOK, California
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
NORMA J. TORRES, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
------
Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida, Chairman
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
WITNESSES
Ms. Katherine Bauer, Blumenstein-Katz Family Fellow, The
Washington Institute for Near East Policy......................
8
David Andrew Weinberg, Ph.D., Washington representative for
international affairs, Anti-Defamation League..................
27
Ms. Leanne Erdberg, director, Countering Violent Extremism, U.S.
Institute of Peace.............................................
63
LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING
Ms. Katherine Bauer: Prepared statement..........................
11
David Andrew Weinberg, Ph.D.: Prepared statement.................
29
Ms. Leanne Erdberg: Prepared statement...........................
65
APPENDIX
Hearing notice...................................................
90
Hearing minutes..................................................
91
Written responses from Ms. Leanne Erdberg to questions submitted
for the record by the Honorable Dina Titus, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Nevada..............................
92
GRADING COUNTERTERRORISM COOPERATION WITH THE GCC STATES
----------
THURSDAY, APRIL 26, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade
and
Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 2:00 p.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ted Poe (chairman
of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Poe. The subcommittee will come to order.
Without objection, all members may have 5 days to submit
statements, questions, extraneous materials for the record,
subject to the length limitations in the rules.
Our historic relationship with the Arab Gulf states is
crucial. The ties we maintain allow us to project power to
certain threats like Iran and secure key shipping lanes for
global commerce while providing stability in a chaotic region.
Our Gulf partners have made clear that they value our strong
alliance with the United States. And the United States values
and wants to continue to be a partner with them.
But our relationship has not always been perfect. The 9/11
attacks were a tragic wake-up call to a dangerous idea that we
had long ignored. Sunni extremism established strong roots
across the Middle East, North Africa, and South Asia. The
intolerant and violent strain of Islam was largely able to
spread so widely because it was funded and supported by some of
our Gulf allies. While GCC states were benefitting from
security and stability provided by the U.S., they still
fostered radical ideas that sought to target and kill
Americans. It is no coincidence that among the 19 hijackers
from the 9/11 attacks, 17 came from the United Arab Emirates
and Saudi Arabia.
In part, al-Qaeda, led by Saudi, Osama bin Laden did this
deliberately to damage the GCC alliance with the United States.
The Saudi monarchy embraced--the embracement of Wahhabi
ideology produced generations of young Saudis who despised the
West and held hateful views of other religions. In fact, ISIS
uses Saudi textbooks.
After 9/11, the Kingdom and the rest of the GCC states
pledged cooperation with the U.S. to fight terrorism and, to
Saudi Arabia's credit, is doing more to stop terrorism.
However, wealthy financiers and hateful preachers continued to
operate across the GCC. For years, many of our Gulf allies
tried to play both sides of the War on Terror. They acted both
as arsonists and firefighters. While the U.S. military launched
airstrikes against terrorists in the region from the Gulf air
bases, money and recruits flowed to terrorists from the same
Gulf countries.
Ultimately, not George Bush, nor Barack Obama, nor a Donald
Trump can convince young Muslims that al-Qaeda or ISIS's
version of Islam is the wrong one. An American President,
regardless of their party affiliation, will not ever be able to
effectively argue that jihad against the West is not the answer
to the problems in the Middle East. It is only the leaders of
the Muslim world who can make that argument.
In recent years, we have seen progress by the Gulf states
toward tackling the sources of extremism within their borders.
They have recognized this is not just the United States' first,
but their own security is at stake. The Saudis have infiltrated
terrorist groups to thwart attacks on the West and detained
radical clerics who once incited thousands to join ISIS or al-
Qaeda. The UAE is leading the region in developing messaging to
counter violent extremism and has prioritized targeting al-
Qaeda in Yemen. Bahrain is host to the region's Financial
Action Task Force and amended its charity law to closely
monitor terrorism and enact harsh penalties on violators.
Kuwait has intensified its charity monitoring and outlawed
fundraising for terrorist organizations online. Meanwhile, Oman
remains a haven for tolerance and moderate Islam, effectively
preventing terrorists from using its territory for fundraising
or recruitment. Even Qatar signed a memorandum of understanding
with the U.S. last year to cooperate on counterterrorism and
has created terrorist designation lists. Trust is finally being
restored.
But there is a lot of work to be done. Qatar still harbors
Hamas operatives and al-Qaeda fundraisers. The Saudis still
publish intolerant material in their textbooks that glorify
jihad and incite hatred and violence. Kuwait still has
designated terrorists living freely in their borders. Oman
remains suspiciously tied to the region's number one state
sponsor of terrorism; of course, that is Iran. And reports of
arms smuggling through Oman to Yemen's Houthi rebels persist.
No GCC member is contributing enough to prevent ISIS from
reemerging in Syria and Iraq. The Saudi-led coalition is overly
focused, in my opinion, on Iran's meddling in Yemen while al-
Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula survives in the chaos.
So, we need our Gulf partners to aggressively and
proactively combat extremism across the region, and not wait
for the U.S. to take the lead. The region belongs to our Gulf
partners, and they should be taking the lead in defeating
terrorism. All the drones and special forces in the world
cannot destroy an idea that is deeply rooted. The fight against
terrorism must start and end with the ideals and not on the
battlefield. Treating the symptoms is not enough to stop the
underlying disease. And this hearing is a candid look at
terrorism in the Gulf states. And that is just the way it is.
I will yield to the ranking member on the Terrorism,
Nonproliferation, and Trade Subcommittee, Mr. Keating from
Massachusetts.
Mr. Keating. Chairs Poe and Ros-Lehtinen, Ranking Member
Deutch, thank you for convening the hearing today and joining
us.
We recently had a hearing in the Terrorism,
Nonproliferation, and Trade Subcommittee on countering violent
extremism and the role of women. Much of that hearing focused
on the numerous ways that we can change how we empower
communities and governments to get to the heart of violent
extremism by capitalizing on the people and resources we have
but, frankly, are not taking full advantage of.
We are presented with an exceedingly challenging
environment for addressing terrorism threats in and emanating
from the Gulf. However, I refuse to believe that we are
helpless to do anything about it and that we are confined to
the geopolitical maneuverings of foreign actors. We have far
too long thought about terrorism in the traditional Whac-A-Mole
sense. But as we learn more about the drivers of extremism I
think we have actually come away with a better understanding of
how many different ways we can positively impact this problem:
By empowering women to be meaningful actors in identifying and
addressing early signs of extremism and radicalization in their
communities; by strengthening the rule of law and grievance
mechanisms so that there are formal pathways for citizens to
make their concerns heard; by improving information sharing at
the local level through community policing, and at the regional
and international levels so that the governments can work
better together to eliminate terrorist financing, take down
terrorist networks, stop foreign fighter travel. There are a
lot of tools at our disposal. And it is sheer negligence not to
use them.
This reality came into relief in the Boston Marathon
bombing which this month marked the fifth anniversary of that
attack. Terrorists don't emerge in these instances without
external support, be it inspiration for an attack, training,
financing, or involvement early on in the radicalization of
vulnerable individuals. We need to do everything we can to
stamp out all streams of support for terrorism because
terrorist attacks do not happen in a vacuum.
The tragic deaths in Boston during the marathon, which is
an inspiring and proud day every year for the runners, their
families, and all those cheering them on the sidelines and
watching them at home, these attacks don't happen in a vacuum.
There were a lot of lessons learned that emerged from that
attack and others that we need to be implementing fully today.
Combating terrorism abroad does mean saving lives at home.
And while it is my hope that we have learned from the past, I
think we can do much better. And we can encourage our allies in
the Gulf to do much better. The Gulf is a serious threat
environment for terrorism. The terrorist threats from al-Qaeda
and ISIS operating in the Gulf is compounded by destabilizing
engagement in the region by Iran and the dire conflict that
exists in Yemen.
If we fail to work strategically with our allies and
partners and with our own State Department, intelligence
community, Treasury Department, and with all the relevant
agencies and actors across our Government working in the region
to mitigate these threats, the question of the next terrorist
attack here at home will just be a question of when. And that
is unacceptable because we can do this work. We can support and
invest in a strong State Department to navigate and negotiate
the tensions in the region.
At the end of the day our counterterrorism efforts work
best when everyone is focused and committed and not distracted
by unproductive disputes. We can do more to mitigate the
humanitarian crisis in Yemen and to do our part in welcoming
refugees. With our robust State Department, and with our allies
working around the world we can coordinate our response to the
conflict in Yemen and act swiftly so we can finally move more
aggressively toward stabilization efforts and eradicating the
terrorist networks there.
Terrorists benefit from the ongoing chaos and conflict, And
we are all ill-served by falling into the trap of thinking that
the civil war and the humanitarian crisis on the other side of
the world cannot hit us back here at home.
Across the region what can we do to shut down terrorist
financing networks? How can we compel the best efforts by our
partners in the region to once and for all track and eliminate
these funding streams and hold all of those accountable for
their crimes?
Lastly, one of the greatest assets we have are the programs
being carried out by our State Department and USAID on better
community policing, strengthening the rule of law and civil
society, and expanding opportunities for economic empowerment,
improving access to education and job training, turning down
the incubators where the seeds of radicalization are sown. This
is what we are here to discuss today.
I thank our witnesses for being here. And I look forward to
hearing your recommendations going forward, how we can improve
the situation, make the world safer, make our country safer.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman from Massachusetts.
The Chair now recognizes the chairman emeritus, the
professional Ileana Ros-Lehtinen in foreign affairs from
Florida, the chair of the Middle East and North Africa
Subcommittee. And she can speak as long as she wants to.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. I won't take up that much time. But now
that you have given me that opportunity.
But thank you, Chairman Poe. Thank you, Ranking Member
Keating. Congressman Deutch and I want to thank both of you and
your staff for working with us and our teams to hold this
hearing jointly today.
As we know, the rift between Qatar and the other Gulf
states has in many ways shined a necessary light on Doha's
support for certain groups and ideologies in the region, many
of which have ties to terrorist organizations. And to be sure,
the criticism of Qatar is well deserved. As former Deputy CIA
Director David Cohen said in 2014, Qatar has openly financed
Hamas, is supporting extremist groups operating in Syria, is a
permissive terrorist financing environment, and has actively
undermined regional stability.
From Syria, to Libya, to Sudan, Qatar's support for the
Muslim Brotherhood and other more extremist organizations is a
driver of that instability, complicating and setting back much
of what the United States and our partners are trying to
achieve. To see how Qatar fuels extremist violence in the
region one need only look at its state-funded Al-Jazeera and
the religious incitement that Qatar is condoning and
broadcasting all over the Arab world. Understandably, Qatar's
neighbors are upset with Doha's foreign policy and are pushing
for change, which we have begun to address through our
strategic dialogue and our memorandum of understanding with
Qatar.
However, as much as the rest of the Gulf countries want to
single out Qatar, it must be said that other GCC members,
including some of our most trusted and important partners do
not have the best record on these issues either. Our friends in
Saudi Arabia, after years of cultivating the political favor of
religious extremists within its borders, have now taken steps
to moderate the brand of Islam that the Saudis are famous for.
But exactly how much the crown prince can or will reverse
the behavior of Saudi citizens, including those in the royal
family, remains to be seen. Never mind improving the Kingdom's
still abhorrent human rights record and reforming an
educational curriculum that still promotes intolerance of both
Jews and Christians.
On a more practical level, all the GCC countries still have
room to improve on fighting terrorist financing and money
laundering, from Qatar and Kuwait, to Bahrain and Oman, to
Saudi Arabia and the UAE. In the State Department's latest
country report on terrorism not a single GCC country escapes
criticism as terrorists' financiers continue to operate,
charitable donations still reach terrorist groups, and
religious incitement goes unaddressed.
The amount of work left to do on these issues highlights
just how big the challenge is before us, no matter how much
cooperation we are getting from GCC partners in other areas.
Since 9/11 the United States has poured billions of dollars,
billions into counterterrorism efforts. And for the most part,
our national security agencies and their partners have been
enormously successful shutting down operation after operation,
many of which will never be reported.
What we have been less successful with is putting a stop to
the root cause of terrorism, the violent ideologies, and
associated economic factors that drive so many men and women to
commit acts of terror in the first place. And when our partners
are not fully committed, whether by failing to close gaps in
their terrorist financing laws, or end religious incitement or
reverse repression, both inside and outside their borders, then
countering terrorism is made that much harder.
As we look to the future, I am encouraged by a lot of the
progress, albeit slow, that we are seeing in our GCC partners.
And I am hopeful that we are going to see even greater
commitment by our partners in the years to come. Not just on a
military level but by leading by example, by promoting the kind
of human rights, the kind of tolerance, and economic well-being
that are so desperately needed in the Middle East.
So, thank you, Chairman Poe. I look forward to hearing from
our witnesses and any recommendations that they may have for
increasing counterterrorism cooperation in the Gulf, and
specifically what we can do in Congress to help. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentlelady.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member on the Middle
East, North Africa Subcommittee, Mr. Ted Deutch, also from
Florida, for his opening statement.
Mr. Deutch. Thanks to Chairman Poe and to you and Chairman
Ros-Lehtinen, and thanks for calling this hearing. This is an
important issue and I look forward to the discussion. I also
want to thank Ranking Member Keating for his leadership. And
thanks to our panel of expert witnesses for your time and
insight.
The threat of terrorism emanating from the Gulf states is
clearly a very real concern. The high number of ISIS recruits
and supporters in GCC countries demonstrates the seriousness of
the radicalization in the region. However, we must remember
that ISIS is only the most recent in a long line of radical
Islamic terror groups.
ISIS's conventional defeat in Iraq and Syria will not stop
support of its ideology around the world, especially in the
Gulf region. Our counterterrorism efforts cannot focus on
security cooperation alone. They are incomplete without a
comprehensive effort to counter violent extremism and address
the root causes, the drivers of terrorism. And while it is
perhaps more difficult to measure success with these programs
than it is to quantify territory controlled or number of
fighters killed, they are a critical part of a counterterrorism
strategy. And we have got to press our allies to work together
on these efforts with the same commitment that they have to our
security cooperation.
Terror groups are increasingly propagating their dangerous
message to vulnerable individuals through social media and
online platforms. Efforts in the realms of education, through
religious institutions, and government outreach can be powerful
in fighting dangerous ideologies and fighting back against
terrorist recruitment. Populations in GCC countries are
especially vulnerable to this online radicalization.
Fundraising and operational plotting go hand-in-hand with
these online mechanisms, presenting what is a complex and fluid
obstacle for GCC states to tackle. The GCC countries must be
diligent in facing these challenges. However, counterterrorism
and security concerns cannot be used by states as a reason to
silence the voices of political opposition and curtail freedom
of speech. Human rights and combating corruption must not be
overlooked when applying the strongest counterterrorism
policies.
Likewise, the Gulf states must ensure its official
messaging is consistent with their stated commitment to
countering violent ideologies. State-sponsored media, like Al-
Jazeera, cannot be used to spread messages of violence. And
speakers who endorse violent action wherever they speak,
whether in the public square or the public mosque, any violent
actions spoken against perceived enemies of Islam must not be
tolerated by the GCC.
I am deeply concerned that U.S.-GCC counterterrorism has
also been weakened by the current rift among the GCC countries.
Unity in this region is critical to our efforts to counter
Iran's destabilizing influence. And unity will be even more
vital should the administration choose to walk away from the
nuclear deal. The United States will need our partners to stand
together to deter the Iranian aggression that threatens all of
our interests.
It does the United States no good to choose sides in this
rift. We must work to solve the current crisis, and, in the
process, strengthen the efforts of all GCC countries to fight
terrorism. The GCC countries host U.S. troops and critical
security infrastructure. We are all safer when we are working
together. I believe it is in the region's best interest to
counter all brands of terrorism from Hamas to al-Qaeda, ISIS to
Hezbollah. And I know that some of our allies view these groups
differently. But we must be clear in our expectations of those
who want to be partners with the United States.
The GCC countries should be working together, should find
strength in unity in combating these violent ideologies that
threaten long-term state stability. It does nothing to
strengthen regional security to only point fingers and claim
the terrorism supported by one country is worse than the
terrorism supported by another country. Let's agree, terrorism
is bad, period. And we expect our allies to fight it, not fund
it.
Combating terror financing in the Gulf region is a key
component of our counterterrorism strategy. There is
substantial room for improvement in all of the Gulf countries.
The United States has made clear that we will work with our
allies to help them get their terror finance laws in line with
ours, we will share technical expertise and information, but we
expect the governments will pursue terror financiers to the
full extent of the law.
I look forward to our witnesses addressing the terror
finance piece in greater detail.
Finally, I hope that today will help us understand where
the current gaps in our own counterterrorism programming as
well as that of our allies exist, and just how we might
strengthen our joint efforts to combat it.
I appreciate the time, Mr. Chairman. I yield back. Thank
you.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman from Florida.
The Chair will recognize other members for 1 minute if they
wish to make an opening statement. The Chair recognizes the
gentlelady from Missouri, Ambassador Wagner, for 1 minute.
Mrs. Wagner. I thank you, Mr. Chairman and Chairwoman, for
your courtesy and for this hearing today.
I had the opportunity just last week to ask Ambassador
Satterfield, Assistant Secretary for Near Eastern Affairs, how
our diplomatic corps is strengthening our partnerships with
Gulf states and working to resolve tensions between Qatar and
its neighbors. I appreciate very much the chance to revisit
this critical issue today. It behooves the United States to
foster excellent working relationships with and among Arab
states as we counter the threats from Iran, Syria, and
terrorist groups.
And to add on to our colleague Mr. Deutch and what you had
to say, I spent the better part of 4 years in a tiny little
country as U.S. Ambassador of Luxembourg fighting directly
terrorist financing that was being moved and laundered through
and into this region. So I very much look forward to your
thoughts and discussions on this area. So I thank you for your
indulging me, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentlelady.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr.
Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Chairwoman Ros-Lehtinen and
Ranking Member Deutch, and Chairman Poe and Ranking Member
Keating for convening this important joint hearing on the
Middle East, North Africa, and Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and
Trade Subcommittees.
Particularly since the terrorist attack of September 11,
2001, we have relied on cooperation from our allies and
partners throughout the world to work with us on
counterterrorism operations through military support,
intelligence sharing, and increased action against terrorist
financing. Our partners in the Persian Gulf have played a
critical role in these efforts in many areas. And in many of
these nations, cooperation and partnership with the United
States has continued to improve.
While I hope that this will be part of today's discussion,
I also hope that we will be able to address ways in which Gulf
Cooperation Council states can continue to improve
counterterrorism activities, in ways in which we can combat the
roots of extremism in the region, ways in which we can work
together to prevent terrorist organizations from carrying out
horrific acts around the world.
I look forward to today's discussion and to hearing from
our witnesses today. And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman. The Chair recognizes the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Boyle.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I will just be brief. One of the things that I am most
interested in this hearing today is the extent to which, if
any, the intra-GCC rift that has emerged on the Arabian
Peninsula affects our overall joint counterterrorism efforts.
So if they weren't already planning to do so, perhaps our
panelists might be able to address that point when they are
speaking.
Thank you.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair will now introduce each of our witnesses and hear
from them. And then the members will question them.
Ms. Katherine Bauer is the Blumenstein-Katz Family Fellow
at The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, and former
Treasury official who served as the Department's Financial
Attache in Jerusalem and in the Gulf.
Dr. David Weinberg is the Anti-Defamation League's
Washington representative for international affairs. Previously
he was a senior fellow at the Foundation for Defense of
Democracies studying the Gulf.
Mrs. Leanne Erdberg is the director of Countering Violent
Extremism at the U.S. Institute of Peace. She previously served
on the National Security Council and the State Department.
Ms. Bauer, we will start with you. You have 5 minutes. When
the red light comes on you know the drill, stop. So you are
recognized.
STATEMENT OF MS. KATHERINE BAUER, BLUMENSTEIN-KATZ FAMILY
FELLOW, THE WASHINGTON INSTITUTE FOR NEAR EAST POLICY
Ms. Bauer. Thank you, Chairman Poe and Ros-Lehtinen,
Ranking Member Keating and Deutch, distinguished members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on
GCC States counterterrorism efforts.
The Arab Gulf States are important U.S. counterterrorism
partners. Since 9/11, the United States has made great, albeit
often uneven strides, in working with our various partners in
the GCC. And counterterrorist financing has been at the heart
of such cooperation. It remains essential today. The central
role of counterterrorist financing is reflected both in the
fact that it is among the grievances that has fueled the rift
between Qatar on the one hand, and Saudi Arabia, the United
Arab Emirates, Bahrain, and Egypt on the other, and because of
the increasing complexity of the terrorist threat.
Years of conflict in Syria, Iraq, Yemen, and Libya have
provided fertile ground for terrorist groups and extremist
ideologies. Such groups have sought and achieved safe havens in
weak and failed states from which to recruit, train, plot, and
conduct attacks, as well as to extract resources and aggregate
funds. Because of this evolution in terrorist financing
methodologies, disrupting foreign sources alone will not
bankrupt such groups.
In order to achieve durable counterterrorism successes,
counterterrorist financing must proceed alongside efforts to
counter extremist ideologies and promote good governance, areas
where the GCC states also have an important role to play. Even,
and especially so, continuing to build partner capacity to
address systemic vulnerabilities to illicit finance will make
it harder for terrorist organizations to move and store funds.
Some GCC states have taken greater ownership of such issues
in recent years due to domestic and foreign threats, as well as
changing dynamics in the global financial system. As they do,
the United States should continue to press the GCC states to
comply with international standards for anti-money laundering
and counterterrorist financing, promulgated by the Financial
Action Task Force, to include transparency and due process in
the application of targeted financial sanctions.
Since the Gulf rift began 10 months ago, terror finance
concerns have figured prominently. But it is unlikely that
resolving these concerns alone would end the crisis.
Nonetheless, the U.S. should continue to work with Qatar under
the terms of the MOU on Counterterrorism Cooperation signed in
July, as well as to work to mitigate the impact of the rift on
counterterrorism and other security cooperation.
The rift has focused attention on Qatar's counterterrorist
financing deficiencies, with the result that others in the
region have arguably been given a pass. In particular, Kuwait,
where a number of U.N.-designated terrorist financiers continue
to operate according to the State Department's most recent
country reports on terrorism. In reality, each Gulf state faces
its own deficiencies, vulnerabilities, and barriers to action
against terrorist financing.
These are hard and politically sensitive issues. The scope
of the challenge facing Saudi Arabia is perhaps greater than
any other Gulf state. Both ISIS and al-Qaeda continue to call
for attacks against the Kingdom. And despite serious efforts on
the counterterrorist financing front, Saudi individuals likely
continue to serve as a source of funding for terrorist groups.
The UAE has inherent vulnerabilities to terrorist and other
illicit financing due to its role as a regional commercial and
financial hub.
Bahrain has among the most technically competent anti-money
laundering and counterterrorist financing regimes in the Gulf.
However, Manama is sometimes overzealous in its application of
such laws and regulations against its local Shia population,
risking the credibility of Bahrain's counterterrorism efforts
overall.
Qatar does deserve its share of the blame. But the number
of deep pocket terrorist financiers and facilitators in Qatar
is ultimately relatively small. Qatar has taken some limited
action against individual terrorist financiers, freezing
assets, imposing travel bans, shutting down accounts, and even
shutting down a charity tied to al-Qaeda in Syria.
But in all these instances the country acted only in
response to considerable U.S. pressure and was remarkably
reluctant to publicly take credit for successes. Other actions
have mixed or unclear results, such as stalled prosecutions and
the omission of U.N. designated Khalifa al-Subaiy from their
first national terrorist list issued last month.
Taken together, one has to wonder, as the Treasury official
did last fall, whether Qatar has made the kind of ``fundamental
decisions on combating terror finance that would make the
country a hostile environment for terrorist financiers.''
Before I conclude, I just want to recognize Congresswoman
Wagner's intervention regarding the importance of diplomacy. I
couldn't agree more. And I look forward to discussing the role
of sanctions diplomacy in the Gulf in particular.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today. And I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bauer follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Ms. Bauer.
Dr. Weinberg, welcome back. You have 5 minutes for your
opening statement.
STATEMENT OF DAVID ANDREW WEINBERG, PH.D., WASHINGTON
REPRESENTATIVE FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, ANTI-DEFAMATION
LEAGUE
Mr. Weinberg. Chairman Poe and Ros-Lehtinen, Ranking
Members Keating and Deutch, and distinguished members of the
subcommittees, thank you on behalf of the ADL for this chance
to testify here today. I will present an abridged version of my
written remarks.
Nearly all six monarchies of the Gulf Cooperation Council
have been victims of terrorist attacks, and each one hosts U.S.
bases. Because this region is of particular importance for
terror finance, I will focus on that issue, along with how well
the GCC states are doing at publicly designating terrorist
groups for financial and other countermeasures.
This area is home to roughly half the Middle East's super
rich, as well as Wahhabism, an austere brand of Islam with
historically intolerant teachings about non-Muslims. Thus, the
majority of the millions of dollars raised by al-Qaeda's core
leadership and deep-pocket donors appears to have come from the
Gulf. Likewise, Hamas operatives in the GCC have raised or
laundered tens of millions. And South Asian terror groups such
as the Taliban have also raised any millions in the Gulf.
Early last year a just-retired U.S. Treasury official
confirmed the presence of designated terror financiers
operating openly in Qatar and Kuwait. Then, last June, Saudi
Arabia, the UAE, Egypt, and Bahrain sanctioned Qatar for
supporting Islamist extremists, including tolerating terror
financiers. At that time, as Ms. Bauer here has written, Qatar
had prosecuted just five terror funders, and not a single one
was serving time on a conviction in Qatar as yet.
Compare that with Saudi Arabia, which has convicted
hundreds for funding terrorist groups, primarily al-Qaeda, and
frozen over 30 million Euros in suspect funds. Since then,
Qatar says it re-arrested most of these men and is retrying
them. Yet, one was spotted just this month at his son's
wedding, along with Qatar's Prime Minister.
Meanwhile, the Web site of Kuwait's top public university
appears to list three men as faculty members who are under U.S.
sanctions on charges of funding al-Qaeda, one of whom even used
students to courier funds to al-Qaeda according to the U.S.
Treasury.
There is much the U.S. can do to address these problems:
First, the U.S. needs Ambassadors in Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and
the UAE. The U.S. should also seek to resolve the Gulf
standoff, but only on terms that verifiably help to end the
impunity of terror financiers. In part, that means greater
transparency about the U.S.-Qatar Terror Finance Agreement,
including its shortcomings.
Second, U.S. officials should work with our Gulf allies to
publicly designate all terrorist groups. Oman and Kuwait have
not even issued public lists of this sort. Qatar issued its
closest thing to such a public list last month, but it omitted
Hamas, al-Qaeda, most of the Islamic State, and a major local
al-Qaeda financier. Saudi Arabia, the UAE, and Bahrain have all
issued public lists but with a few shortcomings. Not a single
GCC state has publicly designated Hamas or Palestinian Islamic
Jihad as terrorists.
Just as the House unanimously passed Ranking Member
Deutch's bill urging the EU to sanction Hezbollah, Congress
should do the same with the Gulf states and Hamas. Similarly,
the U.S. must persuade more Gulf allies to publicly ban the
main South Asian terrorist groups.
Third, the U.S. should encourage and advise the GCC states
on imposing sanctions to deter foreign countries from enriching
Iran's terror-sponsoring IRGC.
Fourth, Congress can urge Foggy Bottom and the new
Secretary of State to weigh naming Qatar under Section 6(j) of
the Export Administration Act as tolerating terrorist
operatives on its soil. This would require licenses for
sensitive exports that must be kept from terrorists' hands.
Likewise, Congress should pass Congressman Mast's
Palestinian International Terrorism Support Prevention Act
which ADL endorsed last year.
Fifth, the U.S. should indict more terrorists and seek
their extradition. Last year, the U.S. unsealed charges against
an accomplice of the Sbarro Pizzeria bombing in Jerusalem that
killed or injured nine Americans in 2001. Qatar is evidently
hosting a mastermind of that attack, Hussam Badran, who could
be targeted for singular U.S. legal action. You could write the
Justice Department a letter on this tomorrow.
Sixth, the U.S. should do more to discourage government
ransoms to terrorists, including, time and again, reportedly by
Qatar, and to a lesser extent, in the past by Oman. As Chairman
Poe has written, a year has passed since the Executive Branch
missed a legal deadline to report which governments are
believed to have facilitated terrorist ransoms. Congress should
keep pressing this point and pass legislation making this
reporting regular.
Lastly, the U.S. must work intensively with Gulf partners
to end incitement in state-backed media outlets, by state-
backed religious officials, and in state textbooks. Incitement
of this sort is particularly problematic in broadcasts by the
state-backed Qatari television network Al-Jazeera; in sermons
at Qatar's state-controlled Grand Mosque, carried on official
Qatari media; and in current Saudi state textbooks.
ADL is, therefore, endorsing judicious legislation by
Chairman Poe and Ranking Member Keating on addressing Saudi
textbooks.
Additionally, I can provide detailed examples for any of
these kinds of state-backed incitement during Q&A if that would
be helpful.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Weinberg follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Dr. Weinberg.
Ms. Erdberg, the Chair recognizes you for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF MS. LEANNE ERDBERG, DIRECTOR, COUNTERING VIOLENT
EXTREMISM, U.S. INSTITUTE OF PEACE
Ms. Erdberg. Thank you, subcommittee Chairs Poe and Ros-
Lehtinen, Ranking Members Keating and Deutch, and members of
the subcommittees. Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
I will summarize my remarks, which cover two main themes:
The first, GCC progress to date; and the second, future
recommendations.
Since the September 11 attack, GCC counterterrorism
efforts, as my co-panelists have noted, have been varied. But
that should not discount the sincere progress in several key
areas that I hope will continue.
The first is on rehabilitation and reintegrating former
terrorists back into society. This has long been a focus
notably of Saudi Arabia, but also Bahrain, Kuwait, and the UAE.
Disengagement and deradicalization programs are only growing in
importance as countries grapple with the return of foreign
terrorist fighters.
The second is on religious engagement. Religious clerics in
Saudi Arabia and other GCC nations have issued numerous fatwas
denouncing terrorism and condemning ISIS. Ministries of
religion are actively reducing the reach of hardline clerics.
And GCC countries sponsor several initiatives on religious
topics, such as the UAE's support for the Forum for Promoting
Peace in Muslim Societies.
The third concerns counterterrorism finance, which has been
well covered by my co-panelists.
The fourth is on military operations. As part of the
Coalition to Defeat ISIS, as well as independently, GCC
militaries capture and kill terrorists on the battlefield, and
they provide training to other nations.
And lastly, GCC countries are participating in leading
several international counterterrorism and CVE efforts. To name
a few, the UAE helped to establish the Hedayah Center, a CVE
Center of Excellence located in Abu Dhabi.
Qatar has donated generously to the Global Community
Engagement and Resilience Fund, which is a public-private
partnership devoted to funding community-level initiatives that
address violent extremism.
And Saudi Arabia's voluntary contribution has enabled the
United Nations to launch its own counterterrorism center
devoted to these topics.
But these discrete areas of progress have been unable to
stem the tide of terrorism. Every day terrorists take innocent
lives, they spew a hateful, violent vision of this world, and
yet they have new recruits that are willing to die for their
cause. That is precisely why we of the United States and GCC
countries must do more to prevent young people from turning to
terror in the first place. I would like to focus on a couple
concrete, practical areas that are in deep need of future
progress.
The first, how do we know what works? We have to turn to
research. It can provide outsiders and locals alike with the
data and information they need to make meaningful progress.
The second area starts with recognizing that we cannot
simply message away the attraction of belonging to a community,
and the commitment to be on a moral mission to resist
injustice. What we can do is give people an opportunity to be
part of a larger cause, create meaningful social bonds in
service of a mission, and give them the dignity of ownership
through the proven power of nonviolent action and organizing.
The third is to unleash the power of religious figures far
beyond merely challenging religious discourse. Instead, we need
to start seeing them as key contributors to addressing
community needs that may not be--appear to be religious in
nature.
The fourth concerns the security sector. When security
forces fail to protect their citizens from threats, perpetuate
cycles of abuse and corruption, or act with impunity,
terrorists take these injustices to sow distrust and radicalize
new recruits. On the other hand, police can be incredibly
valuable in preventing radicalization by strengthening the
trust of the people they serve, and tangibly improving the
security and circumstances of their communities.
The last, and the subject of the subcommittee's hearing
last month, is to empower women and encourage their
participation more fully as contributors to efforts that
counter violent extremism.
In sum, preventing the advent of the next ISIS must go
beyond countering the propaganda-filled messages, killing
terrorist leaders, and addressing financial flows. The United
States should encourage GCC partners to empower the
communities, civil society, municipal authorities, and local
practitioners that are on the front lines of this challenge
every day. And it is time to demonstrate to the generations of
youth across the Middle East that they have a stake in their
future and their human dignity matters.
We can build our collective success through sustained U.S.
leadership, close partnership with allies, and a shared
commitment to end this scourge together.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. And I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Erdberg follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Poe. Thank you for your testimony. I thank all of the
panelists for your excellent insight.
Now we will allow members to ask questions. The Chair will
yield its time, without objection, to the gentlelady from
Florida and recognize her for her questions.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much. I don't know why you
are buttering me up. I fear, I fear tomorrow. But thank you,
Chairman Poe.
In my opening statement I mentioned that despite a lot of
success in stopping terrorist operations since 9/11 we still
have a long way to go in getting at the root causes of
terrorism. And I am hopeful that we are going to start seeing
more of a commitment from the Gulf in that to this end.
Two questions. Can you share some specific examples of our
Gulf partners tackling the root causes of terrorism?
And, secondly, how can Congress push the Gulf to take more
of a leadership role in this area? Or is that something that we
should not be involved in doing and let our partners do the
pushing?
Ms. Erdberg. I would be happy to start with the first one
particularly.
So, I think that each and every one of the GCC partners has
taken internal national efforts to try and address the root
causes. Although we know that this phenomenon is very global,
and so addressing only their own home communities is only part
of the challenge.
But, for instance, Kuwait has prepared a national plan to
reinforce moderation, which is a collective interagency effort
among many Kuwaiti parts of their executive branch, the
Ministry of Education and Information, of Islamic Affairs and
Youth. And they are initiating--I think it is dozens of
initiatives at the local level that are designed to try and
prevent youth from joining violent extremist networks.
Oman, which doesn't get a lot of air time in this place,
but in 2014 the Grand Mufti had published an essay calling for
tolerance and rejecting extremism. And he has had in his weekly
televised program, reference to those same themes pretty
regularly.
Qatar, as I mentioned, is a generous donor to the Global
Community and Engagement and Resilience Fund, which is a really
interesting way to get money into the hands of communities that
are doing local level initiatives related to violent extremism.
They also have instituted a number of CVE programs that are
directed at its own citizens, particularly through the vector
of education.
I think that is a start on the horizon.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. And I will ask the other
panelists. Thank you, Doctor.
Mr. Weinberg. So there are a couple of interesting examples
of Gulf states trying to tackle what we might consider root
causes of terrorism. I think the UAE-backed Forum for Promoting
Peace in Muslim Societies, and related Muslim Council of Elders
is in part a sort of state rivalry thing with Qatar relative to
Qatar's International Union of Muslim Scholars. But, it is also
a countering violent extremism, countering extremist ideology
effort.
I mean, if you look at the Qatari-backed IUMS, this is
Yusuf al-Qaradawi, who has previously authorized in fatwas
attacks against Americans in Iraq. He has wished--he has
described the Holocaust as divine punishment, and wishing for
more of that against the Jews, but truly horrible stuff.
The Forum for Promoting Peace in Muslim Societies had a
Jewish-Christian-Muslim religious leaders' dialog in Washington
a couple months ago on exactly sort of the opposite of that:
How we can all work together in promoting more tolerant
messaging within religious communities.
The U.S.-UAE joint Sawab Center is specifically an
initiative as part of the U.S.--as part of the Global Coalition
Against ISIS. It is a center for countering the messages that
ISIS has online.
And if you look more broadly at Saudi Arabia's Vision 2030
Modernization Program, I mean the general idea behind this is
to give the youth a greater stake in their societies and
greater opportunities to have a vibrant economic future.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Weinberg. Yes.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And, Ms. Bauer?
Ms. Bauer. Thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Should we do more or do we let others
push?
Ms. Bauer. So, countering violent extremism in the Gulf
isn't a specific area of my research. But I have spent time in
the Gulf. Lived there for 2\1/2\ years and also traveled there
recently. And I would say that, that just in observation I have
seen a difference in the recent efforts the Gulf states are
taking compared to just a few years ago.
In a recent trip to Saudi Arabia I had a chance to tour the
ETIDAL Center with a delegation. And noticed, noted really,
that their rhetoric had shifted to much more focus on the
ideology as the underpinning of the issue. And really the
violence is just a symptom of----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Moving in the right direction.
Thank you. Excellent panelists, Mr. Poe. Thank you.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentlelady.
The Chair recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Keating, from
Massachusetts for his questions.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, a person I am impressed with greatly in terms of
his wisdom on these matters is Secretary Mattis. Recently in a
group meeting that we had he really impressed upon all of us
there his view of military. His view of the military is to be
there as a foundation, a framework, and support for our
diplomatic efforts. That it is diplomacy first, and the
military's place is just to provide incentive and support for
that. And that is coming from our Secretary of Defense.
We have work to do in that regard, I believe, in our own
country. But can you comment on that philosophy with the GCC
states, is there any progress with recognizing the diplomatic
side first and the military side second? Jump in anyone.
Ms. Erdberg. I think the challenge is bigger than words.
And I think with our defense sector, and as well as many of the
other GCC defense sectors, the scalability of the amount of
personnel and resources that they have devoted to the
counterterrorism challenge is so far outweighing the amount of
diplomats, development professionals, peace builders, and
others who are also committed to this challenge.
And so I absolutely agree with the Secretary on this
premise that diplomacy first and defense second. But, when you
look at the amount of people who are putting their brains
toward solving this challenge, we need a little bit more of a
right sizing in that approach as well.
Mr. Keating. Thank you. Anyone else want to jump in?
I will, if you are not willing, I just had another
question. We spoke, I did my remarks, Ms. Erdberg did too, I
think Ms. Ros-Lehtinen did too, about the role of women. Now,
this presents a great challenge culturally in many of these
countries, too. What progress has been made to advance that
role, given the cultural challenges and limitations among those
countries?
Ms. Erdberg. I think you hit the nail on the head in your
assessment of the challenge. I think we have seen with the new
crown prince and the Vision 2030 in Saudi Arabia at least the
right first steps in this direction to try and enable more of
the population to have a stake in their own future.
I think in other GCC partner countries, we have seen,
again, I would characterize it as mixed progress for the role
of women. But I think, as my co-panelist was saying in her most
recent visit, that things are changing in terms of the
discourse. And I think that we are hopeful to see more positive
steps in the role of women in this discourse as well.
I would also just add to that that, the role of women in
national security positions in these countries would make a big
difference into showcasing how there is a different gender role
in the decision making apparatus as well.
Mr. Keating. Yes. I recall being in Afghanistan and being
part of the training for women in security and witnessing that.
One of the concerns, though, and it was mentioned in
testimony, is government failings, you know, really being
incubators for unrest and terrorist activities, becoming real
incubators, and whether it is a security failure or the
inability to police financing, private financing for terrorism.
How are we doing against corruption practices in that regard?
Because that would be simply one area where that would be a
real roadblock to better enforcement on both of those counts.
Ms. Erdberg. On the illicit finance issue more broadly, one
of the obstacles to acting sometimes for states is that greater
transparency in the financial system inevitably uncovers
corruption as well. And so, in certain countries if you are
asking counterparts to take steps against terrorist financing,
or money laundering, or anything else, that is one of the
problems is that corruption can be underlying it.
But positive steps on these issues as a whole help, you
know, help all, raise all of the boats. So it is a worthwhile
effort.
Mr. Keating. Thank you. Yes, Mr. Weinberg.
Mr. Weinberg. One of the challenges with governments in
this region is that these are all monarchies. Right? And so
there is a tendency to make decisions from the top down without
a lot of regard for institutions. So in Saudi Arabia we saw a
massive campaign against corruption in the last year. But it
was, you know, really in a way that raised concerns about the
extent to which there is rule of law and concerns from
investors.
So this is, you know, an ongoing challenge in the Gulf, as
is the broader human rights question and the extent to which
the U.S. is talking even about human rights as opposed to, say,
arms sales when the President goes to the Gulf.
Mr. Keating. Thank you for that comment. Thank all the
witnesses for their comments. I yield back.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman from Massachusetts.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Perry, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Weinberg, I had signed a letter sometime back asking
for the declassification of the MOU. And I am just wondering
what your thoughts are regarding whether that is problematic,
and why it is problematic, or if it should be done?
Mr. Weinberg. Ms. Bauer, did you have anything you wanted
to----
Ms. Bauer. This is your, you are talking about the MOU
with----
Mr. Perry. Regarding Qatar.
Ms. Bauer. Regarding Qatar. So, so I don't--to my knowledge
it is not necessarily classified. And, in fact, I had a meeting
with Qatari officials. They invited a number of people working
on these issues to sit down and talk with one of them. And
there was a memorandum from that meeting that was by one of the
Qatari consultancies that was working for them that was
submitted as part of the FARA filing. And so there is actually
details in there of a Qatari official describing the contents
of the MOU.
Mr. Perry. Have you seen our MOU?
Ms. Bauer. I have not seen it. But as it was described to
me by a Qatari official, it focuses primarily on increasing
intelligence.
Mr. Perry. Do you know anybody in Congress that has seen
the MOU?
Ms. Bauer. Not to my knowledge. But as I was going to say,
my understanding is it is primarily intelligence information
sharing and prosecutorial capacity building are the two primary
focuses of that, and under which the idea is to forward deploy,
you know, U.S. Government personnel who can work with Qatar to
build their capacity to prosecute, you know, these----
Mr. Perry. That sounds great. I just wonder if the United
States Government, the State Department, the administration's
concerned about, about Members of Congress divulging classified
information in that regard because I haven't seen it and I
don't know anybody in this place that has.
But that having been said, let me, let me ask you this. Why
just, why just Qatar's been singled out by its neighbors? In
some testimony in the beginning here you talked about Kuwait
and their harboring of terrorists. Why not Kuwait as well?
Mr. Weinberg. Well, as you noted, you know, Qatar and
Kuwait are the two Gulf states that have been identified as
having the most problematic records in this regard in recent
years. The top U.S. official for combating terror finance in
2014 called them both out as relatively permissive
jurisdictions for terror finance.
In 2017, a top U.S. official, who had just retired, again
said there were terror financiers operating openly and
notoriously in both countries.
And as Ms. Bauer noted in her testimony, the Kuwaitis have
basically been able to sidestep some of this scrutiny because
of the pressure on Qatar. The----
Mr. Perry. Do you know how much the United States taxpayer
spends in Kuwait? How many people, how many boots on the ground
we have in Kuwait?
Mr. Weinberg. I believe we have over 10,000 troops in
Kuwait currently. It is primarily an Army access point for
Iraq, as well as a lot of other U.S. military operations in the
region. But that is no excuse for Qatari failure to prosecute
terror finance using their territory.
I mean, if you wanted to write a letter to the Embassy of
Kuwait on this issue I think you would be free to raise some of
these concerns.
Mr. Perry. But why have the neighbors seemed to be
reluctant?
Mr. Weinberg. So, a lot of this I think comes down to
Qatari support for the Muslim Brotherhood and related Islamic
extremists, something that Kuwait hasn't done to such an
extent. And something that Qatar's neighbors understandably
view as a threat to their own national security.
Mr. Perry. Let me ask you this, we talked at least in here
a fair amount about countering violent extremism as it relates
to the GCC partners or countries. Other than Islamist extremism
what other violent extremism do they experience in their
countries?
Mr. Weinberg. I mean, that is, that is the main one.
Mr. Perry. Yes. That is what my thought was. So I wonder
why we call it violent extremism instead of Islamist extremism,
because that is what it is. You know, they don't, they don't
have the Ku Klux Klan there, they don't have white supremacist
organizations, they have Islamist extremism. And I think it is
important that we call it what it is because it is important to
recognize the problem if you are going to solve the problem.
I would just beseech everybody in the room that that is
what we are dealing with here, folks. That is what it is,
unfortunately. Nobody likes it but it is the reality of the
matter.
Mr. Chair, I yield.
Mr. Poe. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Florida,
Mr. Deutch.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As I said in my opening remarks, I don't see how it is
helpful to heal the rift in the GCC if the United States takes
sides in this conflict to say that one form of terrorism is
worse than another. But I do think it will be helpful in the
midst of this ongoing dispute to understand some of the
accusations that we hear, like the Qataris are funding al-
Qaeda-affiliated groups. Or the Saudis are exporting Wahhabism
around the world.
What do each of those mean for our security interests? And
are both accusations accurate? Ms. Bauer?
Ms. Bauer. So, starting with the issue of Qatari
individuals financing al-Qaeda, I think in the oft-cited speech
that Chairman Ros-Lehtinen cited as well by David Cohen in
2014, where he called Kuwait and Qatar a permissive
jurisdiction, that was an interesting point in time where
someone like me who follows very closely the changes in
terrorist financing methodologies, there was a real resurgence
in traditional forms of financing and donations coming from the
Gulf. And these were from individuals. And they were coming via
online platforms. This was the next generation, of kind, of the
abuse of charities that we saw before.
Going forward, I think that there has been an evolution not
necessarily in the Gulf, but if you look at the recent
indicators of the financial strength and the way that they are
funding themselves of the downstream groups, you see that al-
Qaeda in Syria has become more self-reliant. It has embedded
itself into the society there. And so I think that is an
important, important point to emphasize, that even that the
most recent U.N. report said that al-Qaeda in Syria, where a
lot of this money was flowing, was self-sufficient. That
doesn't mean they are not getting the funds, it just means that
it is a different picture perhaps than it was in 2014.
Mr. Weinberg. Okay. So, with regard to the Saudi question
first, and the Qatari one second, so the Saudi religious
tradition is an evangelical one. It is a proselytizing
tradition that seeks to spread its view of a purer, more proper
Islam. And, you know, as a country here that is founded on
religious liberty, you know, it doesn't seem like our place to
say whether one should or should not share their religious
beliefs.
But where U.S. national interests are involved is when
Saudi religious proselytization overseas involves spreading of
religious incitement or ideas tolerating violent extremism.
Saudi textbooks are where that ideological challenge is most
explicitly articulated today. So if you look at this current
year's Saudi Government-published textbooks they teach that
major Jewish organizations are trying to destroy--most major
Jewish organizations are trying to destroy the Al-Aqsa Mosque
and trying to--that Jews are trying to destroy Islam; that
Christianity and Jews who disbelieve are the worst of all
creatures; and that gay people, people who commit adultery, or
people who convert away from Islam should be executed.
So these are areas where, you know, Saudi teachings should
probably be challenged by the U.S.
On the Qatari question there are two parts. One is
private----
Mr. Deutch. By the way, it is not probably. No need to
modify that. Go on.
Mr. Weinberg. By all means.
Mr. Deutch. Yes.
Mr. Weinberg. So, you know, part of that is that
legislation on this issue should be marked up by this
committee. Right? On the Qatari question there are two parts
really. One of them is private terror financing, whether the
government is continuing to turn a blind eye to some of these
terror financiers or finally cracking down on them and putting
them in jail with convictions.
The other part is reports of government-provided terror
financing.
So, case after case after case after case after case,
government officials have been quoted in major news reports
claiming that the Qatari Government has paid multi-million
ransoms to al-Qaeda. Last year there was a reported case of an
alleged Qatari Government ransom of nearly $1 billion between a
Hezbollah offshoot, al-Qaeda, and other extremist groups.
And so, you know, the biggest thing that the U.S.
Government can do is to shine a light on this. And that means--
--
Mr. Deutch. Dr. Weinberg, I appreciate it.
Mr. Weinberg. Yes.
Mr. Deutch. I want to give Ms. Erdberg just one, one--just
if you could answer this question. Shouldn't we be equally
concerned about anything happening in the Gulf, isn't it, that
threatens our security interests? Shouldn't that be the
approach no matter what country, instead of getting involved in
the middle of this dispute, why not, why not work to protect
our interests first?
Ms. Erdberg. I would align myself with that. I think we
need to be working to protect our interests first. I also think
that a lot of the international efforts that the GCC countries
have, have generated independently really give us a little bit
more latitude to not have to only look at things through a
bilateral lens.
So I think there are over half a dozen CVE and CT
cooperation mechanisms that involve the GCC countries, and they
allow us to be able to work with each of the countries beyond
just our national borders.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman from Florida.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Kinzinger.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all
for being here today on these important issues.
Look, American leadership in the Middle East is extremely
important, especially when it comes to things like combating
terrorism. And I believe, as I have said repeatedly, that we
are in a generational fight against terrorists. It probably
honestly could take as long as it took to win the Cold War
because it is going to take new generations within Islam,
frankly, rejecting that ideology. And I believe that is it.
But also a part of that, though, is understanding of
tyrannical regimes like Syria. When you have an oppressive
dictator, he actually creates an environment for terrorism to
thrive because people feel like they don't have a voice and
they turn to what they see as the alternative, which is, in
many cases, radicalism. And while many of the GCC countries
have taken steps to fight terrorism and its support at home,
there remain a few countries who are hesitant to combat some of
that deep-rooted terrorism.
I do have a couple of questions if you all want to answer,
whoever can take them, about Qatar. I spent a little time there
as a military pilot in that base. It is an extremely important
base for us in terms of the war. But it is well known that
Qatar is willing to turn a blind eye to some of the nefarious
activities in their country, in many places playing both sides,
such as some of the fundraising networks that benefit Hamas and
the Taliban.
2017 some of the countries severed diplomatic ties with
Qatar over their willingness to host Islamic scholars and
embrace the Muslim Brotherhood movement. In response, the
administration in Qatar signed a MOU to fight support of
terrorism within the Qatari society.
What should Congress and the administration be willing to
do to ensure that the Qatari Government is upholding the MOU?
Anybody can start.
Mr. Weinberg. Well, it has been reported that that MOU is
not classified. So, you know, there is--there doesn't seem to
be a sources and methods question about whether that can be
made public. So, instead, it is a political question.
And, you know, if we are going to see this Gulf crisis
resolved on terms that address some of the core concerns, if we
are going to see terror finance effectively combated in the
Gulf, a key part of that is having Congress and the public be
able to debate and know whether the terms of that MOU are being
implemented and whether the term--and what those terms cover
and don't cover.
I have written two monographs on Qatar and its record on
terror finance over the years, and I can tell you case after
case after case after case the Qataris have said to the U.S.
Government, we are going to do things better. We are really
serious now. We are monitoring these people. We are going after
them. We are doing serious things.
And then those individuals have been free again and re-
engaged in terror finance.
So, public scrutiny and congressional accountability on
this issue are crucial.
Mr. Kinzinger. And so if they fail to meet the standards,
you know, that we kind of set forth with them or in these
agreements are we limited in our response due to the strategic
importance of Al Udeid, or are there other options?
Mr. Weinberg. Well, it is an excellent question. It is very
tempting to think in all or nothing terms, to think, oh, well,
we don't have leverage, they have leverage over us because this
base is there and we need this base. It is an important base.
But no base is permanent. And Al Udeid is actually a perfect
example of that.
Mr. Kinzinger. And it is not the only game in town now.
Mr. Weinberg. Right. The Combined Air and Space Operations
Center that is based at Al Udeid, the most important part about
that base was in Saudi Arabia until 2003. And then for
strategic other reasons we moved it.
For those same reasons, the U.S. can keep that there, or,
it can look at alternatives. It can move some forces out, or
keep some forces in. And so it doesn't have to be all or
nothing and it doesn't have to be permanent. It should be as
long as this base is serving U.S. interests.
Mr. Kinzinger. So, earlier this week the Saudi Foreign
Minister said that Qatar needed to pay for American presence in
Syria and needed to contribute forces because ``if the U.S.
pulled out from its military base in Qatar the Doha regime will
fall in less than a week.'' What do you make of that statement?
Anybody?
Mr. Weinberg. I mean that was clearly, you know, throwing a
little bit of shade at his neighbor across the way. Right?
Mr. Kinzinger. They like to do that sometimes.
Mr. Weinberg. Yeah. I mean, the U.S. spoke out for Qatari
national sovereignty at the start of the Gulf dispute last
year. And without it there might have been concern about the
stability or about the safety of the Qatari regime.
Look, as you know better than most Members of Congress,
Syria is a really, really complicated, but really important
military problem. And this is not something that should be
treated as a political football by actors in the region, it is
something where we should work with them to see what they can
do, as well as, perhaps through the Saudi Islamic military
lines to combat terrorism, to build a legitimate, multilateral
military contribution to help the U.S. in combating terrorism
in Syria and beyond.
Mr. Kinzinger. Excellent.
Well, given my time, I will yield back. And thank you all
for being here.
Mr. Poe. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Donovan, for his questions.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to
continue what Mr. Deutch was saying about protecting U.S.
interests first.
What is our leverage in these countries? And we are talking
about very wealthy countries. And many times the United States
uses things like sanctions as leverage to get other countries
to act in a certain way. What is our leverage when you are
talking about people or countries of such great wealth? And I
would like to ask everyone just their opinion.
Ms. Bauer. I would just say that we have used sanctions in
this case to try to create leverage. And that is part of the
popular--the public exposure of those individuals who are
operating there who have also been--a number of whom have also
been designated at the U.N. The idea is to build pressure on
Qatar to act.
And think, as the congressman was asking about the terms of
the MOU and how to, how to hold them accountable to that, this
list of entities or individuals that the Qataris themselves put
out last month as part of fulfilling that MOU, it is imperfect,
and they need to continue to work on that, and we need to
continue to pressure them to do that.
They also are supposed to be pursuing a number of
prosecutions which may or may not result in convictions
eventually. We need to help build that prosecutorial capacity.
And we need to tell them if they are not going to result in
convictions, that they have some other plan in order to be able
to monitor and make sure that these individuals who have been
identified and they no longer possibly--I don't know--be able
to operate in, you know, in a clandestine way, that others
don't follow behind them. But they need to build their capacity
to do that.
So there are things that we can pressure them to do.
Mr. Donovan. Right. Those are great goals but how do we
pressure them to do those things? How do we pressure them to do
those prosecutions? How do we pressure them after those
prosecutions to impose some type of penalty for that conduct?
Ms. Bauer. I think that they have responded to U.S.
pressure. My primary critique would be that they, others in the
region have taken these issues on themselves and taken
ownership of them. Qatar has responded to U.S. pressures. Some
of these prosecutions were being pursued before the rift
started. This isn't all in response to the rift. It is in
response to being called out starting in 2014 when they were
called a permissive jurisdiction for terrorist financing.
Mr. Donovan. Doctor?
Mr. Weinberg. Yeah. I think the U.S. legitimacy to speak
about good or bad conduct in the region shouldn't be
underestimated. The U.S. did a lot of this, especially in 2014,
and you saw Qatar and Kuwait took notice and they started
trying to take steps to at least make the situation look
better.
But, additionally, you see the importance, as Chairman Ros-
Lehtinen noted, of the State Department CT reports every year
of country reports on what these countries are or are not
doing. It is important information that shines light on good or
bad practices.
Members of Congress have also played an important role, in
this regard, with letters. By my count, there are, I think, six
letters from Congress to either the Executive Branch or to the
Qatari Embassy on Hamas operations in Qatar, including signed
by many of the members who are or have been in this room today.
That is attention that can be helpful.
The Export Administration Act, Section 6(j), does have
legal requirements for dual licensing, for licensing of dual
lease exports that these countries don't want to see themselves
listed under. And State is legally required to list countries
every year that allow terrorists in their territory.
Mr. Donovan. Wonderful. Ms. Erdberg?
Ms. Erdberg. I don't know that I have that much to add. But
I would say that there is also some encouragement that can be
very, very powerful, both behind closed doors through the means
of diplomacy, but also in the types of joint military
exercises, joint police exercises. The ways in which we
interact with officials at all levels of government can start
to create more of a space for holistic conversation on some of
these issues that sometimes is able to see behavioral change at
the same level, if not more levels, than just the transactional
leverage and sanctions that we have.
So I hope that we are using all of, all of the tools at our
disposal to try and change the bad behaviors that we seek to
correct.
Mr. Donovan. And for some of those we would like to see
improvement in activity, any of our allies have influence on
them, so if they are not heeding to our demands or our
requests, or whatever we want to phrase them as, some of our
allies have influence on those countries that can maybe
encourage better behavior?
Mr. Weinberg. Absolutely. And, you know, the more the U.S.
speaks in concert, for example, with our European allies on
this issue it can be very effective. Additionally,
international fora are important.
So, if you look at U.S. designations with statements of the
case about what terror financiers are doing in the Gulf, those
are important, but so are U.N. terror finance designations.
Those carry even greater authority. And the U.S. has been
effective at getting joint designations in that regard, as well
as joint designations with the Gulf governments.
Additionally, the Financial Action Task Force is an
important venue in this regard. The Trump administration is
reportedly pressing for Pakistan to be put on a watch list for
negligence on terror finance. That is something where U.S.
partnership with other allies could create pressure on some
Gulf governments as well.
Mr. Donovan. Before my time has expired, and just for the
record, I always take notice of what Chairwoman Ros-Lehtinen
says.
Mr. Poe. As you should.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Garrett.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank the members
of the panel.
Mr. Weinberg, is it Weinberg, pronounced correctly? You
spoke in verbatim earlier saying that it might help moving
forward with GCC states to give the youth, and I quote, ``a
greater say in their societies.'' The curriculum under which
these young people are educated, can you speak to the secular
or non-secular nature of that and whether or not it is inherent
in that curriculum that biases against non-prevalent
denomination, states, et cetera might be common?
Mr. Weinberg. I will speak to Saudi Government-published
textbooks in this regard because that is the one where I have
actually read a fair number of the books.
Mr. Garrett. That is where I am going.
Mr. Weinberg. Yes. It is a serious, serious problem.
The Islamic State in Syria actually was using Saudi
Government-published textbooks until, I believe, it was 2014 or
2015 when they published some of their own. I mean, this is----
Mr. Garrett. And who is--I know I am interrupting you, and
not to be rude.
Mr. Weinberg. No, by all means.
Mr. Garrett. By the way, welcome back to the Foreign
Affairs Committee.
Who is the number one exporter of Arabic language textbooks
on the planet Earth?
Mr. Weinberg. You know that, that is a particular figure I
am not familiar with. Saudi textbooks have----
Mr. Garrett. Well, how about would you believe that it
might possibly be Saudi Arabia?
Mr. Weinberg. Yeah.
Mr. Garrett. And is the curriculum in these books driven by
Wahhabiist sentiment in general speaking terms?
Mr. Weinberg. Yes. And the Saudi Government has also
published I think it is something like 300 million copies of
their particular commentary on the Quran, which has problematic
language that is not necessarily in there about Christians and
Jews.
Mr. Garrett. Sure. And we could do this all day long but I
have a finite amount of time.
I spent a little bit of time in the Balkans and had
occasion to become good friends with some local national
Muslims who had siblings who were in schools. And primarily
when we saw a place of worship destroyed it was an Eastern
Orthodox or Catholic church that lay in rubble. But if it was a
mosque, very, very frequently there was a green and white sign
in four languages that said, ``This mosque rebuilt by the
generous and benevolent peoples of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia.''
And one of my good friends, who is a local national, who is
Muslim, said what they are teaching my little brothers and
sisters is frightening. Right? And what terrible tragedy we
witnessed in that civil war that arose in a society that was
certainly secular enough wherein they used to hang out
together, date, and, you know, spend time socially together.
And this rift was created.
My fear is that moving forward we can do all--and we need
to do things like integrate young women into the opportunity
network. Right? But where these things are taught
professionally, what is the hope that in 30 years we aren't
still encountering violent extremism emanating from GCC
countries? It is open-ended.
Mr. Weinberg. The first U.S. Undersecretary for Terrorism
and Financial Intelligence wrote that capturing and going after
terror financiers and terrorist operatives is great, but far
more important is ending the stream of the ideology, ending the
incitement, including in education of this sort.
On the positive side there is a relatively new Secretary of
the Saudi Muslim World League, which plays a big part in this
propagation of Saudi Islamic teachings, who does seem to be
more focused on stopping some of the radical incitement,
hopefully. He has talked a good game on some issues.
But on textbooks in particular, you are right, it needs to
stop. And this is an area where, hopefully, the Saudi crown
prince and king are moving to curtail this stuff. But until
they do there is important legislation that----
Mr. Garrett. Right.
Mr. Weinberg [continuing]. You and your colleagues can co-
sponsor.
Mr. Garrett. And I want to reiterate comments that I have
made in this committee and other places publicly as it relates
to arms deals between the United States and our allies, the
Saudis, and that is that I think there is a time line that says
2030 is the magic year in which they will have hoped to have
addressed these problems.
And I don't think, you know, candidly, that we need to be
placing arms in the hands of individuals who are having an
antithetical upbringing as it relates to the practices and
beliefs of their neighbors. I understand that political
consequences creates strange bedfellows, and that certainly
there is a threat emanating from the nation of Iran, not the
people thereof, but I would be clear on that. But that the
Saudis need to put their proverbial money where their mouth is
before we start sending advanced armaments to the tune of
billions and billions of dollars.
And that is just me editorializing.
You spoke also to, Mr. Weinberg, ``Kuwaiti support for the
Muslim Brotherhood,'' and this is a quote, ``and other related
extremist organizations.'' There has obviously been some back
and forth as it relates to the designation of the Muslim
Brotherhood as a foreign terrorist organization, and I can
certainly see both sides of that.
Brookings suggests that perhaps it might make sense to
address Muslim Brotherhood elements locally as extremist
foreign terrorist organizations. Thoughts on that in my last 10
seconds?
Mr. Weinberg. So Qatar is in support of the Muslim
Brotherhood more than Kuwait.
Mr. Garrett. I am sorry, I may have gotten that wrong.
Mr. Weinberg. But there is no doubt that the Muslim
Brotherhood is an extremist group, arguably in many institutes,
a hate group. Some of its branches have been terrorist groups.
So it may be a lot easier to go after some of these where
we can meet U.S. legal criteria easily, rather than this
global, variegated network.
Mr. Garrett. Right. There is a theory that we--and I
understand that I am over. I will try to wrap up as quickly as
I can.--that we shouldn't engage the Muslim Brother as a
foreign terror organization for two reasons: Number one, they
are so disparate in their chapters; number two, they are too
big.
It is exactly--that is crazy counter-logic; right? That
there are too many adherents to the Muslim Brotherhood
philosophy, so identifying them as an FTO would be bad. I just
think it is interesting to flesh out with you all here today.
And I don't want to throw out proverbial babies with the bath
water, but I don't think we should be having this conversation
either.
Thank you.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman. The Chair recognizes itself
for 5 minutes.
Dr. Weinberg, you pointed out the big picture. We don't
have Ambassadors in three countries that we are talking about:
The UAE, Qatar, and Saudi Arabia. We have got to have
Ambassadors there. It is hard to deal with another country if
you don't have American Ambassadors.
I have met with the Ambassadors from these three countries
here and we have discussed many of the things that you are
talking, or you all have been talking about. But we have got to
have Ambassadors in these countries.
And, of course, I am not in charge, but if I had my way we
would have three Ambassadors in waiting right here and we could
point you to the three countries that we have been talking
about, and--anyway, that is not my choice. But I am just, just
suggesting that to those who decide.
Anyway, the countries that we are talking about, and we are
talking about several in the Gulf, I think because they are now
experiencing terrorist activities in their own countries they
may see the light to coming to the table about stopping
terrorist groups.
The gentleman from Virginia mentioned the phrase ``hate
groups.'' The terrorist groups we are talking about are hate
groups. I think that is just another name for them is terrorist
hate groups.
To me, it is all about the money. Let's find the money.
Now, do we know, does the United States have at its
disposal the names, rank, and serial number of these people who
are millionaires, bazillionaires that are sending their money
all over the world to terrorist groups to promote hate? Do we
know who these people are? Do we know who these people are? Do
we know their names?
Ms. Bauer. Yes, Mr. Chairman, the U.S. has designated as
terrorist financiers and facilitators a number of individuals
in Qatar, Kuwait, a number of, you know, Saudi individuals.
Saudi Arabia has many----
Mr. Poe. So to answer the question, we do know their names?
Ms. Bauer. Yes.
Mr. Poe. And we know the names that haven't been
designated, too. There are probably other people who we know
are involved in terrorism, we just haven't designated them yet.
So, wouldn't it be wise that we zero in on those people, no
matter what country they are coming from or what country they
are being harbored in, and stop the money train from them? I
mean, is that an unrealistic thing that we can do, Dr.
Weinberg?
Mr. Weinberg. You know, I think that is what the U.S.
Treasury Department aims to do.
Mr. Poe. But is it doing it?
Mr. Weinberg. I think so. I will defer to the former
Treasury official here to, you know, to give the insider
outsider perspective though.
Ms. Bauer. Thank you, David.
There is a lot of challenges to doing it because there is a
lot of different--it is a complex issue. You know, one of the
false assumptions I think is that this money primarily flows
through the financial system. And----
Mr. Poe. A lot of it is cash.
Ms. Bauer. A lot of it is cash.
Mr. Poe. It is just being taken across the border all over
the world and it is just hard, hard cash. Isn't that right?
Ms. Bauer. It is either cash or some of it comes in through
some money service businesses, kind of remittance shops,
hawalas, exchange houses that may be----
Mr. Poe. Fronts.
Ms. Bauer [continuing]. Unregulated or----
Mr. Poe. Fronts.
Ms. Bauer [continuing]. Regulated, and it makes its way
into the financial system that way.
Mr. Poe. But we know that that occurs and we know who these
people are?
Ms. Bauer. I think there are a lot of people in the U.S.
intelligence community and the U.S. Treasury Department focused
on this issue and engaging in information sharing with, with
partners in the Gulf on these issues as well.
Mr. Poe. And let me just ask one of you, all three of you
just one question. And, Dr. Weinberg, you have given us some
ideas on legislation. And I think we will discuss this among
the two committees. We may file the legislation calling these
countries to designate certain groups like Hamas as a foreign
terrorist organization.
The question is, name one thing you would like to see
Congress do about what you all have been talking about? Cut to
the chase, Ms. Bauer.
Ms. Bauer. So if there were one thing, okay, I will, I will
take this opportunity to talk about the value, I think, of
sanctions diplomacy. And I am not sure if you are aware of
this. The Treasury Financial Attache corps is actually pretty
small. It is usually about nine or ten people; very zero sum.
Three of those positions right now are based in the Gulf, which
is----
Mr. Poe. Basically what?
Ms. Bauer. Three of those positions, three out of the nine
or ten Treasury attaches for the whole department are in the--
--
Mr. Poe. The Gulf. Okay.
Ms. Bauer [continuing]. Gulf states. One in Saudi Arabia,
one in UAE, and one in Qatar. It is a reflection, I think, of
the priority that is placed on this issue. But I think it is
also an opportunity to highlight how important those
relationships are.
And I think that is something that Congress needs to know,
that having people forward deployed who can engage in technical
conversations with counterparts at central banks and ministries
of finance is incredibly important. And I think there, there
was addition--there were additional funds given to the Treasury
Department this year to go toward the Terror Financing
Targeting Center, which is the U.S.-GCC initiative. And some of
that I think can be used to shore up the attache program as
well.
Mr. Poe. Okay. More money. More money to fight money.
Ms. Bauer. Yes.
Mr. Poe. Thank you. Dr. Weinberg, one thing?
Mr. Weinberg. The one thing is to legislate penalties that
will motivate governments to not host terror financiers and
terrorist operatives. There have been some U.S. books, laws on
the books to this effect, such as the Export Administration Act
provision that I cited. So in those regards, pressing the
administration to enforce the law. But also legislating in ways
that motivate these governments to realize that it is not okay
to host terrorists.
Mr. Poe. Ms. Erdberg?
Ms. Erdberg. I would say a more cohesive interagency
approach to research. We still don't have enough empirical or
locally based information that is getting from the hands of
academics and research organizations into the hands of
development practitioners, diplomats, and defense officials to
understand how radicalization is happening and what prevents
against it.
Now, at USIP we host the Resolve Network, which is an
incubated network to try and connect all these research pieces
together. But there are huge amounts of information across the
U.S. Government that are still not being widely shared. It is
the completely non-classified realm. This is all about
academic, social science, and other types of research getting
into the hands of decision makers.
Mr. Poe. Thank you very much. I thank all three of you for
being here.
I think it is imperative that the United States work with
the Gulf states in solving this problem because we are all in
this together.
And I also want to thank both committees and the members
that were here to enlighten Congress, but also the American
public, about what is going on in the Gulf states. So this,
these two subcommittees are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:36 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]