- OVERSIGHT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
OVERSIGHT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
FEBRUARY 15, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-101
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
_________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-188 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman
Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee
GENE GREEN, Texas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi
G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey
DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
JERRY McNERNEY, California
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
PETER WELCH, Vermont
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
PAUL TONKO, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
SCOTT H. PETERS, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
Subcommittee on Health
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
Chairman
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
GENE GREEN, Texas
Vice Chairman
Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
FRED UPTON, Michigan
JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee
DORIS O. MATSUI, California
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
KATHY CASTOR, Florida
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
BILLY LONG, Missouri
Massachusetts
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
TONY CARDENAS, California
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
officio)
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................
2
Prepared statement...........................................
3
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
5
Hon. Doris O. Matsui, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, prepared statement..............................
7
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................
8
Prepared statement...........................................
9
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................
10
Prepared statement...........................................
11
Hon. Ben Ray Lujan, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New Mexico, prepared statement..............................
13
Witness
Alex M. Azar II, Secretary, Department of Health and Human
Services.......................................................
14
Prepared statement...........................................
16
Answers to submitted questions...............................
94
Submitted Material
Letter of February 9, 2018, from Seema Verma, Administrator,
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department of Health
and Human Services, to Mr. Pallone, with letter of January 31,
2018, from Mr. Pallone, et al., to Administrator Verma,
submitted by Mr. Pallone.......................................
75
Letter of February 8, 2018, from Ms. Schakowsky, et al., to Alex
Azar, Secretary, Department of Health and Human Services,
submitted by Ms. Schakowsky....................................
79
Article of February 14, 2018, ``Bevin's Medicaid changes actually
mean Kentucky will pay more to provide health care,'' by
Deborah Yetter, Louisville Courier Journal, submitted by Mr.
Kennedy........................................................
81
Letter of December 1, 2017, from Ms. DeGette, et al., to Eric
Hargan, Acting Secretary, Department of Health and Human
Services, submitted by Ms. DeGette.............................
85
Article of February, 2018, ``Immigrant rights group in email says
it was warned not to mention abortion to teens,'' by Ann E.
Marimow and Maria Sacchetti, The Washington Post, submitted by
Mr. Cardenas...................................................
90
OVERSIGHT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
----------
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 12:33 p.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Michael C.
Burgess (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Burgess, Guthrie, Upton,
Shimkus, Latta, Lance, Griffith, Bilirakis, Bucshon, Brooks,
Mullin, Hudson, Collins, Carter, Walden (ex officio), Green,
Engel, Schakowsky, Butterfield, Matsui, Castor, Sarbanes,
Lujan, Schrader, Kennedy, Cardenas, Eshoo, DeGette, and Pallone
(ex officio).
Also present: Representatives Welch and Tonko.
Staff present: Jennifer Barblan, Chief Counsel, Oversight
and Investigations; Mike Bloomquist, Deputy Staff Director;
Adam Buckalew, Professional Staff Member, Health; Kelly
Collins, Staff Assistant; Zack Dareshori, Legislative Clerk,
Health; Paul Eddatel, Chief Counsel, Health; Adam Fromm,
Director of Outreach and Coalitions; Caleb Graff, Professional
Staff Member, Health; Jay Gulshen, Legislative Clerk, Health;
Ed Kim, Policy Coordinator, Health; James Paluskiewicz,
Professional Staff Member, Health; Mark Ratner, Policy
Coordinator; Kristen Shatynski, Professional Staff Member,
Health; Jennifer Sherman, Press Secretary; Danielle Steele,
Counsel, Health; Austin Stonebraker, Press Assistant; Josh
Trent, Deputy Chief Health Counsel, Health; Hamlin Wade,
Special Advisor, External Affairs; Jacquelyn Bolen, Minority
Professional Staff Member; Jeff Carroll, Minority Staff
Director; Waverly Gordon, Minority Counsel, Health; Tiffany
Guarascio, Minority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Health
Advisor; Una Lee, Minority Senior Health Counsel; Miles
Lichtman, Minority Policy Analyst; Rachel Pryor, Minority
Senior Health Policy Advisor; Samantha Satchell, Minority
Policy Analyst; Andrew Souvall, Minority Director of
Communications, Outreach, and Member Services; Kimberlee
Trzeciak, Minority Senior Health Policy Advisor; C.J. Young,
Minority Press Secretary.
Mr. Burgess. The Subcommittee on Health will now come to
order. I ask everyone to please take their seats.
And before we get started, I do want to take a moment to
recognize yesterday's devastating events in Florida. We will
continue to learn more about how things occurred, and I know my
colleagues and I will keep the victims, the injured, and their
loved ones foremost in our minds.
Representative Bilirakis and Representative Castor, we will
also be thinking of you, the entire Florida delegation, and the
people of Florida during this difficult time.
I would like to recognize myself 5 minutes for the purpose
of an opening statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS
This afternoon, we are honored to have Secretary Alex Azar
before the Health Subcommittee to discuss the Department of
Health and Human Services' budget for the fiscal year 2019.
First, Secretary Azar, congratulations on your recent
confirmation, and we appreciate your willingness to participate
today, and I believe this is your third congressional hearing
in 24 hours. So we also appreciate your endurance.
Earlier this week, President Trump and his administration
released their budget, which provides a blueprint on where
Federal investments could be made as well as areas of
additional funding and resources and areas of efficiency.
We appreciate the administration sharing its vision for the
upcoming fiscal year as all of us on the committee work to
solve many of the healthcare issues impacting our respective
communities across the country.
Mr. Secretary, you see before you on this dais men and
women with a multitude of backgrounds and experience and
different political approaches to solving these problems--
different political philosophies.
But I can tell you for a fact everyone seated on this dais
on either side is committed to seeking solutions and doing the
work necessary, and I pledge that we will work with you as we
accomplish these goals for the American people.
The Energy and Commerce Committee, specifically this
subcommittee, has the broadest jurisdiction in Congress over
our Nation's healthcare matters, major policy operations under
the Department of Health and Human Services.
These include both private and public health insurance
markets, Medicare, Medicaid, Children's Health Insurance, and
the Affordable Care Act; biomedical research and developments,
particularly those emanating out of the National Institutes of
Health; the regulation of food, drugs, and medical devices, as
well as cosmetics through the Food and Drug Administration.
We also oversee Federal policies affecting substance abuse
and mental health, which demand interagency collaboration,
especially with the Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Administration; and oversight of not only the Nation's public
health but also global health, including the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention.
Again, Members on both sides of this dais on this
committee, we do have our differences but I believe we have the
mutual goal of delivering for the American people and working
together on issues that demand our full attention.
We have got an opiate crisis that demands our attention. We
have got to improve the quality and access to healthcare
products and services. We have to harness the scientific and
medical technologies of today to advance the healthcare
policies of tomorrow.
What this committee has already accomplished under the
previous administration and the current administration is
indicative of what is certainly possible: passage of the
Medicare and CHIP Reauthorization Act to repeal the sustainable
growth rate formula; the enactment of the 21st Century Cures
Act; the reauthorization of several key user fees at the Food
and Drug Administration last year; the reauthorization of
Children's Health Insurance and community health centers and
other important public health and Medicare extenders just last
week.
On this committee, we were able to include 19 Member-led
healthcare initiatives in the recent Bipartisan Budget Act that
included both Republican and Democrat priorities. The Health
Subcommittee still has an extensive list of items to finish
before the end of this year. These include holding hearings on
legislative policies and developing the proposals to blunt the
opioid epidemic, to reauthorize the Pandemic and All-Hazards
Preparedness Act and the Animal Drug User Fee, and examining
the cost drivers of the Nation's healthcare infrastructure and
offering solutions and improvements to programs like 340B drug
discount under the Health Resources and Services
Administration.
We are also interested in Consumer eHealth in the Office of
the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology.
I would like to build upon the work that our subcommittee
initiated last year and continue assessing the ways that our
current healthcare infrastructure can more positively impact
Americans in urban and rural areas where illnesses like
Alzheimer's disease and mental health disorders pose challenges
for our loved ones and their families.
As a physician who understands the demands and challenges
of treating patients while maneuvering through the reporting
and other compliance requirements, which can often be barriers
to providing better patient care, I want you to know I am
committed to relieving the burdens that have been placed on
doctors through commonsense market-driven solutions.
Many of the actions the current administration has taken
thus far are very encouraging, and it is my hope we can
continue to work together on this effort.
Mr. Secretary, I want you to regard this subcommittee as a
resource and a partner to you and your agency to fulfill your
mission and deliver for America.
Again, I want to welcome you, Secretary Azar, and I want to
thank you for being here. I look forward to hearing your vision
for the Department of Health and Human Services and exploring
opportunities to work together on the many critical health
issues on behalf of the American people.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burgess follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Michael C. Burgess
Today, we are honored to have Secretary Alex Azar before
the Health Subcommittee to discuss the Department of Health and
Human Services' budget for the fiscal year 2019. First,
Secretary Azar congratulations on your recent confirmation, and
we appreciate your participation today, which I believe will be
your third congressional testimony within the last 24 hours.
Earlier this week, President Trump and his administration
released their budget which provides a blueprint on where
Federal investments could be made as well as areas of
additional funding resources and efficiencies. We appreciate
the administration sharing its vision for the upcoming fiscal
year as all of us on the committee work to solve many of the
healthcare issues impacting our respective communities across
the country.
You see before you on the dais, men and women with a
multitude of backgrounds and experience and different political
philosophic approaches to solving these problems. But I can
tell you everyone seated on this committee is committed to
seeking solutions--and doing the work necessary.
The Energy and Commerce Committee, specifically this
subcommittee, has the broadest jurisdiction in Congress over
our Nation's healthcare matters, encompassing the major
policies and operations under the Department of Health and
Human Services. These issues include both private and public
health insurance markets under Medicare, Medicaid, CHIP, and
the Affordable Care Act; biomedical research and developments,
particularly those emanating out of the National Institutes of
Health; the regulation of food, drugs, medical devices, and
cosmetics through the Food and Drug Administration; Federal
policies affecting substance abuse and mental health, which
demand interagency collaboration, especially the Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Administration; and oversight of not
only the Nation's public health but also global health
pandemics, including the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.
Again, Members on both sides of the dais on this committee
do have our differences, I believe that we have the mutual goal
of delivering for the American people and working together on
issues that demand our full attention, such as combatting the
opioid crisis, improving the quality and access to healthcare
products and services, and harnessing the scientific and
medical technologies of today to advance healthcare policies of
tomorrow. What this committee has already accomplished under
the previous and current administration is indicative of what
is certainly possible--the passage of the Medicare and CHIP
Reauthorization Act to repeal the SGR; the enactment of the
21st Century Cures Act; the reauthorization of several key user
fees at the FDA last year; and the reauthorization of CHIP,
community health centers, and other important public health and
Medicare extenders last week. Just on this committee, we were
able to include 19 Member-led healthcare bills in the recent
Bipartisan Budget Act that included both Republican and
Democrat priorities.
The Health Subcommittee still has an extensive list of
items to finish before the end of this year. These include
holding hearings on legislative policies and developing a
package of proposals to blunt the opioid epidemic,
reauthorizing the Pandemic and All Hazards Preparedness Act and
Animal Drug User Fee, and examining the cost drivers of the
Nation's healthcare infrastructure and offering solutions, and/
or improvements, to programs like 340B drug discount under the
Health Resources and Services Administration and Consumer
eHealth at the Office of National Coordinator for Health IT.
I would also like to build upon the work our subcommittee
initiated last year and continue assessing the ways our current
healthcare infrastructure can more positively impact Americans
in urban and rural areas, where illnesses like Alzheimer's
disease and mental health disorders pose challenges for our
loved ones and their families. As a physician who understands
the demands and challenges of treating patients while
maneuvering through reporting and other compliance
requirements--which can often be barriers to providing better
patient care--I am committed to relieving the burdens that have
been placed on doctors through commonsense, market-driven
solutions. Many of the actions the current administration has
taken thus far are encouraging and it is my hope we can
continue to work together on this effort.
I want you to regard this subcommittee as a resource to you
and your agency, and a partner to fulfill your mission and
deliver for America. I again want to welcome Secretary Azar and
thank him for being here. I look forward to hearing your vision
for the Health and Human Services Department and exploring
opportunities to work together on the many critical healthcare
issues on behalf of the American people.
Mr. Burgess. At this time, I would like to recognize the
ranking member of the Health Subcommittee, Mr. Gene Green of
Texas, for 5 minutes, please.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Secretary and Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Secretary, for being here today, and it is unusual to
have two Texans who are ranking and chair of the Health
Subcommittee. We wondered about that for most of this session.
But somehow it works out.
This week, President Trump released his 2019 budget
request. Budgets are more than just numbers on a page. They are
statements of priorities.
Unfortunately, I believe the priorities of the
administration are out of whack. This budget doubles down
policies that would hurt working Americans and jeopardize their
health.
It proposes devastating cuts to Medicaid, Medicare, public
health programs, and yet again calls for repeal-and-replace of
the Affordable Care Act.
This dangerous budget imperils access to care for millions
of Americans and puts our Nation's healthcare system at risk.
Three million Americans lost their health insurance this
year because of the administration. This budget proposes to
take away from millions more.
Proposing to cut Medicaid by $1.4 trillion is an assault on
the working families and would be even crueler than the
permanent caps on funds that Trumpcare passed by the House
would have imposed.
It would implement harsh barriers to coverage for low-
income families altogether. The budget would gut the single
largest insurer of children, enact an unprecedented cut on the
largest payer for behavioral health, and threaten care for
seniors in nursing homes, individuals with disabilities, and
working families.
Repealing the ACA and cutting 675 billion in healthcare
dollars over a decade would take healthcare away from millions
of Americans, raise costs, and destroy Obamacare's protections
for people with preexisting conditions.
This budget cut of almost $500 billion from Medicare shifts
costs to seniors and cutting our healthcare safety net. It cuts
$1 billion from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
at a time when a robust public health infrastructure couldn't
be more important.
It is clear they have very different aspirations for this
country and what our healthcare system should look like.
The picture of the administration's budget paints a harsh
one where more and more Americans join the ranks of the
uninsured every day, where seniors face declining quality of
care and Medicare due to deep and irrational cuts to pay for
the tax cuts for the wealthy, and where working families and
people with disabilities can no longer rely on the safety net
that is Medicaid.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Green follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Gene Green
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to Secretary Azar
for being here this morning.
This week, President Trump released his 2019 Budget
Request.
Budgets are more than a numbers on a page--they are a
statement of priorities.
Unfortunately, I believe the priorities of this
administration are wildly out of whack.
This budget doubles down policies that will hurt working-
class Americans and jeopardize their health.
It proposes devastating cuts to Medicaid, Medicare, and
public health programs, and yet again, calls for ``repeal and
replace'' of the Affordable Care Act.
This dangerous budget imperils access to care for millions
of Americans and puts our Nation's healthcare system at risk.
Three million Americans lost their health insurance this
year because of this administration, and this budget proposes
to take coverage away from millions more.
Proposing to cut Medicaid by $1.4 trillion is an assault on
working families and would be even crueler than the permanent
cap on funds than the TrumpCare bill passed by the House would
have imposed.
It would implement harsh barriers to coverage for lower-
income families and all together, the budget would gut the
single largest insurer of children, enact an unprecedented cut
on the largest payer for behavioral health, and threaten care
for seniors in nursing homes, individuals with disabilities,
and working families.
Repealing the ACA and cutting $675 billion in healthcare
dollars over a decade will take healthcare away from millions
of Americans, raise costs and destroy Obamacare's protections
for people with pre-existing conditions.
This budget would cut almost $500 billion from Medicare,
shifting costs to seniors and cutting our healthcare safety
net.
It cuts more than $1 billion from the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, at a time when a robust public health
infrastructure couldn't be more important.
It is clear we have very different aspirations for this
country, and what our healthcare system should look like.
The picture the administration's budget paints is a harsh
one- where more and more Americans join the ranks of the
uninsured each day; where seniors face a declining quality of
care in Medicare due to deep and irrational cuts to pay for tax
cuts for the wealthy; and where working families, and people
with disabilities can no longer rely on the safety net that is
Medicaid.
I appreciate the opportunity to hear from our witness and
look forward to answers to our questions.
I yield 1 minute to Congressman Ben Ray Lujan.
I yield 1 minute to Congressman Peter Welch.
Mr. Green. I appreciate the opportunity to hear from our
witness. I am looking forward to asking questions, and I'd like
to yield 1 minute to my California colleague Ms. Matsui.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Mr. Green.
I am extremely concerned by the priorities reflected in
this President's budget. This proposal directly and negatively
impacts hard-working families who depend on crucial services.
It guts Medicaid by $1.4 trillion. These cuts mean working
single mothers in between jobs, families with a family member
who suffers from addiction, and grandparents in long-term care
facilities will have less access to care.
And the HHS budget once again declares war on the
Affordable Care Act, restricting access to coverage. These are
cruel inflictions from an administration who claims to be
addressing the opioid crisis.
I am disappointed that HHS, which has a mission to enhance
and protect the health and well-being of all Americans, has
presented a budget that targets the most vulnerable in our
communities--women, children, people with disabilities and
mental illness, and the LGBT community.
I sincerely hope that in our conversation today we can
address the failings in HHS' budget vision and how the agency
should in fact be working to protect all Americans.
Thank you. I yield back to the ranking member.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Matsui follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Doris O. Matsui
Thank you for yielding. I am extremely concerned by the
priorities reflected in this President's budget.
This proposal directly and negatively impacts hard-working
families who depend on crucial services.
It guts Medicaid by $1.4 trillion. These cuts mean working
single mothers in-between jobs .. families with a family member
who suffers from addiction. and grandparents in long term care
facilities. will have less access to care. And, the HHS budget
once again declares war on the Affordable Care Act. restricting
access to coverage. These are cruel inflictions from an
administration who claims to be addressing the opioid crisis.
I am disappointed that HHS, which has a mission to enhance
and protect the health and well-being of ALL Americans. has
presented a budget that targets the most vulnerable in our
communities: women, children, people with disabilities and
mental illness, and the LGBT community. I sincerely hope that
in our conversation today we can address the failings in HHS'
budget vision and how the agency should, in fact, be working to
protect all Americans. Thank you, I yield back.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to my colleague
from Vermont, Congressman Welch.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much.
Mr. Secretary, in March of 2017, President Trump invited
Congressman Cummings and me to the White House to discuss drug
prices.
This committee has got a big concern about that. Mr.
Burgess has been very active. And his concern was that the
prices are beyond affordability for individuals, for the
businesses that are trying to cover their employees, and for
taxpayers. He believes they are too high. He's explicit that
it's inexcusable and unsustainable. The causes are many. You've
got incredible experience in the industry, so you understand
it.
And the hope, I think, that the entire committee has is
that, when you come back in a year, let's say, we are going to
show that the price has stabilized or started to go down.
The status quo is just killing us. And if you have these
medications that have great promise but people can't afford
them, they are not going to be sustainable.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Welch. And I yield back.
Mr. Green. OK. In my last six seconds, I want to also take
personal privilege. My staff member Kristen O'Neill, this is
her last day with us. She's going to bigger and better things.
She's been in our office doing healthcare for 6 years and,
as you know, that's been pretty traumatic for both sides of the
aisle. But I'll miss Kristen because she's been a great staff
member and made sure I didn't make too much of a fool of
myself.
[Applause.]
And I yield back my time.
Mr. Burgess. Gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks the
gentleman.
Chair recognizes the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Walden,
chairman of the full committee, 5 minutes for an opening
statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON
Mr. Walden. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would also
join in I guess congratulating Kristen on her departure. I
don't know if that's a good thing or a bad thing.
But you've certainly played a key role on healthcare issues
here and done a great job for Gene, and our team has enjoyed
working with you as well. So we wish you every success in going
forward.
Mr. Secretary, we are delighted to have you here as well.
Welcome to the Energy and Commerce Committee.
On behalf of all of us, I'd like to again congratulate you
on your confirmation as the Secretary of the Department of
Health and Human Services.
Your previous leadership experience at the Department and
in the private sector I think gives you a tremendous
springboard to do great work for the American people, and we
like to work as much as we can around here in a bipartisan way
and we know we share a lot of common objectives. We appreciate
your appearing before the subcommittee so shortly after your
confirmation.
Energy and Commerce has always led the way in delivering
meaningful healthcare reforms and policies for the American
people, and last year we completed our work to spur new
innovation and competition in the life sciences sector through
the FDA Reauthorization Act.
Ensuring and strengthening America's leadership role in
biotechnology to help consumers will continue to be a priority
for our committee.
We also just enacted the longest extension of the
Children's Health Insurance Program--as you know, CHIP. We did
critical extensions of Medicare extenders that seniors rely
upon.
We strengthened public health by providing funding for
community health centers--really, really important, especially
I know in my part of the world, 240,000 Oregonians get their
care through our very important network of community health
centers--and we have done a lot of other public health
priorities.
We also rolled back the Affordable Care Act's Independent
Payment Advisory Board, which threatened to undermine care for
our Nation's seniors who rely upon the Medicare program.
We did this all in a fiscally responsible way by doing the
hard work of ensuring that new spending was fully paid for with
targeted and smart reductions in other spending.
These priorities and others were part of the 19 Energy and
Commerce Committee bills that were signed into law by President
Trump as part of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018. So we got a
lot of work teed up through here, and then we are able to put
it in that package and the President signed it.
So, Mr. Secretary, we had a chance to talk earlier this
week about our shared priorities, and we look forward to
partnering with you and the entire Department of Health and
Human Services.
This committee has a rich tradition of bipartisan oversight
and legislative work, and I see a lot of opportunity for us to
continue down that path in the coming weeks and months.
Particularly, I'd like to focus on the issue of opioids and
the crisis that is afflicting our country and our citizens.
It's a top priority for me. It's a top priority for Members on
every side in this committee. We need to build upon our
previous legislative efforts, known as the Comprehensive
Addiction Recovery Act, or CARA, and the funding provided in
the 21st Century Cures Act.
I would point out that's the most funding the United States
Government has ever put directly toward the opioid epidemic,
and we intend to do more and we are set up in the budget
agreement to do even more, going forward. But we want to make
sure it goes to the right places for effective purposes and
helps in this effort.
While these laws resulted in record amounts of money being
devoted to this fight, more is needed to address this growing
crisis, and in last week's budget bill we were able to deliver
headroom to provide new resources for both 2018 and 2019. So we
look forward to working with our friends in the Appropriations
Committee as we work on how that money should be spent.
Last year, we held a Member Day. We solicited solutions to
combat the opioid epidemic. We had, I think, something like 50
Members of Congress come before this committee--an
unprecedented show of support--with their ideas and their
suggestions about what we could do.
We also have had tremendous work being done by our
Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee, now led by Chairman
Harper, looking at how these drugs got into our communities and
the tripwires that didn't trip, or if they did we want to know
why somebody didn't take notice.
Given that addressing the opioid epidemic has bipartisan
support and President Trump's leadership and commitment to this
issue, it is my hope and belief this committee will deliver
additional legislation this spring and that we can get into law
soon.
The Health Subcommittee also plans to build upon the work
of our Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee's report on
340B. This program is important, as it serves our low-income
individuals. But it's essentially not been modernized in two
decades. So it's our belief that reforms are necessary to both
strengthen and secure the program so it can best serve low-
income populations and make sure they have access to affordable
medications. So we look forward to working with you on that.
Along with finding opportunities to lower costs for
consumers across the board and addressing reauthorizations
later this year, 2018 will be busy for this subcommittee and,
Secretary Azar, we look forward to partnering with you on these
initiatives and many more going forward.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden
Secretary Azar, welcome to Energy and Commerce. On behalf
of all of us, I'd like to congratulate you again on your
confirmation as the Secretary of the Department of Health and
Human Services. Your previous leadership experience at the
Department and in the private sector will give you a tremendous
springboard to do great work for the American people.
We appreciate you appearing before the subcommittee today
so shortly after your confirmation.
Energy and Commerce has led the way in delivering
meaningful healthcare reforms and policies for the American
people. Last year, we completed our work to spur new innovation
and competition in the life sciences sector through the FDA
Reauthorization Act. Ensuring and strengthening American's
leadership role in biotechnology to help consumers will
continue to be a priority for this committee.
We also just enacted the longest extension of the
Children's Health Insurance Program, critical extensions of
Medicare extenders that seniors rely upon, and strengthened
public health by providing funding for community health centers
and other important public health priorities. We also rolled
back the Affordable Care Act's Independent Payment Advisory
Board--which threatened to undermine care for our Nation's
seniors who rely upon the Medicare program. We did this all in
a fiscally responsible way by doing the hard work of ensuring
new spending was fully paid for with targeted and smart
reductions in health spending.
These priorities and others were part of 19 Energy and
Commerce Committee bills that were signed into law by President
Trump as part of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018.
Secretary Azar, we had a chance to talk earlier this week
about our shared priorities and we look forward to partnering
with you and the entire Department of Health and Human
Services. This committee has a rich tradition of bipartisan
oversight and legislative work--and I see a lot of opportunity
for us to continue down that path in the coming weeks and
months.
Particularly, I see a great opportunity to for us to work
together to combat the opioid crisis, a top priority for me and
for this committee. We need to build upon E&C's previous
legislative efforts, namely the Comprehensive Addiction
Recovery Act (CARA) and the funding provided in the 21st
Century Cures Act. While these laws resulted in record amounts
of Federal resources being devoted to this fight, more is
needed to address this growing crisis. In last week's budget
bill, we were able to deliver headroom to provide new resources
to combat the opioid crisis for the rest of FY 2018 and FY
2019. We look forward to working with our friends at the
Appropriations Committee on this point.
Last year, we held a Member Day to solicit solutions to
help combat the opioid crisis--hearing directly from Members
both on and off this committee, Republican and Democrat. Later
this month, this subcommittee will launch its review of
targeted solutions to help combat the opioid crisis. This work
will be done in tandem with our Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee work led by Chairman Harper.
Given that addressing the opioid epidemic has bipartisan
interest and with President Trump's leadership and commitment
to this issue, it is my hope and belief that this committee
will deliver additional legislative solutions that we can move
to the full House later this year.
The Health Subcommittee also plans to build upon the work
of our Oversight and Investigations work regarding the 340B
program. This important program designed to serve low-income
individuals has essentially not been modernized in more than
two decades. It is my belief that reforms are necessary to
strengthen and secure the program so it can best serve low-
income populations access affordable medications. We look
forward to working with HHS and stakeholders to make sure we
get the job done right.
Along with finding opportunities to lower costs for
consumers across the board and the addressing reauthorizations
later this year, 2018 will be a busy year for this
subcommittee.
Secretary Azar, we look forward to partnering with you on
these initiatives and working on many of our shared priorities
together.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentleman.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Pallone, ranking member of the full committee, 5 minutes,
please.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
To my dismay but not my surprise, President Trump's 2019
budget proposal continues the cruel and complacent perspective
of ripping healthcare away from millions of Americans to help
pay for the Republicans' tax scam that overwhelmingly benefits
the wealthy and corporations.
This budget is an attack on working families, seniors, and
lifesaving programs. I want to just highlight some of the more
egregious issues with the budget.
It doubles down on gutting and capping the Medicaid
program, the Nation's largest health insurer, and cuts our
Nation's safety net by $1.4 trillion.
Meanwhile, it builds on the administration's ongoing
illegal efforts to kick vulnerable Americans off Medicaid
through work requirements, lockouts, and proposed lifetime
limits.
Simply put, the Trump administration's vision for our
country through this budget is to take coverage away from
families living on the brink that depend on Medicaid to make
ends meet.
The Trump budget also includes over $500 billion in cuts to
Medicare, jeopardizing healthcare for seniors. Deep cuts to
safety net providers, nursing homes, home health agencies, and
other providers appear to be based not on any real policy
rationale but cutting for the sake of cutting. Essentially, cut
healthcare for seniors to pay for that Republican tax cut.
Sadly, the Trump budget continues the same Republican
efforts to repeal the Affordable Care Act. As proposed, ACA
repeal would leave millions more uninsured, gut protections for
preexisting conditions, and result in a $675 billion cut to our
healthcare system.
In addition, ongoing efforts to sabotage the ACA such as
cutting off cost-sharing reductions and rolling back consumer
protections have already resulted in skyrocketing costs for
middle-class families and 3 million more Americans uninsured in
2017.
And now, HHS is sitting by the sidelines while Idaho
clearly circumvents the law, and this is simply unacceptable.
Today, we will hear from our newly confirmed Secretary
Azar, and Mr. Azar moves into the top leadership position at a
very trying time.
The Department has been embroiled in scandal since day one.
From former Secretary Tom Price's exorbitant travel expenses,
to the use of official resources to lobby in favor of ACA
repeal-and-replace, to Brenda Fitzgerald's purchases of tobacco
stock while she was the head of CDC, these issues deserve
immediate attention.
This morning I sent a letter to you, Mr. Secretary, asking
you to conduct a top-down review of the Department and all of
its operating divisions to assess the extent to which HHS
personnel are abiding by all applicable Federal ethical
regulations and policies and whether appropriate safeguards are
in place to protect against abuse and conflicts of interest.
I hope we hear today about your plans to faithfully uphold
the laws set by Congress, improve transparency, and eliminate
conflicts of interest and protect the health of working
families.
The American people deserve a commitment to restore the
integrity of the Department.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.
To my dismay but not my surprise, President Trump's 2019
budget proposal continues the cruel and complacent perspective
of ripping healthcare away from millions of Americans to help
pay for the Republicans tax scam that overwhelmingly benefits
the wealthy and corporations. This budget is an attack on
working families, seniors and life-saving programs.
I want to just highlight some of the more egregious issues
with this budget. It doubles down on gutting and capping the
Medicaid program, the Nation's largest health insurer, and cuts
our Nation's safety net by $1.4 trillion. Meanwhile, it builds
on the administration's ongoing, illegal efforts to kick
vulnerable Americans off Medicaid through work requirements,
lock outs, and proposed lifetime limits. Simply put--the Trump
administration's vision for our country through this budget is
to take coverage away from families living on the brink that
depend on Medicaid to make ends meet.
The Trump budget also includes over $500 billion in cuts to
Medicare, jeopardizing healthcare for seniors. Deep cuts to
safety net providers, nursing homes, home health agencies, and
other providers appear to be based not on any real policy
rationale, but cutting for the sake of cutting. Essentially cut
healthcare for seniors to pay for that Republican tax cut.
Sadly, the Trump budget continues the same Republican
efforts to repeal the Affordable Care Act. As proposed, ACA
repeal would leave millions more uninsured, gut protections for
preexisting conditions, and result in a $675 billion cut to our
healthcare system. In addition, ongoing efforts to sabotage the
ACA, such as cutting off cost-sharing reductions and rolling
back consumer protections, have already resulted in
skyrocketing costs for middle-class families and 3 million more
Americans uninsured in 2017. And now--HHS is sitting by the
sidelines while Idaho clearly circumvents the law. This is
simply unacceptable.
Today, we will hear from newly confirmed HHS Secretary
Azar. Mr. Azar moves into the top leadership position at a
trying time--the Department has been embroiled in scandals
since Day 1. From former Secretary Tom Price's exorbitant
travel expenses, to the use of official resources to lobby in
favor of repeal-and-replace, to Brenda Fitzgerald's purchase of
tobacco stock while she was the head of CDC, these issues
deserve immediate attention. This morning, I sent a letter to
Secretary Azar asking him to conduct a top-down review of the
Department and all of its operating divisions, to assess the
extent to which HHS personnel are abiding by all applicable
Federal ethical regulations and policies, and whether
appropriate safeguards are in place to protect against abuse
and conflicts of interest. I hope we hear today about his plans
to faithfully uphold the laws set by Congress, improve
transparency and eliminate conflicts of interest, and protect
the health of working families. The American people deserve a
commitment to restoring the integrity of the Department.
Thank you.
Mr. Pallone. I'd like to yield--I don't have exactly 2
minutes, but half my time initially to Mr. Lujan and then to
Mr. Kennedy. I yield to Mr. Lujan at this time.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you, Mr. Pallone, and Mr. Secretary, thank
you for being here today.
In previous hearings, you told some of my Democratic
colleagues that we all shared values on healthcare. I am
interested to hear more about how the Trump administration's
budget reflects these shared values, or perhaps explore where
in fact we are not aligned.
I believe healthcare is a right, not a luxury. I believe
healthcare should be affordable no matter your income,
accessible no matter where you live, high quality no matter how
you're insured.
The President's budget proposal continues the Republican
obsession with repealing the Affordable Care Act, which would
strip healthcare away from tens of millions of Americans.
Let me be clear. Those are not my values. I believe it's a
tragedy that seniors all across this country have to choose
between rent and prescription drugs.
I believe it's a tragedy that, before the Affordable Care
Act, more Americans filed bankruptcy for medical debt than
anything else. I believe it's a tragedy that, before Medicaid
expansion, paying for inpatient opioid treatment was out of
reach for so many middle-class Americans.
This Trump budget dismantles Medicaid and the Affordable
Care Act. It represents an attack on working families and
lifesaving programs. The Trump budget cuts care for children,
families, women, and people with disabilities while once again
favoring the wealthy over corporations. Those are certainly not
my values.
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lujan follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Ben Ray Lujan
Thank you, Secretary Azar, for joining us today.
In previous hearings, you told some of my Democratic
colleagues that we all have shared values on healthcare. I'm
interested to hear more about how the Trump administration's
budget reflects these shared values, or perhaps explore where
we in fact are not aligned.
I believe healthcare is a right, not a luxury.
I believe healthcare should be affordable--no matter your
income.
Accessible--no matter where you live.
And high quality--no matter how you are insured.
The President's budget proposal continues the Republican
obsession with repealing the Affordable Care Act, which would
strip healthcare away from tens of millions of Americans.
Let me be clear. Those are not my values.
I believe it's a tragedy that seniors all across this
country have to choose between rent and their prescription
drugs.
I believe it's a tragedy that before the Affordable Care
Act, more American's filed bankruptcy for medical debt than
anything else.
I believe it's a tragedy that before Medicaid expansion,
paying for in-patient opioid treatment was out of reach for so
many middle-class families.
The Affordable Care Act and Medicaid expansion provided a
historic step forward in addressing the health disparities have
plagued our communities.
A healthcare system that addresses these issues reflect my
values.
This Trump budget dismantles Medicaid and the Affordable
Care Act. It represents an attack on working families and
lifesaving programs.
The Trump budget cuts care for children, families, women,
and people with disabilities while once again favoring the
wealthy and corporations.
Those are certainly not my values.
Mr. Pallone. Mr. Kennedy, you got, like, 10 minutes left.
Mr. Burgess. Ten minutes?
Mr. Pallone. Ten seconds.
Mr. Kennedy. I got 6, 7 seconds. So I'll yield back.
Mr. Pallone. I am sorry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. Gentleman yields back. Chair thanks the
gentleman.
This concludes Member opening statements. The Chair would
remind Members that, pursuant to committee rules, all Members'
opening statements will be made part of the record.
Testifying before our subcommittee today is the Honorable
Alex Azar, Secretary of the United States Department of Health
and Human Services.
Secretary Azar, you will have an opportunity to give an
opening statement followed by questions from Members. We do
want to thank you for being here today.
You are now recognized for 5 minutes to summarize your
opening statement, please.
STATEMENT OF ALEX M. AZAR II, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
AND HUMAN SERVICES
Mr. Azar. Chairman Burgess, Ranking Member Green, Chairman
Walden, and Ranking Member Pallone and members of the
committee, thank you for inviting me here today to discuss the
President's budget for the Department of Health and Human
Services for fiscal year 2019.
I would like to begin by expressing, of course, my
sympathies and prayers for the victims and families of the
tragedy in Florida. I want to echo the President's comments
this morning that this administration is committed to working
with States and localities to tackle the issues of serious
mental illness.
It's a great honor to be here. It's an honor to serve as
Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services. Our
mission is to enhance and protect the health and well-being of
all Americans.
It is a vital mission, and the President's budget clearly
recognizes that. The budget makes significant strategic
investments in HHS' work, boosting discretionary spending at
the Department by 11 percent in 2019 to $95.4 billion.
Among other targeted investments, that is an increase of
$747 million for the National Institutes of Health, a $473
million increase for the Food and Drug Administration, and a
$157 million increase over 2018 funding for emergency
preparedness across the Department.
The President's budget especially supports four particular
priorities that we have laid out for the Department, issues
that the men and women of HHS are already working hard on:
fighting the opioid crisis, increasing the affordability and
accessibility of health insurance, tackling the high price of
prescription drugs, and using Medicare to move our healthcare
system in a value-based direction.
First, the President's budget brings a new level of
commitment to fighting the crisis of opioid addiction and
overdose that is stealing more than a hundred American lives
every single day.
Under President Trump, HHS has already disbursed
unprecedented resources to support access to addiction
treatment. This committee in particular took a major step in
addressing the crisis through creating the 21st Century Cures
Act's State-targeted response to the opioid crisis grants.
The budget would take total investment to $10 billion in a
joint allocation to address the opioid epidemic and related
mental health challenges.
Second, we are committed to bringing down the skyrocketing
cost of health insurance, especially in the individual and
small group markets so more Americans can access quality
affordable healthcare.
This budget recognizes that this will not be accomplished
by one-size-fits-all solutions from Washington. It will require
giving States room to experiment with models that work for them
and allowing customers to purchase individualized plans that
meet their needs.
That's why the budget proposes a historic transfer of
resources and authority from the Federal Government back to the
States, empowering those who are closest to the people and can
best determine their needs.
The budget would also restore balance to the Medicaid
program, fixing a structure that has driven runaway costs
without a commensurate increase in quality.
Third, prescription drugs cost too much in our country.
President Trump recognizes this, I recognize this, and we are
doing something about it.
This budget has a raft of proposals to bring down drug
prices, especially for America's seniors. We propose a five-
part reform plan to further improve the already successful
Medicare Part D prescription drug program.
These major changes will straighten out incentives that too
often serve program middlemen more than they do our seniors.
These changes will save tens of billions of dollars for seniors
over the next 10 years, adding to savings we are already
generating with reforms the Medicare Part B payments under the
340B drug discount program.
The budget also proposes further reforms in Medicaid and
Medicare Part B to save patients money on drugs and provide
strong support for FDA's efforts to spur innovation and
competition in generic drug markets.
We want programs like Medicare and Medicaid to work for the
people they serve. That means empowering patients and providers
with the right incentives to pay for health and outcomes rather
than procedures and sickness.
Our fourth departmental priority is to use the tremendous
powers we have through Medicare as the largest purchaser of
medical services in the U.S. to move our whole healthcare
system in this direction.
This budget takes steps toward that by, for instance,
eliminating price variation based on where post-acute care is
delivered, rationalizing payments to physicians and hospital-
owned outpatient facilities, supporting investments in
telehealth, and advancing the work of accountable care
organizations.
The future of Medicare must be driven by value, quality,
and outcomes, not the current thicket of opaque, unproductive
incentives.
Making our programs work for today's Americans, sustaining
them for future generations, and keeping our country safe is a
sound vision for the Department of Health and Human Services,
and I am proud to support it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Azar follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Secretary, thank you for your testimony.
Thank you for being here today. We will move on to the Member
questions portion.
I would like to first recognize the vice chairman of the
subcommittee, Mr. Guthrie of Kentucky, 5 minutes, please.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here. I had a meeting
earlier today with Workforce on Opioids, and that's something
that we are all concerned about, particularly my home State.
And one tool that could be improved to combat the opioid
crisis is prescription drug monitoring programs. As you know,
PDMPs can help spot potential drug misuse or diversion.
I've heard from stakeholders that integrating PDMP data
into the clinical workflow in a timely manner is needed to
improve provider and dispenser resources.
Can you please describe how HHS is thinking about
leveraging its authorities to encourage best practices within
PDMPs?
Mr. Azar. So thank you, Congressman, for that question.
I look forward to any ideas that you and others may have
about ways that we can support States in this critical effort.
One of the proposals in our budget is to require States to
monitor high-risk billing activity to identify and remediate
abnormal prescribing and utilization patterns that may indicate
abuse in the Medicaid system. That may include States with
prescription drug monitoring programs as a vehicle to do that.
We also are asking for authority to make sure that,
whenever we exclude a provider, it will automatically lead to
transmission of that information to DEA to pull the physician's
ability to write controlled substances through the DEA.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
Second question, on Medicaid rebates. Strengthening and
improving the oversight of the Medicaid drug rebate program is
something this committee has been working on for several years.
In fact, recently the HHS Office of Inspector General just
issued a report on CMS' oversight of the program. In their
report, the OIG found that, from 2012 to 2016, Medicaid may
have lost $1.3 billion in base and inflation-adjusted rebates
for 10 potentially misclassified drugs, with the highest total
reimbursement in 2016. This budget includes a proposal to
clarify Medicaid definition of brand and over-the-counter drugs
under the Medicaid drug rebate program to prevent
inappropriately lower manufacturer rebates.
We are interested in your legislative proposal in this
budget, and could you describe it and then have your office
provide us with details?
Mr. Azar. Yes, thank you.
So this is an issue that came up in the last year or last
year and a half regarding making sure that manufacturers are
clearly understanding and that the rules of the road are very
clear--what's a branded drug, what's a generic drug, what's an
over-the-counter drug--so that we are getting our proper rebate
payments in the Medicaid program, and as you mentioned, that
can be an error to the tune of $1.3 billion of misreporting. So
we are asking for language that would clarify that.
In addition, you know, we have got in our budget proposal a
plan that we would like authority to grant up to five States
the ability to negotiate their own formulary for drugs with
drug companies to see if they can do an even better job than we
do through our statutory Medicaid drug rebate program to bring
down drug costs.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. I look forward to looking at the
details of that.
And one more. I'll go back to my first question on the
prescription drug monitoring programs. It's my understanding
that prescription drug monitoring programs are not allowed to
have data on patients receiving methadone.
On the other hand, buprenorphine prescribed in an office-
based setting is typically filled at the pharmacy, and
pharmacies can submit dispensing information to the PDMPs.
So methadone dispensing and buprenorphine dispensing are
treated unequally when it comes to this prescription drug
monitoring. What can the Department and Congress do to improve
safety and health outcomes for patients while still protecting
patient privacy?
Mr. Azar. I am glad you mentioned that.
I had not been aware of that issue with methadone reporting
into the prescription drug monitoring databases. I'll be happy
to look into that. I don't understand why that would be the
case. These can be very important vehicles to prevent physician
shopping as people try to abuse legal opioids. So I am happy to
look into that.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, thank you. I look forward to sharing
that with you and looking forward to getting the answers.
And I appreciate you being here. I know you've had a couple
of long days. And I have about 50 seconds left, so I just want
to say I actually drove to Greenbrier, and when I got there
everything that had happened, and they were interviewing Dr.
Burgess, and the person interviewing Dr. Burgess on the radio
kept trying to, well, ``Wasn't there fuel--wasn't there
whatever--essentially, did you run into a dangerous
situation?'' Dr. Burgess kept saying--like all the others
there, he kept saying, ``Well, I didn't think about that. I was
just trying to help people.''
So I've always known you to be a man of principle, and it's
great to verify also you're a man of character. So I appreciate
that very much, and I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. And Dr. Bucshon as well, of course, that day.
Mr. Guthrie. Yes--I have 14 seconds--yes, everybody. But I
heard you specifically say that. So I appreciate it.
Mr. Burgess. All right. If you're through praising me, I
was going to yield you another 15 minutes.
[Laughter.]
Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, I'll reserve my time.
Mr. Burgess. Gentleman reserves--the Chair recognizes the
gentleman from New Jersey, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary, the State of Idaho recently released guidelines
that would eviscerate critical protections that are enshrined
in Federal law and would potentially destabilize the health
insurance market.
Idaho would allow insurers to deny people with preexisting
conditions, not cover pediatric dental or vision care, charge
older Americans more, and exclude maternity and newborn
coverage.
I sent you and Administrator Verma a letter on this issue a
few weeks ago, and I asked questions about whether these
guidelines are in compliance with Federal law and, if not, what
the agency planned to do to enforce the law, and I received
what I consider an unacceptable response.
And I quote, it says, ``At this time, the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services does not have any additional
information to share regarding this bulletin. We are committed
to fulfilling our obligations under the law while continuing to
work with States to provide flexibility where possible and we
are happy to keep you informed of any developments.''
So Mr. Chairman, I'd like to ask unanimous consent to enter
my letter and the response into the record, and I'll give them
to you now.
Mr. Burgess. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pallone. And, again, this response is inadequate and
nonresponsive, so I'd like to use my time today to follow up on
some of the questions set forth in my letter, and where
possible I'd ask you to respond yes or no because we have only
got 3\1/2\ minutes.
Secretary, are you aware that the Affordable Care Act
imposes certain requirements on health insurance coverage
offered in the individual market, including, for example,
community ratings, coverage of preexisting conditions, and the
inclusion of essential health benefits? That, I think, can be a
yes or no.
Mr. Azar. That would be a yes, I am aware.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you.
Is it your impression that these requirements are optional
for States or able to be waived?
Mr. Azar. I would need to check under 1332 our waiver
authority against each of those. I still haven't sat with the
attorneys and learned all the parameters of what can be waived
or what can't be waived through our waiver----
Mr. Pallone. All right. Well, I'd ask you, if you could, to
get back to me in writing within, like, a week or so about that
because I don't think it would be that difficult to respond.
Secretary, are you aware that, under Section 2761 of the
Public Health Service Act, as Secretary of the Department you
have a legal obligation to enforce the law and take action
against any insurers offering noncompliant plans in the State
of Idaho?
Mr. Azar. So we have only--at this point, I've seen what's
in the press reports, and I've seen what Idaho has purported to
pass, and then just the recent news about the Blues' plan
coming in with a plan.
If that gets to the point where it's actually both
finalized as well as certified by the State or not certified,
where there is final action, we would certainly review that
and--a searching review for compliance with the legal
obligations that we have in our statutes.
Mr. Pallone. I mean, I appreciate that. But, you know, in
my opinion--and I know you don't agree with me--I think that,
you know, these news reports are pretty clear what they are
proposing, and I would think that, you know, if you felt--and I
do--that they were in violation of the law, you could initiate
and start some kind of investigation now. You wouldn't have to
wait until, you know, you see whether they are finalized or
not, because what my concern would be, that if we wait until
then, you know, they might already have a negative impact on
the public.
But explain to the committee--I know you haven't taken any
action against the State, you said, or any action against
insurers who are clearly in violation. But how long would this
take? You said, I have to wait until it's final. I mean, I am
concerned that this--you know, that this happens and people are
negatively impacted. You want to give me some kind of time
line, if you could?
Mr. Azar. Well, we are certainly not going to let anyone be
negatively impacted by noncompliance with the law. What we are
going to do, though, is not reach out--I just--I can't reach
out to every press report and----
Mr. Pallone. No, I know. But----
Mr. Azar [continuing]. Take enforcement action based on
information in press reports.
Mr. Pallone. You see, my concern though----
Mr. Azar. We are tracking it very closely, though.
Mr. Pallone. All right. But I just would like to make sure
that you complete an evaluation before the plans are approved
by Idaho and sold to consumers, which I am told by the news
report could happen as soon as April.
So can you at least assure me that your evaluation and
decision whether to go after them or not allow it would be made
before they approve it and sell it to consumers?
Mr. Azar. I cannot imagine a circumstance where we would
not evaluate it for compliance against the law before offered
to consumers.
I do think it's appropriate to wait to see even if the
State finds it in compliance with whatever their State laws
are. I don't see why we would be reaching in and picking up
matters out of press reports.
Mr. Pallone. All right.
Mr. Azar. We don't make it a habit of reviewing
applications of States.
Mr. Pallone. Would you at least assure me that you--would
you at least assure me that you wouldn't allow them to go ahead
and sell these things without doing that evaluation and
determining?
Mr. Azar. I fully expect that we would do so.
Mr. Pallone. All right.
Mr. Azar. I fully expect that would be--I can't imagine why
we would not.
Mr. Pallone. All right. I appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. Gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks the
gentleman.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, former
chairman of the full committee and the author of the Cures for
the 21st Century, Mr. Upton. You're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Upton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome, Mr.
Secretary, to our great committee.
I do have a couple questions. The opioid crisis--and I know
that this committee looks forward to a bipartisan series of
bills in the next number of weeks, moving forward--for me, I
have a district that's sort of a blend between rural and urban,
and I just want to know what some of your thoughts are
providing particularly technical assistance to some of those
communities that may not have the resources even though we know
that our more populated centers are stressed to the Nth degree
as well.
Mr. Azar. Thank you for asking about that.
I am just really very--I am just gratified, excited that on
a bipartisan basis we are able to tackle this opioid crisis and
the $10 billion of funding appears to be in the budget
agreement, and we have requested $3 billion of that for 2019 on
top of $3 billion in 2018 that we are hoping will come through
the omnibus.
So significant funding on top of the historically high
level of funding through 21st Century Cures that we put out in
2017.
We have one program in particular I wanted to call your
attention to for more rural areas. So through HRSA in 2019 we
would propose $150 million for rural substance abuse to
actually help those providers in more rural areas and ensure
there is adequate capacity there for treatment for addiction
and dependence.
We also would be putting $400 million into quality
improvement payments for our community health centers--just, by
way of example, some of the steps at the community level.
Mr. Upton. Yes. I visited a couple of our community health
centers, one in particular this week, and they do a really
amazing job and, again, one of the things that's certainly been
bipartisan as this committee has moved forward.
I don't know if you're familiar with this fire retardant
PFAS, which has been in the ground water and particularly in a
lot of our military installations from years past.
Our delegation--Michigan delegation--met formally earlier
this week, and I know that we on a bipartisan basis are looking
to do a letter to the appropriators asking that there may be
funding in this omnibus appropriation bill next month for the
Centers for Disease--a CDC study looking at how extensive that
is. Are you very familiar with this issue?
Mr. Azar. I am slightly familiar. Obviously, not as much as
you are.
I know that CDC is already working on gearing up and
preparing for that study work in the event of appropriation.
Mr. Upton. So, if you could help us on that, that would be
appropriate.
As the newly sworn-in Secretary of HHS, you are certainly
taking a very important role--oversight role on major Federal
and State programs.
There have been a couple of pretty high-profile State
budget battles not only--in particular, Illinois, which has had
a significant disruption in payments to vendors, which led to
hardships for some Medicaid recipients in that State.
I am working on a proposal that, again, I think will be
bipartisan to ensure that Medicaid beneficiaries are not
impacted by those budget battles by ensuring that managed care
plans can, with late payments from the State to third parties
in order to maintain a cash flow and continue paying their
front line providers who are, in turn, treating those Medicaid
beneficiaries.
I don't know if you're aware of that situation or not.
Mr. Azar. I am not, but I'd be happy to get back to you on
that if you could give more detail, because that's not a
situation--I know the Illinois issues on payment in the past,
certainly, but I hadn't heard of this particular third-party
issue.
Mr. Upton. Yes, they continue to--we are looking to try and
resolve that, particularly for the companies that are in
essence eating the--not getting paid for now years because of
those Illinois battles.
The last question I have is, in '05 Congress changed the
Medicaid--excluding the prompt-pay discounts from the AMP
calculation.
I've introduced legislation to fix the prompt-pay loophole
in order to treat prompt pay in Medicare the same as in
Medicaid, and as most businesses use it as a tool to make
markets work more efficiently. It will raise reimbursement for
community-based physicians to help improve access in less
expensive settings.
Does the administration support applying that same prompt-
pay policy in Medicare as well as in Medicaid?
Mr. Azar. This would be in the ASP+6 methodology----
Mr. Upton. Correct.
Mr. Azar [continuing]. And excluding it from ASP. I don't
know. That's a new issue to me. I have not heard about the
question of prompt pay within ASP submissions. Again, happy to
look at that and get back to you on that.
Mr. Upton. Yes. I may submit a formal question and let you
respond in the days ahead.
With that, yield back. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentleman.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms.
Schakowsky, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Secretary.
I am very concerned about the skyrocketing costs of and the
crushing burden of prescription drug prices. Families around
the country are struggling to be able to pay for them, and some
people are dying.
Tragically, Shane Patrick Boyle and Alec Raeshawn Smith
both died because they could not afford the jacked-up price of
insulin during the time that Eli Lilly was under your watch and
this occurred.
I think it's completely unacceptable. So you acknowledged
in your Senate Health Committee testimony and in your comments
today to Senator Sherrod Brown that the list price is part of
the problem.
So what I want to know is, what is HHS going to do
specifically to deal with the list price? I really don't want
to hear about the other ways that you may be under control of
the Medicaid negotiation or more generics. If there is nothing,
you can just tell me that there's nothing. But I really want to
know about the list price set by pharmaceutical companies.
Mr. Azar. So the list price is a problem, and so we have in
the budget proposal, one of the items is in Part B, the
physician-administered drugs, to actually have an inflation
penalty in there as we do in Medicaid, so that, if a pharma
company increases the price above inflation, there would be a
reduction in the reimbursement that would be offered by
Medicare and that then flows through also to the patient, who
pays a share of that at the point of sale or at the doctor's
office.
We also are looking at--we proposed five major reforms to
the Part D program, several of which we think actually reverse
the incentives for high list prices.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK. Let me interrupt--let me interrupt for
just a second.
Again, there are sectoral ways that you might be dealing.
So we are dealing with Medicare, dealing with Medicaid.
But in terms of doing something for all consumers of drugs,
is there not something that can be done about these list prices
that--it's like, in dealing with an avalanche, we are dealing
with the middle of the avalanche rather than the top of the
avalanche, which is really the issue of the list price.
Mr. Azar. Well, if--there is only one list price. So if we
can use our influence through these Government programs and
create incentives towards lower or flatter list prices, it
benefits everybody.
So that actually is what we are trying to do,
Congresswoman.
Ms. Schakowsky. So you're saying if, in Medicare Part D,
that you would do that--that that would affect the list price
for everyone, including people not in Medicare Part D?
Mr. Azar. It creates a disincentive towards higher list
price, and that list price is the same across the entire
sector. There is one list price. It's called the wholesale
acquisition cost. And so that would impact everybody and
benefit everyone if we can do that. What we are trying to do is
look for, and I am open to ideas you would have--how do we--
every incentive in the system right now is towards higher list
prices.
Ms. Schakowsky. Exactly.
Mr. Azar. And we create incentive towards lower or flatter
list prices that respect--that way it respects innovation, it
respects marketplaces, but actually make the finances in the
market work to push down list prices.
Ms. Schakowsky. I would hope so, because otherwise the
least insured person is going to be the one that's going to pay
that jacked-up price so that the pharmaceutical companies can
continue to make their profits if we don't do it across the
board.
Mr. Azar. I agree with you.
Ms. Schakowsky. So OK. I wanted to, in the time remaining--
so last week, as the ranking member of the now-defunct select
panel that was dealing with the issue of fetal tissue, I wrote
to you with the other Democratic members of that panel raising
questions about HHS Office of Civil Rights chief, Chief of
Staff March Bell, who I--well, worked with is not quite the
right word--who was the chief counsel to Chairman Blackburn on
the panel.
Mr. Bell has acknowledged working with David Delaiden, who
was indicted for his action in creating the highly edited video
that prompted the panel's beginning even in the first place.
And by the way, I ask unanimous consent, Mr. Chairman, to
submit that letter that I wrote into the record.
Mr. Burgess. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Schakowsky. So these connections pose a serious risk
with March Bell's new position at HHS. So I would like to know,
yes or no, given the ethical questions surrounding Mr. Bell's
conduct during the select panel's investigation, can you commit
that March Bell will be recused from any case pending before
OCR on fetal tissue or abortion services?
Mr. Azar. We just received the letter that you sent, and I
appreciate your raising these concerns. We will look at them
seriously, and we will work with the career-designated agency
ethics official and ensure that he and we follow any applicable
Government ethics rules on recusal.
Ms. Schakowsky. And I am happy, and I think other members
of the panel--that were members of the panel--would be happy to
work with you, as well. We were mistreated, and the connections
that he had were really unacceptable.
So I thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. The
gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Latta, 5
minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you very
much, Mr. Secretary, for being with us today. And before I
begin my questions, I'd like to thank your staff at FDA for all
their hard work and collaboration on the OTC monograph reform
work that we are doing, and I look forward to working together
to get this important legislation across the finish line.
As you mentioned in your testimony, one of the HHS' top
priorities is and should be tackling the opioid epidemic, and
you've heard from the former full committee chairman about the
issues that opioids are having across this country.
The misuse of opioids is taking lives of individuals far
too soon, and the crisis is particularly horrific in Ohio. A
recent report indicates Ohio's drug overdose deaths rose 39
percent between mid-2016 to 2017.
That's the third-largest increase among States. More
importantly, that's 5,232 lives lost in a 12-month span.
This crisis is devastating families and our communities. In
December 2017, HHS held a symposium and code-athon to identify
and develop data-driven solutions to the opioid epidemic.
It is my understanding the event went well and helped to
develop ideas that could become foundational solutions to the
problem. It seems the event also highlighted the continued
challenge the Federal Government has in leveraging data across
departments and agencies, particularly within HHS, given the
sensitivity of health data.
Mr. Secretary, what do you need from Congress to enable
data sharing within HHS across your own agencies and with other
departments in a safe and secure manner that both protects
patient privacy and facilitates innovative solutions?
Mr. Azar. Congressman, I have not had raised to me the
issues of any data security or data transfer issues within HHS
among our agencies.
So I'd love to check back with our folks and see what they
came up with, and if there are authorities that we would need
to enable effective transfer of information and collaboration,
I certainly agree that we need to be doing that.
Mr. Latta. OK. Let me go on because, again, especially in
Ohio, as I said, this is truly an epidemic.
Continuing with the data discussion, I have a bill, the
Indexing Narcotics, Fentanyl, and Opioids Info Act, that seeks
to improve how communities respond to the epidemic by putting
information on Federal funding, efforts on prevention and
treatment data on effective programs, and data on areas hit
hardest by opioid abuse all in one place.
In what ways is HHS currently working to make the data
surrounding the epidemic more easily accessible to the public,
and if I could just be more specific: In my district and when
I've been across the State of Ohio, I've heard from
departments, agencies. They have a very hard time. They don't
have grant writers, and they are trying to get help and they
can't find the help really out there, and they also are trying
to find where the money is to help facilitate this.
So it's really--does HHS have something out there right now
that the communities and law enforcement could be looking at to
get some help?
Mr. Azar. So, if the concern is around sharing best
practices, that's actually something that I've spoken with our
SAMHSA administrator about--how we can create better vehicles
to ensure that what we learn from one State can be taken by
others without reinventing the wheel.
In fact, just this week, the President and I separately
have spoken with Governor Kasich about the work going on in
Ohio and what best practices from there we might be able to
take and translate out to others States as having been sitting
in the epicenter of the opioid crisis.
Mr. Latta. OK, because also just--you know, again, to
follow up, though--if someone's out there looking for something
right now that HHS might have to help them, could they out
online and find it right now?
Mr. Azar. I believe at the SAMHSA.gov Web site but also
certainly just letting--calling in into SAMHSA, we would be
very happy to point them to available resources that we have.
Mr. Latta. OK. And because, again, I think maybe just
follow up again because, if you could provide the specific
steps. So if someone--you say they'd have to go to the SAMHSA
website? And again, I want to thank HHS, because they have been
in my district at one of our events that we had to get
information out to the public from HHS and SAMHSA.
But, again, what I am hearing from the people in my
district is that they can't find the information. So, again,
that's why I've introduced the legislation, to try to make it
more accessible.
You have a one-stop shop, you might say, that you can find
this information. So I'd like to work with you all on this as
we go forward because, again, this is what we hear from back
home, from our departments or agencies or ADAMHS boards. But
it's critical for them to get the help, get the information.
Mr. Azar. Happy to work with you on that.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. Gentleman yields back. Chair thanks the
gentleman.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from California, Ms.
Matsui, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Secretary Azar, for being here today with us.
Mr. Azar, you previously stated that one of your top goals
as Secretary is to address the opioid epidemic. The President's
proposed budget acknowledges the fight that States and local
communities are waging against the crisis and proposes
increasing some funding for prevention efforts.
I share this goal and appreciate the additional funding,
particularly for things like community behavioral health
clinics.
However, the massive cuts this budget makes to Medicaid and
the repeal of the Affordable Care Act would undo any progress
made and, indeed, take a step backwards in our efforts to
provide treatment to those suffering from a substance abuse
disorder.
To take it a step further, the proposed budget preserves
the CMS OPPS rule that is an attack on the 340B drug discount
program. The purpose of this program is to allow hospitals and
clinics to stretch scarce Federal resources to serve the
underserved.
So taking a piece of that away takes away critical
resources that these providers are using for things like
fighting the opioid epidemic on the ground in our communities.
Giving some of those savings back to the hospitals that
have high levels of charity care not only does not make sense
administratively, it wrongly indicates that 340B providers are
not already serving the vulnerable.
That is the point. In fact, the flexibility allowed by the
savings in the program allows hospitals to do things like open
new clinics in rural or underserved areas. Why would we want to
take that away?
It seems evident that this budget is taking money from the
very communities the Trump administration claims to want to
help. The 340B program, a crucial player in our fight against
opioids, does not cost a dime of taxpayers' money. It should be
a program with strong bipartisan support. I cannot comprehend
why it is under attack.
As I said, this budget proposes to cut Medicaid by over
$1.4 trillion through block grants and per capita caps. And
yet, shoring up Medicaid and strengthening that program is
perhaps the single best thing we can do to battle the opioid
crisis.
Medicaid covers 4 in 10 nonelderly adults with an opioid
addiction and a full 80 percent of treatment for infants with
neonatal abstinence syndrome. It is the largest insurer for
children and a lifeline for their parents. Often, Medicaid is
the only way those with an opioid addiction come into the
healthcare system for treatment.
Your rhetoric on the opioid epidemic is not matched by your
actions. Cutting the very insurance coverage that treats these
people for ideological reasons--the coverage that provides
opioid abuse treatment--will not help us address the opioid
epidemic.
The President's budget has made it abundantly clear that
he's not serious about this epidemic. Secretary Azar, do you
agree that Medicaid is a critical tool in the fight against the
opioid crisis?
Mr. Azar. Our Medicaid program is an important tool in
providing healthcare to many Americans, but we also have to put
it on a stable long-term sustainable footing for it to be there
for this and future generations.
That's the challenge that we have, and we want to empower
the States so that they have the right incentives to actually
deliver quality service, and for the States the opioid crisis
is front and center, and so they will design their programs in
the best way possible for them to be able----
Ms. Matsui. We understand that. However, Medicaid has been
a success and I really truly feel that eliminating the
Medicaid--this is really truly eliminating the Medicaid
entitlement, for all intents and purposes, by cutting by $1.4
trillion.
Now, the Affordable Care Act then only expanded Medicaid to
cover those who often had no access to employer-sponsored
coverage. It ensured that plans offered actually cover services
that people need, from preventive care to inpatient hospital
care.
Secretary Azar, do you believe in the value of preventive
health services?
Mr. Azar. I think we all share the goal of preventive
health services.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Do you believe that people are more likely
to seek and receive preventive health services when they are
free of charge?
Mr. Azar. People are going to seek--if they are insured and
they have the ability to seek out preventive services, they are
going to more likely utilize services.
Ms. Matsui. Right.
Mr. Azar. Sometimes they may overutilize from free of
charge, as opposed to having cost sharing----
Ms. Matsui. Well, preventive care, though, is really
important.
Do you believe people are more likely to seek and receive
preventive health and chronic condition management services
when they are available locally in the community, whether in
person or remotely?
Mr. Azar. Well, we want to make sure that services are
available and are accessible to people through community health
centers, through telehealth, through alternative service
providers. That's part of our agenda, is to make sure that
healthcare is affordable and accessible to people.
Ms. Matsui. So do you also believe that a person is more
likely to seek medical treatment if they have health insurance
than if they were uninsured?
Mr. Azar. We all share the goal of helping to make
insurance be affordable and accessible to individuals. The
challenge is our current individual system under the Affordable
Care Act is not delivering on that promise for 28 million
Americans for whom it's unaffordable.
Ms. Matsui. Many of the provision in this budget claim to
provide choice to patients when really they are just allowing
patients to once again be offered less substantial coverage and
services.
With that, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. The
gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Lance, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon to
you, Mr. Secretary. Congratulations to you on your appointment
and your confirmation, and I look forward to working with you.
As you are aware, the administration received additional
resources for the FDA--I believe it was $486 million--as a
result of the 2-year budget agreement the President has signed
into law.
With these new funds we understand that the FDA will
continue to do everything possible to bring safe new therapies
to consumers as quickly as possible such as by investing in
continuous manufacturing research, and that is research that is
being done in part at universities in New Jersey.
The administration worked with this committee on the 21st
Century Cures Act 2 years ago and took a major step toward
facilitating the further development of this technology.
Mr. Secretary, could you please explain to the committee
how this new funding could advance efforts such as these?
Mr. Azar. Absolutely. Thank you, Congressman.
We appreciate the work of this committee through 21st
Century Cures to reinvigorate and strengthen the FDA for the
21st century and the funding that we got through the budget
deal.
This enables us actually to increase year-on-year FDA
discretionary funding by $663 million, which allows us to put a
huge investment to speed approval of new drugs and devices as
well as to invest in our core quality and safety programs.
So we are quite excited about this at FDA and think this
will really help us with speeding access to safe, quality
medicines for patients.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
I am pleased to see that the administration's budget
request includes changes to Part D that will help lower costs
to senior citizens by passing on negotiated discounts and
rebates to beneficiaries.
Would you please update the committee on this proposal, Mr.
Secretary?
Mr. Azar. Thank you so much, Congressman, for asking about
that.
We have a five-part proposal with the Part D drug program,
with the idea of how do we lower out-of-pocket costs for our
senior citizens.
The first thing that we are requesting Congress do is
require that the insurers pass at least one-third of the
rebates they receive from the drug companies on to the senior
citizen when they walk into the pharmacy at the point of sale.
The second is to create, for the first time ever, a genuine
out-of-pocket maximum for seniors so that, when they hit
catastrophic coverage, they will pay nothing for their drugs.
We would also fix an incentive in the system, where right
now these high list prices keep pushing people to catastrophic
coverage, where we, the Feds, are on the hook for 80 percent of
that. We want to flip that so that the insurance companies are
on the hook for 80 percent and we are on the hook for 20, so
that they will push back to keep those list prices down.
We also want to give free generics to our low-income
seniors who are in the drug program. So free generics
throughout for them.
And we want to give the plans more flexibility to negotiate
against drug companies, loosening up some of the rules that
they have against them.
Mr. Lance. And, Mr. Secretary, I hope that these plans
might be put in place as quickly as possible.
Mr. Azar. We will need to work with Congress on that. But
this collection of efforts, including others I didn't have a
chance to mention, could save seniors tens of billions of
dollars in out-of-pocket savings on top of the $3.2 billion of
savings President Trump already delivered through the Part B
regulation that's been discussed here already, from saving out-
of-pocket expense for seniors.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I look forward to
working with you on that issue as well as others. I have
confidence in you based upon your distinguished career in the
private sector and in the public sector working with President
Bush and also your distinguished tenure with two of the best
jurists in the history of the Nation, and I congratulate you on
your becoming the Secretary of HHS.
Thank you, and Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentleman.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Florida, 5 minutes
for questions, please.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Chairman Burgess, and welcome, Mr.
Secretary. I appreciate your comments at the outset of the
hearing regarding the school shooting in Parkland, Florida.
That's now the eighteenth school shooting in America so far
this year, and we are here in mid-February. In America, about
96 Americans die every day at the hands of a firearm. That
includes domestic violence, incident suicides. More Americans
have died from gun violence in America since 1970 than all who
lost their lives in every war in the history of our country,
and another completely saddening statistic is that more
preschoolers die every year because of gun violence than police
officers.
So I appreciate your sentiments that we have to do more
when it comes to mental health resources. Would you also commit
here today that you will act in a proactive fashion to support
new efforts for gun violence safety research at the agencies
under your purview, including the Centers for Disease Control?
Mr. Azar. Thank you, Congresswoman. Again, our sympathies
to those of you from Florida.
We believe we have got a very important mission with our
work with serious mental illness as well as our ability to do
research on the causes of violence and causes behind tragedies
like this.
So that is a priority for us, at especially at the Centers
for Disease Control.
Ms. Castor. So specifically on my question--you know, there
was a rider that has been added to various appropriations bills
over time that has had a chilling effect and, in essence, has
acted as a ban on the Centers for Disease Control conducting
gun violence safety prevention research just like we do with
automobile accidents that has really ended up saving a lot of
lives over time.
Would you commit to that specifically, on gun violence
prevention safety research?
Mr. Azar. So my understanding is that the rider does not in
any way impede our ability to conduct our research mission. It
is simply about advocacy.
Ms. Castor. So will you proactively speak out now, knowing
we have had our eighteenth school shooting here? We are mid-
February, and 96 Americans on average die a day. Will you be
proactive on the research initiative?
Mr. Azar. We certainly will. Our Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention--we are in the science business and the
evidence-generating business and----
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Mr. Azar [continuing]. So I will have our agency certainly
be working in this field as they do across the broad spectrum
of disease control intervention.
Ms. Castor. And we are going to hold you to it.
And Chairman Burgess, this is an important topic for our
committee. I wonder, would you commit to holding a hearing on
specifically just the topic of gun violence prevention
research? That's the purview of this committee.
Would you commit today to holding a hearing? The Democrats
had a hearing on our own, but we've got to work on a bipartisan
way on this. Would you commit to holding a hearing here in the
next few months?
Mr. Burgess. The committee is open to all suggestions, and
I think we've shown that track record over the past year and 2
months.
Ms. Castor. We haven't had a hearing on this. But thank
you, Mr. Chairman. We will hold you to that.
Speaking of the CDC, we are now living through a worse-
than-expected flu season. Over the past years, we have had
Zika, Ebola, and I am very troubled by the Trump
administration's proposal for a $1 billion cut at the Centers
for Disease Control. I mean, this is weakening our public
health research, and I heard what you said--that you support
science.
Then why is a $1 billion cut to the CDC a good idea?
Mr. Azar. Well, that's actually not what's happening. The
$1 billion--most of that is the transfer of the leadership and
supervision and budget for the strategic national stockpile--
simply a transfer of that function to the Assistant Secretary
for Preparedness and Response.
And then the rest is the transfer, again, of the National
Institute of Occupational Safety and Health to be within the
NIH, where we believe it more accurately fits the research
function. So----
Ms. Castor. But then you also--you're cutting $140 million
from chronic disease prevention and health promotion programs
that will limit our ability to control these very chronic
health conditions--cutting $60 million from emerging infectious
disease programs.
I just don't think that's wise in the days of--when we have
had Ebola and Zika, and the CDC has such an important mission
and prevention is so important.
Mr. Azar. Actually, what we have done is invest the $500
million in chronic disease and prevention through the America's
Health block grant, $263 million through our immunization
program, and $137 million in the emerging infectious disease
and zoonotic disease----
Ms. Castor. Fortunately----
Mr. Azar [continuing]. And we regularize that now to not be
in the prevention fund but actually move it to the
discretionary side so it's part of our organic ongoing
operations of the CDC that put us on a sounder footing for the
future. I think----
Ms. Castor. Well, I hope that's the case. We are going to
exercise our oversight role aggressively, and fortunately, in a
bipartisan way, we beat back significant cuts to the CDC
proposed by the Trump administration last year, and I hope we
will do so again.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Burgess. Gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Indiana, Dr.
Bucshon, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Mr.
Secretary. Thank you for all the work that you will be doing
and have done on behalf of the American people.
In June 2015, a GAO report found that, and I quote, ``There
is a financial incentive at hospitals participating in the 340B
program to prescribe more drugs, prescribe more expensive drugs
to Medicare beneficiaries.'' Again, that's a quote. That's not
my comment--GAO report, 2015.
A hospital is able to purchase these drugs at a significant
discount with no requirement to pass along savings to the
patient or Medicare.
Do you believe that additional program requirements,
including targeted guardrails and reporting on the use of 340B
program savings, would help us reverse this unintended
consequence?
Mr. Azar. Congressman, I think that the Energy and Commerce
Committee has done some exceptional work in looking at the 340B
program and finding where it's not maybe meeting all of its
purposes and where better oversight is needed.
One of the things that we have proposed through the budget
is actually enhanced regulatory authority and oversight
authority for HRSA and for this important program.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. Thank you.
And I am also concerned about the increase in cost of
healthcare for consumers, and I am interested in ways to
address the problem.
Experts and researchers, including some providing testimony
in our oversight subcommittee hearing--just yesterday,
actually--have expressed concern that the 340B program
incentivizes hospital consolidation, and this consolidation can
increase costs for patients.
A recent New England Journal of Medicine study funded by
HRSA and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation found that the
final hospital outpatient rule from CMS that would--and I am
quoting again, ``Lower drug reimbursements to hospitals
participating in the 340B program could slow hospital-physician
consolidation while not adversely affecting care for low-income
patients served by general acute hospitals.''
How does this finding from a leading medical journal
influence your thinking about potential new policies in 340B?
Mr. Azar. I think it's undeniable that 340B has actually
led to consolidations, especially hospital acquisition of
independent physicians to be able to take advantage of the
acquisition of drug cost or physician-administered drugs to be
at a lower cost and have that arbitrage.
We have seen that in the practice of oncology. So I think
it's undeniable that that is going on. And so as we look at
reforms in 340B to ensure that it serves its purpose of getting
medicine as affordable as possible to low-income and uninsured
individuals and to support those who do, we need to--we
certainly want to examine those guardrails.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes. I mean, I just want to say for the record
I support the 340B program. I think it's a very important
program.
I have a lot of rural hospitals and other hospitals across
the State that really need the 340B program. But I also support
more oversight within the program, based on the Energy and
Commerce Committee's final report that came out from our O&I
Subcommittee oversight hearings on the program.
I am going to make a quick comment, I mean, based on one of
my colleagues' comments--and this is not a question to you, Mr.
Secretary--but I want to point out that I was on the Select
Committee for Infant Lives, and it has been discussed here
about trying to deflect from the findings of that subcommittee.
And I just want to say that what our Select Committee found
and sent criminal referrals to the Department of Justice
against, organizations that were selling human body parts for
profit--the good news is they are not doing it anymore because
they are completely shut down. So I just wanted to clarify that
deflecting from the subcommittee's work and our final report,
it doesn't change the fact that some will go to pretty long--
well, extensive lengths to protect Planned Parenthood in
addition to other organizations that are performing abortions
in the United States.
And then, so the FDA Commissioner Gottlieb has also stated
publicly that the Congress should take action to clarify the
regulation on LDTs--laboratory-developed tests--and
Congresswoman Diana DeGette and I have draft legislation, and
right now we have submitted to the FDA and CMS for technical
assistance and we are waiting for those results.
So I hope we can count on the full cooperation of HHS as we
work through this process, because it's really a critical piece
of legislation and some critical reforms.
Mr. Azar. We will certainly be happy to continue that
technical assistance in that very complex area of lab-developed
tests.
Mr. Bucshon. It is very, very complex. Again, thank you for
your service.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. Was the gentleman thanking the chairman for
his service?
Mr. Bucshon. Thanking the Secretary and the chairman, of
course, for his service.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman
yields back. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Maryland,
Mr. Sarbanes, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the
Secretary for being here.
I want to pick up on the first part of my time where
Representative Castor left off in terms of research being
conducted by your agency and by the CDC into gun violence.
Yesterday, obviously, another community was forced to make
sense of what is really a uniquely American tragedy, which are
these school shootings we have seen.
This it at least the 273rd school shooting nationwide since
Sandy Hook occurred back in 2012. In those shootings, 439
people have been injured, 121 people have died, and we keep
sending our thoughts and prayers to the victimized families.
But we really should be sending them laws that put in place
commonsense gun safety measures.
Members of Congress, that's our job. I mean, we provide
thoughts and prayers. There are others who are in a better
position to do that. Our job is to actually change the law to
try to address these tragedies.
I just assume--I mean, I know you had testimony yesterday,
I think, on the Hill and earlier this morning. So you've not
been back in the office since then.
But I got to believe that this would--another tragedy like
what we saw yesterday would just be an all-hands-on-deck moment
for you and those around you, your team, to look in the agency,
figure out how you can assemble some resources and put them
behind some serious research into gun violence. Is that
something that your team is undertaking now?
Mr. Azar. Well, as you know, I am with you, so I am not
back at the Department at the moment, so I'll have to check and
see what's going on in terms of that.
But with any kind of public health emergency or response
we, of course, will update the Secretary's emergency operation
center to ensure, for instance, with the response situation
here, what's the hospital capacity--are we able to care for
those who are injured--what is the census of local----
Mr. Sarbanes. So I am going to interrupt you, because I am
talking about a different kind of response. I get that
response. I understand that you want to support the first
responders that are on the ground, the hospitals that are
taking the victims.
I am talking about a response that says this is a public
health crisis and our agency, which is charged with dealing
with public health and is the Department of Health and Human
Services, is going to have to really ramp up the kind of
research--public health research--we do into this crisis of gun
violence--an epidemic of gun violence across the country.
So is that a commitment--as Representative Castor asked
you, I am asking you again--is that a commitment that the
agency and that you, new to the job, are prepared to commit to?
Mr. Azar. So we will continue to look at it across our
range. We have many public health issues and priorities that we
have to investigate and conduct research on and what programs
there are and studies that are available that are being worked
on at the CDC.
So I am happy to look into what is currently going on and
get back to you on that. I am just not aware of--I am 14 days
there, so I am not aware of every single research program that
we have and every study that's being conducted at the moment.
Mr. Sarbanes. Well, I hope you'll do that and, Mr.
Chairman, I want to echo the request that we have some kind of
hearing that addresses this issue of gun violence as a public
health crisis.
Real quickly, let me shift gears. I understand that the
administration is looking at expanding what are called these
short-term limited duration plans, coverage plans which, in a
sense, are these kind of skinny junk plans where you don't have
the same kind of protections, you can exclude coverage for
pregnancy and childbirth if you're an insurer that offers these
kinds of things, you can exclude coverage for mental illness or
nervous disorders, for alcohol or drug dependence, et cetera--
all the kinds of things we were trying to address in the
individual market previously.
But now there is this move on the part of the
administration, and I assume it's going to be going through
your office, to make these skinny plans that don't have the
kind of coverage protections in place more widely available.
You cannot believe that that is moving in a positive
direction. I wanted to ask you to address that.
Mr. Azar. Well, as you know, the short-term limited
duration plans were supported and available during the entirety
of the Obama administration as a vehicle available to
individuals in transition and for whom the Affordable Care
Act----
Mr. Sarbanes. Right, for a short transition period.
Mr. Azar [continuing]. The individual market for 365 days a
year up until October of 2016.
Mr. Sarbanes. Right. But going forward, there is a move on
the part of the President to expand both the time frame and
allow more of these junk coverage provisions to be in place.
I hope that we are not going to start moving in that
direction, because it undermines the very principles that were
fundamental to the Affordable Care Act and providing a higher
level of coverage.
So I hope you'll be vigilant and make sure that those plans
don't begin to swallow up the kind of decent coverage that
Americans can expect across the country.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman
yields back.
The Chair recognizes the chairman of the full committee,
Mr. Walden of Oregon, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Walden. I thank the chairman, and again, Mr. Secretary,
thank you for being here.
Our committee is spending a lot of time on the opioids
investigation and trying to deal with this killer in our
communities.
I know in my State more people die from opioids overdoses
than in traffic accidents, and I think that's pretty close to
the case across the country. Every day, every hour, people are
losing their lives. And so our focus has been and will be
continue to be on the opioid epidemic.
Prescription drug monitoring programs, or PDMPs, can be
effective in improving the prescribing of controlled substances
in addressing the opioid crisis. More and more PDMPs are being
used as public health tools. However, current Federal efforts
to support PDMPs are not well coordinated.
However, the following programs could support PDMPs: the
Harold Rogers PDMP program run out of the Bureau of Justice
Assistance; National All-Schedules Prescription Electronic
Reporting Act administered by SAMHSA but hasn't been funded
since 2010; State demonstration grants for compressive opioid
abuse response, which also has not been funded; CDC's Opioid
Prevention in States grants, which provide the most supports to
the States; are not even authorized in statute; and finally,
the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information
Technology supported PDMP integration with health IT, but this
effort only lasted from 2011 to 2013.
So what is HHS doing to better coordinate all of these
efforts? How can we better assist to address the needs of
States to get timely, complete, and accurate information into
the hands of providers and dispensers so they are able to make
the best clinical decisions for their patients?
What should we do in this space? What can you do in this
space?
Mr. Azar. So these can be--these prescription drug
monitoring programs, these registries, can be very important
vehicles to assist prescribers and pharmacists with knowing if
they are dealing with a patient who is basically prescription
shopping, physician shopping, pharmacy shopping, they've been
shut down one place, they go somewhere else to get around the
system.
In our budget proposal, we actually are asking Congress to
require that States have effective programs for this type of
risk identification and risk mitigation for prescribers,
pharmacists, and patients that are overutilizing,
overprescribing, overdispensing.
We don't specifically ask Congress to dictate the vehicle
of it through the prescription drug monitoring programs. I am
interested in looking more into the issue of interoperability.
States have developed these programs already independently,
and so there is a resource and burden question about forcing
that interoperability to try to be nationwide. But, say, in
Ohio, West Virginia, or Kentucky, where they are bordering and
you could ease the abuse, I'd like to look at ways we can
certainly encourage them to work towards connecting their
systems up for ready interstate checking.
Mr. Walden. I border Washington, Idaho, Nevada, and
California with my district, and I know this is an issue I've
heard about out there, and there is some collaboration and
coordination. But it seems to me that part of what happens with
people who are addicted, the desire is so high they are going
to find every avenue that they can to satisfy it. And so it's
something I think is really important.
And, you know, we get a lot of questions about this
potential allocation of money available under the CAPs to do
work on opioids--you know, Where should it go?
Have you have a chance to give any thought to where you
think the money could best be spent and have the most impact?
Mr. Azar. So, for the initial allocation that we have
requested, which is the $3 billion in 2019, $1.24 billion of
that would go to SAMHSA. One billion of that would go out to
States in the State-targeted response grants, and so that's
doubling what the 21st Century Cures funding was over the last
2 years.
We have got a very interesting $150 million new program for
rural substance abuse----
Mr. Walden. Good.
Mr. Azar [continuing]. To really support providers in rural
areas, a program for $150 million on infectious disease
transmission to help with HIV/AIDS transmission, Hep C, $74
million to help communities buy naloxone for first responders--
--
Mr. Walden. Good.
Mr. Azar [continuing]. For overdose, drug court support,
pregnant mother support, medically assisted treatment support,
investing in all of those.
Seven hundred and fifty million of it, we would be sending
to NIH to support next-generation nonopioid pain treatment
development and devices as well as the best cutting-edge
research on other forms of pain management. CDC, FDA also would
receive funding.
So we have got a game plan that we already are articulating
there.
Mr. Walden. Excellent. Excellent.
All right. We will look forward to working with you on
that. Mr. Chairman, my time has expired.
Mr. Burgess. Gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks the
gentleman.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Kennedy, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, thank
you for your service. Thank you for appearing before us today.
I've got a couple of minutes. I want to try to get through
this quickly. My colleagues have, obviously, already touched on
the fact that under your responsibilities resides the--or under
your umbrella resides the Centers for Disease Control. They
touched on the fact that 17 students went to school yesterday
and did not come back. They've touched upon the fact that
nearly 100 Americans die every day because of gun violence.
No one needs reminding in this committee or otherwise that
this is an epidemic that has infected our schools, our
concerts--60 dead, 800 wounded just a few months ago--our
churches.
I received an email last night, or early this morning, from
a 17-year-old high school student in my district, Mr.
Secretary, that said, ``I don't think proper words can address
my concerns. These school shootings scare me. I am scared that
my school will be next, that my friends will be next, or that I
will be next.
``I don't think it's selfish to want to be safe in school,
is it? Not just for the victims. I imagine losing the people I
love in an awful way like that and simply decide not to imagine
it. There are kids who lose their best friends every day to
this increasingly normal tragedy.''
Something needs to happen here. Mr. Secretary, please, I
ask you--and echoes of my colleagues here--to do everything
that you can to make sure that a major public health crisis is
going to be addressed under your tenure at HHS. Will you
reiterate that pledge?
Mr. Azar. So I will be happy to look, as I mentioned
earlier, to look at what we have invested and if we have the
right programs and the right level of research in this field
and get back to you on that.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, sir.
Shifting gears a bit here onto Medicaid. There has been
much written and said over the course of the past couple of
months about Medicaid work requirements.
Mr. Secretary, I am under the impression that the mission
of your organization is to, quote, ``enhance and protect the
health and well-being of all Americans.'' That's correct,
right?
Mr. Azar. Absolutely.
Mr. Kennedy. And am I to then understand that the policy of
this administration is that there is a direct link, a causal
link, between working and healthier outcomes for Americans?
Mr. Azar. We actually do believe that there is a causal
link between those who are trained, educated, and able to
work--for those who are able--and better health outcomes. And
so we do believe in supporting that.
Mr. Kennedy. Mr. Secretary, that's not the same question,
respectfully. That somebody that is better trained, educated,
and able to work is healthier is different than a work
requirement makes people healthier.
In fact, I believe a recent study put out--might have been
today--indicates that the cost per patient in delivery of
Medicaid in Kentucky is actually going to go up, not down, with
the imposition of the work requirement. Have you seen that
study?
Mr. Azar. I have not seen that study.
Mr. Kennedy. Oh. Well, we can submit it for the record for
you.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Kennedy. Shifting gears, as well, not only are there
pieces put in place around Medicaid work requirements, there
are disturbing reports coming out that at least five States and
that CMS is entertaining the possibility of putting on lifetime
caps on Medicaid.
I want to try to understand this. Would it be the policy of
this administration that it would be recommending that lifetime
caps would somehow make a population healthier?
Mr. Azar. There are requests that are coming in along those
lines. We do not have a position on this, and I do not want to
speculate on the ruling on a waiver. But that is not something
that we have invited in terms of waiver requests, and so we do
not have a position on that at this point.
Mr. Kennedy. And I understand that the administration might
not, and I understand that that's going through the process at
the moment. But could you, perhaps given--I know you've only
been there for a couple weeks, but you've got a lifetime of
service in healthcare. You are truly--you're an expert, you
were confirmed by the Senate, in a closely divided Senate, to
this role. I assume you have some idea as to whether putting a
lifetime cap on Medicaid would make a Medicaid population
healthier.
Mr. Azar. I understand the importance of this issue. I do
not want to speculate without actually looking at it in the
context of the request that we received. But we do not have a
view that is supportive of it or against it. We need to look at
it. I need to talk to our team as we evaluate any requests that
come in on this--on this one.
Mr. Kennedy. OK. Perhaps then, if I am to understand what a
lifetime cap would actually mean, my understanding of the tax
code is that there is in fact a taxpayer subsidy that goes to
employer-sponsored healthcare. Is that right?
Mr. Azar. There is, yes.
Mr. Kennedy. And so what we are basically saying is healthy
people can enjoy that taxpayer subsidy for their healthcare,
but when it comes to being poor, if you get really sick, we
could cut you off. Is that right?
Mr. Azar. No. Again, I don't--I have not reviewed any of
these waivers or requests that some States appear to be making,
so I couldn't even speak to what they are asking for at this
point. This is quite fresh.
Mr. Kennedy. Well, there is public reports from The Hill
and from the Washington Post indicating that five States are
putting that forward. It might be going through your process,
but I am trying to get some guidance as to whether the position
of this administration is going to be that if you are healthy,
you can get taxpayer subsidies, but if you are poor and sick,
you don't.
Mr. Azar. I don't make it a practice to rule on very
serious matters based on what's in The Hill.
Mr. Kennedy. Fair enough. Yield back.
Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman
yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr.
Mullin, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Mullin. I appreciate, Mr. Secretary, you not making
decisions based on The Hill information, although some of it is
quite entertaining.
Mr. Secretary, thank you so much for being here. Mr.
Chairman, thank you for allowing me to ask some questions. I am
going to get right into it.
Mr. Secretary, I was happy to see that HHS is setting aside
$10 billion for the opioid and serious mental health issues.
But I was surprised to see there was no mention about amending
the CFR 42 Part 2.
The President's opioid commissioner and former CDC
administrator both believe that we need to amend Part 2. I was
kind of getting your position. Have you looked at Part 2 to see
what your thoughts are on----
Mr. Azar. I apologize. Could you help educate me what Part
2 is? That's not a provision I am familiar with.
Mr. Mullin. Well, so----
Mr. Azar. The substance of it--I don't know the substance.
Mr. Mullin. Well, we have a bill right now, H.R. 3545, that
I'll be happy to work with you on this if you want to. We'd
love to educate your office on it. We have literally 4 minutes
here, and I don't think I could go through Part 2 enough to get
to it.
But this is something that I have taken on that has been
extremely important to me so I appreciate your honest answer on
that. If you would like to have your office contact us. You
guys are shaking your head. Right on. I appreciate that.
Because we have--we feel like we have a fix for this in our
office. So if you'll just meet with us. The bill is H.R. 3545.
Mr. Azar. OK.
Mr. Mullin. And we have had a hearing on it before in here.
But I understand you've only been there two or three weeks,
so--and by the way, I really do appreciate the time. You get
confirmed and then all of a sudden it goes, ``Wow, what did I
get myself into,'' right?
One more thing I want to get into, I also chair the Indian
Health Service Task Force, which is very important to me, being
Cherokee. The opioid epidemic has unproportionately hit Native
Americans.
I have the privilege of representing District 2 of
Oklahoma, which has the highest Native American population in
the country, and opioid is wrecking our State and many people's
States. And we are working extremely hard to try to figure out
how we can put, as I say, the genie back in the bottle.
You know, why we keep sending controlled substance that are
highly addictive home is beyond me. That's beside the point.
But I really do want to work with you on it.
But yesterday, I think my colleague and a member of the
task force, Kristi Noem, asked you about your plan to deal with
the agencies and with IHS.
You said that you had prioritized it and provided more
money than the President's budget, and this was good to hear.
But I wanted to know if you had any specifics that you could
lead me down the road on that.
Mr. Azar. So as I mentioned yesterday, in the President's
budget with regard to--there are certain facilities that are
having trouble with quality and certification from CMS and
being able to perform.
Most are Great Plains. We have got one Navajo. I don't know
if there is one--I don't remember if there is one in Oklahoma
that's been decertified also. I don't think so.
Mr. Mullin. No.
Mr. Azar. And so we have got $58 million that we are
proposing to invest in assisting these facilities and achieving
their certification, retaining it, and maintaining quality
service for the people that we serve.
Like I say, we put $413 million additional dollars in
increase for IHS in the budget as well as another $100 million
for IHS around the opioid crisis as part of that $10 billion
funding in 2019.
Mr. Mullin. Our task force is a very bipartisan task force,
and we have left politics completely out of it. One thing we
have noticed is there is very little standing operating
procedures and there is very little communication between one
clinic to the next.
There is a drastic difference between the Great Plains and,
say, in Oklahoma where we have maybe a little bit more funding
to be able to put into our Indian clinics. I personally am a
product of that. I grew up in Hastings Hospital and went there
many, many, many, many times, and I found their service being
very adequate--very adequate. My kids still use it.
But we do understand there is a difference, and what I
would like to do is work with your team. We would love to be
able to maybe set something, where we meet you in South Dakota
and see what's happening there and the lack of service that is
given, and then also show you what's happening in Oklahoma when
the Tribes invest in their own back yards and be able to work
with you on coming up with standard operating procedures where
we can draw the line and have the same quality of care no
matter where you go inside the IHS system and where they can
access records and quality doctors and quality healthcare.
This is something our task force has taken on as very
important to us, and if you would have your office reach out to
us, we want to work with you on this. We want to get this
solved.
Mr. Azar. As do we. So we are open for any suggestions how
we can improve the performance of IHS in delivering quality,
safe services for our beneficiaries.
Mr. Mullin. We'd love to meet you up there, too, and show
you firsthand what's happening.
Mr. Chairman, I am sorry. I went over. I'll yield back.
Thank you.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair forgives the gentleman. The
gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Colorado, 5
minutes for questions, please.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Mr.
Secretary.
The Washington Post is reporting today that HHS employees
threatened to cut Federal funding from the Vera Institute of
Justice if the organization's lawyers communicated with their
clients about their abortion rights.
Now, as a lawyer myself, this seems like an unacceptable
intrusion into the attorney-client relationship to me. I am
wondering, Mr. Secretary, did your staff instruct lawyers at
the Vera Institute or any other organization not to discuss
abortion rights with their clients?
Mr. Azar. Congresswoman, I actually--I did not see that
story. It's the first I am hearing it.
Ms. DeGette. Well, OK. I am not asking you about the story.
I am asking you, did your staff instruct the lawyers----
Mr. Azar. It's the first I am even hearing of the issue. I
have not heard anything about this.
Ms. DeGette. So you don't even--you don't know. Would you
think that would be appropriate, if they did instruct lawyers
not to advise their clients of those rights?
Mr. Azar. So I would like to go back and look into this and
see. That's a serious claim----
Ms. DeGette. So you're not going to answer my--you don't
know if it would be appropriate or not?
Mr. Azar. Again, I don't want to answer hypothetical
questions without looking into the facts of the situation.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Well, let me ask you this.
There is something that's been around quite a while at HHS,
and that is that there has been a pattern of conduct about the
Office of Refugee Resettlement under Director Scott Lloyd's
leadership, in particular, to disregard the rules in Federal
law when it comes to women's reproductive rights and health.
Let me talk to you about a couple things. As well as this
report today, we also found out that Mr. Lloyd has attempted to
deny access to abortion to at least four immigrant teens in
detention, including one who was a victim of rape.
Now, in each of these four cases, the Federal courts
declared Director Lloyd's actions unlawful and allowed the
girls to access their reproductive healthcare.
Are you aware of those four cases, sir? Yes or no will
work.
Mr. Azar. I am aware of media reports about them.
Ms. DeGette. Well, you're----
Mr. Azar. I've just been at HHS for 14 days, so I haven't--
--
Ms. DeGette. Yes. Yes, you have. So you're not aware within
the agency?
OK. Well, I sent a letter to the agency--and you were not
there then, in fairness to you--it was dated December 1st--with
some other folks asking that Mr. Lloyd end these unlawful ORR
policies denying reproductive healthcare to immigrant women and
girls in detention.
We have not yet received a response to this letter. Can you
commit to me that we will get a response to this letter?
Mr. Azar. Yes, we will certainly respond to your letter.
Ms. DeGette. OK. And Mr. Chairman, I'd ask unanimous
consent to put the letter into the record.
Mr. Burgess. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. DeGette. Now, Mr. Lloyd, as Secretary of HHS, you have
the authority to stop Mr. Lloyd and his staff from advising
people they can't tell people about their constitutional
rights.
Will you commit to me today that you will ask him to please
stop doing that?
Mr. Azar. So we have with regard to these children who come
into our custody a very important statutory obligation, which
is to look out for the health and welfare of them as well as
their unborn children, and it is a solemn obligation. It is a
difficult obligation----
Ms. DeGette. Well, excuse me.
Mr. Azar [continuing]. And it is now a matter of pending
litigation, and I really can't--I do not know the facts of the
situation nor could I comment, because these are pending
matters in litigation.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Well, good news. Four courts have already
said that your Department can't stop them from getting
abortions. Are you contesting those court decisions?
Mr. Azar. I am not aware of the status on the litigation.
I've been at the Department for 14 days.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Is it the--let me----
Mr. Azar. I will not comment on potentially pending
litigation.
Ms. DeGette. OK.
Mr. Azar. It would be irresponsible for me as Secretary. I
am the named party in the litigation.
Ms. DeGette. Well, let me--then--excuse me, sir. Perhaps
you can comment on HHS policy for me, then. Is it the policy of
HHS to tell your contractors that they are not allowed to
discuss abortion rights with their clients? Yes or no.
Mr. Azar. As I told you, I am not aware of any policy
either way----
Ms. DeGette. No, no. OK.
Mr. Azar [continuing]. Or the facts of that situation.
Ms. DeGette. Well, you're the head guy. Would you support
that kind of a policy?
Mr. Azar. I am not aware of the facts of that situation,
nor can I sit here and off of the cuff state a policy position
for the Department.
Ms. DeGette. If an employee of HHS told the Vera Institute
that their Federal grant would be withdrawn if they advised
their clients of their rights, would you support withdrawing
it?
Mr. Azar. I am going to repeat that I--it was irresponsible
of me to sit here and on the basis of a supposition of facts
articulate a policy position----
Ms. DeGette. OK. But----
Mr. Azar [continuing]. Without investigating and looking
into it.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Great.
Mr. Azar. You would not expect me to do otherwise.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Great. So will you commit----
Mr. Azar. I need to be a responsible officer.
Ms. DeGette. Excuse me. Will you commit to me that you will
investigate and look into it?
Mr. Azar. I will. I already mentioned----
Ms. DeGette. And will you also commit to me that you will
get me an answer back in writing within 30 days of this
hearing?
Mr. Azar. I will not be able to commit on the time line
there because I do not know the nature of the investigation,
the facts, or whether it connects to matters of litigation.
Ms. DeGette. When do you think it would be appropriate to
get back to me?
Mr. Azar. I will not be able to commit on a date until I
know the circumstances here and know whether it connects to a
matter of litigation, because this may be a matter that the
Justice Department would decide. I don't want to make a false
commitment to you on getting back to you by a date certain on
something that might be----
Ms. DeGette. Will you get back to me?
Mr. Azar. We certainly will, yes.
Ms. DeGette. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Burgess. Gentlelady's time has expired. The Chair
thanks the gentlelady.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Griffith, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and I
appreciate your responses to the previous questions,
particularly that you'll get back with some information but not
a specific answer based on the legalities of everything.
That being said, I also appreciate your answers previously
in relationship to the opioid crisis, which is important to so
many of us, and I think that my colleagues have covered that
extensively, so I am going to move on to some other things. But
appreciate working with you on that in the future.
I've got a number of things that I am passionate about and
that affect my district. One is I have a very rural district in
the southwest corner of Virginia, and I want to ask you about
telehealth because it seems me that we have some issues there
with reimbursement.
And if the doctor is willing to conduct a telehealth
consult, I believe they should not be prevented or discouraged
from providing the service because of outdated reimbursement
policies, and I would like to work with you and HHS to help
find ways to alleviate reimbursement challenges that are in the
way of telehealth exploding and bringing medicine to the nooks
and crannies of every part of America.
So what policies are you all working on to facilitate the
delivery of telehealth, and what policies do we need to
change--and I know you may not have an answer after only 2
weeks--but please let us know what do we need to change to help
you all allow reimbursement for telehealth services so the
people can get services all over the country and all--
predominantly rural areas, but I can see applications in other
areas, as well.
Mr. Azar. Thank you for raising that issue. I am a big
supporter of telehealth and how we can harness that, especially
for underserved areas like our rural communities.
I do suspect there are significant statutory barriers
around reimbursement there, given that most of our constructs
were set up in the 1960s for our payment regimes.
So we'd love to work with you on that as I go back and we
plow through and identify those barriers to see where we might
be able to make changes.
I believe in the budget we have one provision that we are
recommending regarding Medicare Advantage plans, I think, and
supporting greater payment flexibility around telehealth. But I
am sure there are many, many more. But I am a big believer in
the opportunities that we have there.
Mr. Griffith. I don't think it's a partisan issue. I think
you'd find support on both sides of the aisle to change the
laws that are keeping you all from doing things that we all
want you to do--so I appreciate that--in relationship to
telehealth.
Let's talk about neonatal abstinence syndrome. I am
encouraged to see that CMS used State plan authority as it did
in the case of West Virginia this week with respect to the
State's request to allow its Medicaid program to reimburse
certain treatment centers that take care of infants with
neonatal abstinence syndrome.
This move suggests that CMS and the States can work
together to address the distinct needs of each State. If my
home State of Virginia or my neighboring State of Tennessee or
other States should choose to follow suit and request coverage
of similar services through a State plan amendment or waiver,
may I get your commitment that your staff at HHS and CMS will
work swiftly to allow such a waiver so that we can ensure
infants with NAS in Medicaid get the care that they need?
Mr. Azar. I don't know the particulars on that approval,
but we certainly will work with any State that is going to be
delivering care in that area within the confines of our waiver
and demonstration authority, and we will do that as swiftly as
we possibly can. That seems quite noble.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Now here's one more I am going to
push you on: durable medical equipment. I know that there have
been some issues. But for rural areas the competitive bid
reimbursement adjustment has been deadly for durable medical
equipment suppliers.
Folks are having--I've got one fellow in particular. He's
driving through, you know, up and down mountains to deliver
oxygen, et cetera, to people that he considers friends and
clients.
He keeps having to lay people off just to make ends meet.
So I ask you, there is an interim final rule that's pending at
OMB. I've spoken with OMB and Mr. Mulvaney about that. Will you
commit to working with Director Mulvaney to ensure this IFR is
released expeditiously? It's currently sitting in your hands.
Mr. Azar. So I can't speak to that particular IFR or that
issue because I do believe that's a matter pending in
litigation, but I will tell you our budget--I am very concerned
about the issue of DME--the competitive DME and rural access,
and our budget proposal actually has some I think very
important reforms and suggestions for rural access there.
Mr. Griffith. And I appreciate that, because I will tell
you that it won't be a whole lot of months before he just has
to completely shut down his operation and then I will have
constituents who are no longer being served because, you know,
when you're a long way from the nearest town, it's hard to
drive down there and get your own equipment and drive it back
up the mountain.
Mr. Walden. Would the gentleman yield a second?
Mr. Griffith. I yield.
Mr. Walden. Yes, I just want to double down on that,
because I am finding the same thing in rural parts of my
district, where all of a sudden in Burns, Oregon, a long way
away, getting access to DME, durable medical equipment, is a
real problem.
Oxygen is becoming a real problem, and this is something
that I hope the administration will act on expeditiously, as
well. So I am glad you raised that.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentleman. Gentleman yields
back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Oregon, Dr.
Schrader, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you, Mr. Secretary, for being here.
You talked in your testimony about the need to improve the
individual and small group markets, and I think, frankly, I am
one of the folks, along with many others, both sides of the
aisle that believes that's true.
But very concerned that in the President's budget, it
proposes actually repealing more of the Affordable Care Act,
which would cause millions to lose coverage, and this is
despite the fact that we had this big debate last year and
Congress, who is the lawmaking body, decided not to move
forward along those lines.
I don't think Americans want to see their health coverage
go away. I think they want to see us come together and
strengthen and improve that individual marketplace, which is
bleeding over to the small group.
I am with a group of bipartisan Members, several of which
serve on this committee, called the Problem Solvers, that has a
bipartisan proposal--about 25 of us--that have supported this.
We have legislation that's introduced. It includes the CSRs
that were included in both the Republican and Democratic
budgets. Talks about a stability fund that was in Republican as
well as Democratic proposals. It gives the flexibility you
alluded to to States, both in the 1332 and 1333 waivers. Rolls
back some of the employer mandate and gets rid of the medical
device tax.
Would your administration and you personally be interested
in promoting that type of proposal to solve the problem?
Mr. Azar. So, obviously, we have our budget proposal, which
is the broader Graham-Cassidy package, but I am also very happy
to work with you and learn more about these ideas that you've
got.
Our commitment is, we want to make insurance affordable for
people in the individual markets.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you. Thank you. Well, I appreciate
that, because we would like to work with you or the
administration, come up with just a commonsense proposal to fix
what needs to be fixed at this point in time so Americans have
healthcare.
Under the current budget there are huge cuts to Medicaid
and the marketplace. Could you give us some idea of the numbers
of folks that are going to lose coverage as a result of the
proposals you've put forward?
Mr. Azar. So I don't have a score that does any estimating
on that. What we would do is----
Mr. Schrader. If I may interrupt. I am sorry. I have only
limited time. I apologize.
The CBO does have a score, and they've indicated repeatedly
that 23 million Americans would lose coverage if the Affordable
Care Act is repealed in its entirety.
Unfortunately, we have already gone through a measure of
that with the current tax cut bill that came out. Very, very
concerned that if we double down on that, that would be not
good for Americans, and hope that as Health Secretary the goal
would be to get people more healthcare, not less healthcare.
Last piece, if I may--getting back to the proposals coming
out of the great State of Idaho. I respect everyone's
sovereignty, but I think the goal of the Affordable Care Act
isn't just to treat conditions and people as they walk in the
door but to make a better healthcare system, to make people
healthier so that they don't have to walk through that hospital
door quite as often.
And I guess my question to you is, Would you and this
administration enforce all the essential health benefits that
are currently a requirement of the Affordable Care Act, given
that that is the law of the land at this point in time,
including prescription health benefits, mental health benefits,
maternity, emergency care, ambulatory care, laboratory
services, prevention and wellness, pediatric care,
hospitalization, and rehabilitation?
Mr. Azar. So we certainly have a duty to enforce the laws
Congress has written and passed and within any flexibilities,
of course, that we have under waiver and other authorities.
But, obviously, we have to be committed to enforcing the laws
that Congress have given us.
Mr. Schrader. All right. I appreciate that very much, Mr.
Secretary, and look forward to working with you.
Mr. Azar. Thank you. Same here.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman
yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Carter.
Mr. Carter. Well, thank you, Mr. Secretary. Congratulations
and thank you for being here today. We appreciate your
presence.
I want to start by asking you about DIR fees. Are you
familiar with DIR fees?
Mr. Azar. You know, I am somewhat. Are we talking in the
context of the specialty pharmacy issues?
Mr. Carter. No, not necessarily in a specialty pharmacy.
This would be in any pharmacy. These are--these are generally
just the fees that are price concessions, or maybe even just
fees that are imposed by the pharmacy, by the PBMs, and that
are recouped sometimes years later, years after the
prescription has been dispensed.
And, obviously, the patients are not getting the benefit of
this, and therefore it is costing taxpayers more money because
in Plan D, as you well know, the higher the drug and the higher
the cost to the patient, it's going to push them into the donut
hole and then ultimately into the catastrophic part where the
taxpayers will be taking up more of those costs.
I've led several letters to your Department, to CMS,
regarding this. I hope that you will look at this closely. One
of my colleagues, Congressman Griffith, on this committee has a
bill right now making it to where DIR fees would have to be
recouped at the point of sale and could not be recouped years
later.
So I hope you'll look at that very closely. I want to ask
you next about abuse deterrent formulations. Are you familiar
with that and how it could be used in the way of opioids?
Mr. Azar. I am somewhat. I am sure not as deeply as you are
with your clinical background.
Mr. Carter. OK. OK.
Well, I hope that you will look at that. I think that is
something that could benefit us and certainly, in our fight
against the opioid, something I know you're committed to and
certainly that we are committed to.
If I may, if you could just hang with me for a second. You
were the CEO of Lilly Manufacturing and Lilly Pharmaceuticals.
Mr. Azar. I was just the president of the----
Mr. Carter. Just the president.
Mr. Azar [continuing]. Commercial business in the United
States.
Mr. Carter. But you understand how PBMs work, and you
understand that whole scenario. As a practicing pharmacist for
over 30 years, I too understand that. And I am just curious.
Let's just take a product that Lilly may have had. Let's
take Prozac or Zyprexa, and both of those are available now in
generic formulations. But if you wanted to--let's take Prozac,
for instance--if you wanted to get Prozac onto a formulary, as
the pharmaceutical manufacturer did you have to offer the
company, the pharmacy benefit manager who was compiling that--
compiling that formulary--did you have to offer them a rebate
in order to get it back?
Mr. Azar. So if I could address this generally.
Mr. Carter. Please do.
Mr. Azar. I would not want to speak in the context of my
former employer.
Mr. Carter. I understand.
Mr. Azar. But yes, generally, almost all brand of products
will have to offer rebates to pharmacy benefit managers in
order to secure equal or preferred status on a formulary.
Otherwise, they will be disadvantaged or ever not covered by
that PBM in terms of the benefit package. So that's quite
standard.
Mr. Carter. Yes, and I just want to----
Mr. Azar. It would be the more unusual case where there
isn't a rebate that's being paid.
Mr. Carter. I've always wondered: Where does that rebate
go? Do you know?
Mr. Azar. Where does the rebate go?
Mr. Carter. Yes, sir.
Mr. Azar. So I am certain----
Mr. Carter. I do know one place it does not go. It does not
go to the pharmacist. I can assure you of that.
Mr. Azar. I believe some of it, obviously, goes into the
premium and buying that down. Depending on the PBM's business
model, some may be retained by the pharmacy benefit manager as
their profit or to cover their expenses. Some may be passed on
in lower premiums. I think it would depend on each individual
PBM how that works.
Mr. Carter. But you would agree that that rebate is
significant?
Mr. Azar. It can be quite significant. Average commercial
rebates approximate about 35 percent.
Mr. Carter. Just out of curiosity, you know, if that
rebate--it's not going to the patient, and it's not going to
the pharmacy. The pharmaceutical manufacturer is paying it to
the PBM.
You know, I am not opposed to anybody making money. But the
mission of a PBM is to control drug prices. If they are
controlling drug prices, why is one of the President's
initiatives to bring drug prices down?
Mr. Azar. Why is it? The President wants----
Mr. Carter. If the PBMs are doing their job, if they are
indeed controlling drug prices, why did the President identify
a drug price? Why have all these people on this committee here
today asked you about prescription drug prices? Why is that one
of the primary issues that we discuss up here?
Mr. Azar. It's actually--so, first, there are pockets of
our programs where we don't get as good of a deal as we ought
to and can do, and that's what we are working on.
Mr. Carter. But I am speaking specifically to the--I don't
mean to interrupt.
Mr. Azar. No, no. And I think it really has to do with list
prices. Every incentive in our system is towards higher list
prices.
Mr. Carter. If I may, I just remind you that there are
three PBMs that control 80 percent of the market and that one
of the PBMs, Caremark, had gross revenues in 2016 that exceeded
that of Pfizer Pharmaceuticals, of Ford Motor Company, and of
McDonald's combined.
Mr. Secretary, we got to do something about this. We need
transparency. Sunlight is the best disinfectant out there. We
have to have transparency.
I can't see this in the Plan B. You won't let me see it. We
need transparency.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Azar. And we do support efforts towards greater
transparency.
Mr. Carter. I know you do, and I look forward to working
with you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Burgess. Gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New Mexico, Mr.
Lujan, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here today, as well.
Mr. Secretary, I am going to ask you a yes-or-no question
off the top here. There is $1.4 trillion less in the budget for
the Medicaid program, yes or no?
Mr. Azar. There is a $1.2 trillion new fund that would
replace the Medicaid expansion and the individual subsidy
program under the Affordable Care Act.
Mr. Lujan. You're talking about Graham-Cassidy?
Mr. Azar. Yes. Exactly.
Mr. Lujan. So would you agree with the CBO's score--that
the CBO said at the very least that Graham-Cassidy reduces
Medicaid by $1 trillion? Are you unaware of that?
Mr. Azar. I don't know the net score on this. You've got
the $1.4 trillion that would come down, but the 1.2 that would
actually replace it through the grant program there. So I don't
know the ups and downs on the complete CBO scoring with regard
to which part is expansion and where the subsidy--the
advanceable, refundable tax credits fit into there.
Mr. Lujan. So, Mr. Secretary, I mean, there can be a lot of
spin around this, in the same way that during the repeal-and-
replace effort my Republican colleagues said that they were not
cutting Medicaid--that they were giving more flexibility to the
States. Is that how you would describe the $1.2 trillion that
you're describing here?
Mr. Azar. Well, no. The core Medicaid program--the old--the
traditional Medicaid will grow under our budget from about $400
billion over 10 years to $453 billion.
The Medicaid expansion does get rescinded as part of the
Graham-Cassidy plan and is replaced along with the individual
subsidy program with that $1.2 trillion grant program.
Mr. Lujan. Let me ask the question a different way.
President Trump, on several occasions, said that he would not
cut Social Security, not cut Medicare, not cut Medicaid.
May 7th, 2015, 10:40 a.m., he tweets, ``I was the first and
only potential GOP candidate to state there will be no cuts to
Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid.''
July 11th, 2015, 3:23 a.m., ``Republicans who want to cut
Social Security and Medicaid are wrong.''
A quote to Daily Signal: ``I am not going to cut Social
Security like every other Republican. I am not going to cut
Medicare or Medicaid.''
Did the President keep his word in his budget?
Mr. Azar. You know, with regard to----
Mr. Lujan. Yes or no, Mr. Secretary. Did he keep his word?
Mr. Azar. Well, with regard--with regard to Medicare----
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Secretary----
Mr. Azar [continuing]. What we are proposing there is to
actually reduce by $250 billion over 10. The rate of growth
goes from 9.1 percent annual increases to 8.5 percent. It
doesn't take from beneficiaries. It actually continues to grow.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Secretary, did the President keep his word
that he would not cut Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security
in his budget?
Mr. Azar. I can't speak to Social Security, and then as to
the core fundamental----
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Secretary, let me ask you the question
differently then. Did the President keep his word that he would
not cut Medicaid and Medicare?
Mr. Azar. The President kept his word that we are not
taking from beneficiaries in Medicare, and for Medicaid the
President----
Mr. Lujan. Will the President--Mr.----
Mr. Azar [continuing]. Has repeatedly been supportive of
repealing and replacing Obamacare, and Medicaid expansion is
part of that. He was clear from day one in his campaign about
that.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Secretary, he didn't mention beneficiaries
here. He said he would not cut Medicare and Medicaid and Social
Security. He would not ``cut Social Security and Medicare and
Medicaid like every other Republican.''
Did the President keep his word that he did not cut
Medicare and Medicaid?
Mr. Azar. The President is keeping his word that we are
supporting Medicare. We are making Medicaid sustainable for the
long term for beneficiaries, and we are proposing the repeal-
and-replace of Obamacare, which is not delivering for our
people.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Secretary, did you have a hand in developing
this budget?
Mr. Azar. I arrived 14 days ago. So no, I did not.
Mr. Lujan. You didn't approve what was submitted?
Mr. Azar. The budget was already at the printer. If the
Senate would have confirmed me sooner, I would have been able
to be involved but----
Mr. Lujan. Let me ask a question.
Mr. Azar [continuing]. I arrived 14 days ago after----
Mr. Lujan. Let me ask you a different----
Mr. Azar. I can only do what I can do.
Mr. Lujan. Let me ask you a different question: Do you
support the President's budget?
Mr. Azar. I do support the President's budget. That's why I
am here today.
Mr. Lujan. Did you keep your word that you would enforce
not cutting Medicaid and Medicare as you answered to Senator
Ben Nelson on the January 24th, 2018, Senate Finance
Committee----
Mr. Azar. I never said that I would enforce not cutting. I
said the President----
Mr. Lujan. Oh.
Mr. Azar [continuing]. The President does not support----
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Secretary----
Mr. Azar [continuing]. Cutting Medicare and Medicaid.
Mr. Lujan [continuing]. Let me read you a quote.
Mr. Azar. And I support the President's position. I will go
along with where the President is on these programs.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Secretary, if I may, there is a great video
that's posted. I think C-SPAN has it, CNN has it. And here's
what you said when Senator Nelson asked if cutting Medicaid,
Medicare, and Social Security should be used to fill this huge
budget deficit hole. You believe the President kept his word,
and your job as Secretary would be to enforce, not to cut those
programs. So I'll stand by that.
Mr. Azar. As long as that is the President's----
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Secretary----
Mr. Azar [continuing]. I am here to implement Medicare and
Medicaid----
Mr. Lujan. Last question, if I may, because I am out of
time here. Have you collected a check from Dr. Price for his
travel on private planes?
Mr. Azar. I do not know.
Mr. Lujan. Have you investigated abuses at HHS with travel?
Mr. Azar. I've just arrived 14 days ago, so I've been busy
getting ready to come here to meet with you today.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, as my time is expired here, I know
that we have talked about oversight hearings in this
subcommittee on this issue. They still have not been scheduled.
I look forward to seeing those scheduled so we could get to
the bottom of this, and I'll be submitting more questions to
the record to find out what's been investigated. This is a
serious issue. Millions of dollars have been squandered, and
the American taxpayers deserve----
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. I am certain that Mr. Guthrie will--I mean,
Mr. Harper from Mississippi will await your letter.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Bilirakis.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate it, and thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here. I
appreciate it very much. Thanks for your service.
I am on also--in addition to being on this great committee
and this subcommittee, I am also vice chairman of the Veterans
Affairs Committee.
This gives me a unique opportunity to serve the health
needs of various populations. Community health centers--and I
was the author of the reauthorization of the community health
centers. They do great work.
As a matter of fact, the Administrator of HRSA, Dr.
Sigounas, was down in my district recently. We discussed
expanding substance abuse services but also mental health
services and dental services, as well, and treating even more
veterans.
Community health centers already provide quality care to
more than 300,000 veterans--as a matter of fact, he told me
exactly 330,000 veterans across the country--and are an
important source of care for veterans in rural areas, who may
not be able to easily access VA facilities.
Can you share with the committee some of the ways in which
health centers are working with the VA to address the
healthcare needs of our Nation's veterans? What more can we do
to improve veterans' access to community health centers, and
are you a proponent of community health centers?
Mr. Azar. So I and we are absolutely proponents of our
community health centers, and one of the things that I am very
happy about through the budget deal that was reached is that we
put the community health centers on secure footing financially
and that we also, through our opioid program, we are going to
be making significant investments into HRSA and the community
health centers. I think $400 million will go through quality
incentive programs to community health centers to assist them
on the opioid crisis.
I am not as familiar about veterans issues in connection
with HRSA and community health centers and would be very happy
to learn more about ways in which we can be supportive and
helpful to our veterans through our community health centers.
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes, I'd like to work with you on that. So,
in other words, the VA people that are in the VA system, we
want to make sure that they have an option, a choice, to go to
a local community health center, particularly in some of the
rural areas where the clinic or the hospital is far away. And I
discussed that with Dr. Sigounas, and I have a bill that I'd
like to talk to you about.
Again, Mr. Secretary, in the budget submission, you
mentioned changing--and again, this is probably--you said that
you've only been on the job for two weeks, so it's really not
your budget even though you approved the budget--you mentioned
changing the Part D pharmacy lock-in program.
Is your budget proposal trying to reform and centralize the
lock-in program inside CMS rather than the Part D plans? Or are
you trying to require all plans to initiate a pharmacy lock-in
program?
Mr. Azar. I believe it's just to require the Part D plans
to initiate a lock-in program rather than a centralized one. I
believe that's the case.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. Very good. Let me get into another
issue, because we don't have a lot of time.
Currently, ASPR's disaster medical assistance team is
experiencing a staffing shortage. I am sure you're aware of
that. As hurricane season is less than four months away, what
is being done at HHS to address this serious public health and
safety issue?
Mr. Azar. So we are working--I've actually met with our
Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response, and we are
prioritizing the hiring to ensure that we get our full
complement of national disaster medical services individuals
for those disaster teams.
You know, one of the important lessons coming out of this
unprecedented hurricane season was our need to continue our
learning processes for how we can deal with multiple either
manmade or naturally occurring disasters and public health
threats at one time. That was a really unprecedented episode,
and it's a good learning for us.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good. I've got time for one more
question, I believe, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for your
service, by the way, Mr. Chairman.
Currently, there isn't a clear standard for medication-
assisted treatment prescribing, and we have heard reports of an
increasing number of rogue actors offering MAT.
In many cases, these pop-up clinics actively recruit
vulnerable client population and provide standardized--
substandard, in my opinion--services with minimal oversight.
While we support consumer choice, of course, and market
competition, we also want to balance this with the consumer
safeguards to ensure that this program--the problem improves,
not worsens, and that bad actors are not rewarded via Federal
dollars.
Additionally, questions have been raised as to whether
States are requiring evidence-based practices to be used in the
STR grant program.
What is HHS doing to ensure rogue actors are not the
recipient of Federal dollars and evidence-based practices are
being used so that the funds expended go to providing the best
possible treatment in recovery services?
Mr. Burgess. If the gentleman will suspend. The Chair is
going to ask if he would submit that in writing. We do have
Members who are----
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes, can you please do that? I would
appreciate it if you addressed that.
Thank you very much, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. And I thank you for your accommodations.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Cardenas from California for 5
minutes, please.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Azar, I am
glad you were able to join us today and I look forward to your
answering some of my questions.
I'd like to begin by talking about Scott Lloyd, the head of
the Health and Human Services Office of Refugees Resettlement.
Tremendous responsibility. This is a man who has shown complete
disregard for the U.S. Constitution.
He abuses his authority and tries to enforce his personal
beliefs on immigrant women in custody over and over again. He
has tried to control women's bodies and violate their
constitutional rights to have an abortion.
Mr. Chairman, at this time, I'd like to ask unanimous
consent to submit for the record a Washington Post article
published today that describes an email reporters obtained from
an official Federal contractor. The contractor is V-E-R-A.
The email claims that after a conversation with a Federal
employee at the Office of Refugee Resettlement at Health and
Human Services, they were directed to prevent their lawyers
from discussing abortion access even if minors in custody asked
for help to understand their legal rights, or else their
multimillion-dollar contract with the Department of Health and
Human Services would be jeopardized. For the record, please,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Wow, that sounds like a complete violation of the law to
me. Scott Lloyd, the Office of Refugee Resettlement chief--his
actions have put young women's lives in danger, even
considering subjecting the women to unproven medical
experiments, and he personally tried to block a rape victim
from getting an abortion.
This is in a memo, and I'll quote from that memo. Quote,
``Here there is no medical reason for abortion. It will not
undo or erase the memory of the violence committed against her,
and it may further traumatize her. I conclude it is not her
interest,'' end quote.
To me, it's just ironic that a man would mention the
violence committed on this young girl while at the same time
violating her rights.
Why does Scott Lloyd still have a job at Health and Human
Services?
Mr. Azar. Well, first, we don't draw conclusions from media
reports, but also these are matters in pending litigation. I am
not going to be able to speak to them, nor do I know the facts
and circumstances. I have not been able to look into them yet
at my time at the Department.
Mr. Cardenas. How committed are you to make it a priority
to look into the details of this, which you just mentioned that
is now there is litigation going on over this matter?
Mr. Azar. The mission that ORR has for these young children
is a very solemn one, to look out for their health and well-
being as well as the health and well-being of their unborn
children.
That is a very difficult task. It's an unenviable one, and
I think they are trying to do the best they can under the
circumstances here to protect both the young girls' health as
well as the unborn child's health and to make sure they are
standing in here under their statutory obligations to do this,
and we will certainly be looking to ensure that our programs
are consistent with the law, that the way we administer them is
consistent with court cases as they eventually come out.
Beyond that, I am not able to really comment. I don't have
the facts.
Mr. Cardenas. Well, I am glad you answered that way. So
maybe you can double down on that answer by expressing before
this committee, Members of Congress, about the policies that
the Department of Health and Human Services, of which you are
now the head, when it comes to following the law and also the
U.S. Constitution, it appears to me that that consistency would
be incumbent upon any department, any public servant.
Mr. Azar. I would agree. We will always attempt to follow
the law and the court constructions of the law and what our
obligations are up against that.
Mr. Cardenas. So are you committed to making sure that not
only Scott Lloyd but anybody under your Department would
actually make sure that their actions and their interactions
with the people that they've been charged in their care that
they be consistent with following the Constitution of the
United States and the laws passed by this Congress and by
Presidents past and present?
Mr. Azar. We all take an oath. You did. I did. Everyone at
the Department takes an oath to support and defend the
Constitution and laws of the United States.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. So, again, I asked you earlier how
committed are you to make sure that you look into the specific
situation that Scott Lloyd has been involved with, that he's
now under your purview?
Mr. Azar. So this is a matter in litigation. I am not going
to be able to comment about my personal activity connected to
that or the nature of any investigations that we would conduct.
These are matters that are being litigated in the courts
right now, and we will follow where the courts end up here, and
as I am able to, we will look and determine whether our actions
are consistent with the law and with case law as it evolves.
Mr. Cardenas. So you mean to tell this committee, Members
of Congress, that you cannot give your own personal opinion
about your personal commitment to how much you're going to look
into this and how quickly, or whether or not you make it a
priority?
Mr. Azar. I am the head of the agency. My name is on the
litigation. I am not able to comment on pending litigation
matters or actions that'll be taken pursuant to that.
Mr. Cardenas. I am not asking about actions. I am talking
about----
Mr. Burgess. Gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Cardenas. I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and the Chair
recognizes the gentlelady from Indiana, Mrs. Brooks, 5 minutes
for questions, please.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you--
welcome, Secretary Azar, and congratulations on your
confirmation.
I am curious. How many hearings have you had this week?
Mr. Azar. Three in 24 hours.
Mrs. Brooks. Yes, that's what I thought. I haven't followed
them all, but I know that you have been in the hot seat. And
so, congratulations. I hope we are your last for the week, I
hope.
Mr. Azar. I believe so.
Mrs. Brooks. Good. I want to thank you. In your bio, what I
am really thrilled about is the fact that you mentioned part of
your work when you were Deputy Secretary focused on advancing
emergency preparedness and response capabilities.
It's an issue that I think we don't talk enough about in
Congress, and I want to--and because at that time you testified
actually as Assistant Secretary of Health in '06 that, and I
quote, ``we'll work to streamline and make more effective the
current BioShield interagency governance process. We will make
this process more transparent and work to educate the public
and industry about our priorities and opportunities.''
A decade has passed since that happened. I don't think we
are there yet, and as you know the President's budget proposes
to transfer the strategic national stockpile to the Assistant
Secretary for Preparedness--ASPR, as you've just talked about
meeting with--from CDC, and I think you talked about that
transfer in funding.
And this move, as I understand it, will consolidate
strategic decision making around the development and
procurement of medical countermeasures.
First, I want to state my support for it, and I've included
this same proposal in the discussion draft of the PAHPA
reauthorization that I am working with my colleague and good
friend, Representative Eshoo, that we look forward to working
with you and your staff on the reauthorization of PAHPA.
But I want to just ensure that you are familiar with the
specific proposal and ensure that you are supporting that
proposal as it stands.
Mr. Azar. Absolutely. In fact, when I was general counsel
and Deputy Secretary, where we ran strategic national stockpile
out of was something that we thought eventually needed to be
with the ASPR, but we didn't have yet the developed procurement
capabilities there and management. We now have a very
sophisticated program there, and so I think the time is now. It
integrates the capability on procurement, on threat assessment,
as well as deployment in an operational setting. So I think
it's absolutely the right thing to do.
Mrs. Brooks. Outstanding, and we look forward to working
with your staff to make sure that we get it right in the PAHPA
reauthorization and also learn whether or not there are any
other authorities or things that need to be changed.
You talked about implementation and delivery. That's
something I actually want to ask about because we often focus
on vaccine development, which can often overshadow vaccine
delivery when it comes time, and in a pandemic it's my
understanding BARDA said that we could need up to 600 million
drug delivery devices over a 6-month period, and our current
excess capacity in the marketplace, it can take years to
produce different devices.
We certainly learned that during the Ebola crisis. Across
the country we did not, for instance, have enough gloves. We
did not have enough masks. We did not have enough things like
that, but let alone even the devices that would be needed to
execute vaccines.
How do we ensure we have enough drug delivery devices to be
prepared when we can't rely alone on the excess manufacturing
capacity?
Mr. Azar. I think that's an excellent question, and that's
one of the reasons why it's helpful, I believe, to have the
strategic national stockpile connected directly into the
Assistant Secretary of Preparedness and Response, so that we
line up that holistic sense of genuine care delivery in an
emergency, thinking of--you know, for want of a nail, a kingdom
was lost--that we don't lack a vial and have a vaccine or lack
a needle but have plenty of vaccines. So I think that holistic
sense is absolutely part of our mission and our assessment for
procurement purposes.
Mrs. Brooks. I want to just wrap up with my minute that I
have left.
Our fellow Hoosier, Director of National Intelligence Dan
Coats, said just this week when talking about North Korea's
nuclear warheads, he also mentioned they are continuing their
longstanding chemical and biological warfare programs.
As you know, over a decade Project BioShield's special
reserve fund has created the only market for medical
countermeasure development and in 2013, while Congress
authorized the $2.8 billion in funding for the SRF, so far only
$1.5 billion has been authorized.
But I understand that in your budget you've requested SRF
be advanced funded at $5 billion over the next 10 years. Can
you talk to us about the consequences if we don't do that to
national security and if we don't provide that advanced
funding?
Mr. Azar. It is absolutely vital in BARDA, which is about
developing and then eventually for us in BioShield procuring
countermeasures that only the U.S. Government is likely the
purchaser for, that we be a predictable purchaser.
So for us to get entities to develop therapies or
countermeasures, we need to be able to show that we have the
money and have the backing of the Congress. And so that's where
that type of advance appropriations is absolutely vital for us
to be able to secure the commitment from our development
partners.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. I am very pleased with your
background and expertise in this area and raising these issues
to the forefront.
Thank you. Look forward to working with you. I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. The
gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Engel, 5 minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Mr. Secretary.
Congratulations on your appointment.
The President, when he was running for office, said that he
would never cut Medicaid and we are, of course, very, very
unhappy with potential cuts to Medicaid.
A few months ago, we passed--Republicans passed a tax bill
that gave massive breaks to big corporations in the top 1
percent and, when that bill passed, there wasn't a doubt in my
mind that the administration would use the hole that their tax
bill blew in the deficit to justify gutting programs that
support working families.
And lo and behold, the President's budget cuts are $1.4
trillion to Medicaid, just shy of the tax bill's $1.5 trillion
price tag.
It isn't subtle. It could not be easier to see that the
administration has ways to pay for their legislation. Some of
us would say handouts to the wealthiest on the backs of
Americans who rely on Medicaid for health use and, even if we
set aside the cuts themselves, the policies in this budget give
us an idea of the kind of Medicaid experiments that this
administration might allow States to try.
If you ask me, those policies are just as distressing as
the cuts because the administration to Congress has made very
clear that whatever they cannot cut they will so-called reform
in ways that will kick people off coverage, and as far as I am
concerned, those kinds of reforms are simply cuts by another
name.
The administration has already chosen to go against the
Medicaid statute by encouraging States to enact work
requirements that we know will take health coverage away from
Americans who desperately need it, and now the administration
is contemplating letting States put in place lifetime limits on
Medicaid coverage. That is something that we have fought
against for many, many years, and it sends an alarming message,
one that I'd like to address right now.
I'd like to quote a parent from my district whose daughter
was born with a rare condition, because I think she put it
best. This is a quote from what she sent me. She said, ``I
never thought our family would be in a position to need a
safety net--a program like Medicaid. We might not be who you
think of when you think of Medicaid. The safety net is there
for all Americans.''
So let me say, again, Medicaid is not a handout. It's a
health insurance program, and it covers nearly one in five
adults in my district.
Medicaid is the single largest insurer for America's
children, and it is a promise to every American that our
country will not forsake them even when the going gets tough.
So I am glad that I welcomed you, because I know you're
going to do--it's a hard job you have, but I'd like you to
commit to us now that your Department will not approve requests
to place lifetime caps on Medicaid health insurance coverage. I
know Congressman Kennedy a little before was trying to get you
to say that, but I'd feel much better if you can give us that
commitment.
Mr. Azar. So, Congressman, I appreciate your concern there,
and I think they are difficult issues, and these are so
complex, difficult issues I really cannot here give you an
answer on resolving a waiver I have not seen.
We will take that very seriously. We have not stated an
invitation or a State Medicaid director approach around that
type of issue. And so I really need to work with our teams to
see what the issues are, what the legal constraints even are. I
don't even know the legal frameworks with regard to any issue
of lifetime caps and how that would interact with our waiver or
demonstration authorities.
So it would just be entirely premature for me to sit here
and give you an answer on that, except to say I would take it
very seriously and there has not been a statement of the
administration's positions or views with regard to any requests
for lifetime caps in Medicaid.
Mr. Engel. Well, I hope you will visit this committee many
times, and I hope you will listen to what some of us on this
side of the aisle are saying. We have some very--as you've
heard all afternoon, we have some very serious questions about
it.
We don't want any situation where our people are being
knocked off of Medicaid--people who really need it, and
lifetime caps is something that we have talked about for a long
time here, and we were doing the Affordable Care Act when we
talked about it.
It comes up quite frequently, and it's really scary. It's
scary for people who don't know what they are going to do if
this happens.
So I take you at your word. I hope next time you come back,
we can have a more thorough discussion on it. But please hear
what we are saying today.
Mr. Azar. I absolutely will, and I appreciate any dialogue
that we can have. These are important programs and very
difficult issues, and the more minds that we have at bear, the
better.
Mr. Engel. OK. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back. And the Chair would
observe that there was a repeal of the therapy caps in the bill
that we passed a week ago, and I hope the gentleman voted for
that.
Does the gentleman from Texas continue to reserve?
Mr. Green. I want to continue to reserve.
Mr. Burgess. All subcommittees members haven't been
recognized. The Chair will recognize Mr. Welch for 5 minutes.
Mine really is 5 minutes, Peter.
Mr. Welch. Well, I appreciate that and, Mr. Chairman, I
thank you, and I thank you for the work you've been doing on
prescription drug prices, and that's what I wanted to talk to
you about, Mr. Secretary.
You've got incredible experience in the pharmaceutical
industry, and that may be something that can be useful. And I
start by saying that I think all of us acknowledge that the
pharmaceutical industry has done some good things with life-
extending and pain-relieving medication. The problem is, they
are starting to kill us with the cost.
And if we want to maintain access to healthcare, we have
got to really stabilize the cost. I don't care whether we have
a Government aid system, employer-based system, or individual-
based system. If the price keeps going up way beyond inflation,
we are going to be broke.
President Trump has said a lot of tremendous things about
price negotiation and about bringing down the cost. You, in
your hearing before the Senate, as I understand it, said the
core problem is the list prices of the drugs. Am I correct in
that?
Mr. Azar. I'd say actually I think list price is one of the
core problems. The other is insuring that, in various parts of
our program, we are getting an adequate deal and, for instance,
Part B, the physician-administered drugs, is one where it's
actually about, are we even getting a good net price. So I'd
say----
Mr. Welch. Right. OK.
Mr. Azar [continuing]. There are two main parts.
Mr. Welch. Here's the bottom line. There are a lot of folks
on both sides of the aisle who want to bring these costs down,
because all of us have consumers that are getting hammered.
There is a real dispute about what role the Government is
going to play in taking action to bring these prices down. But
sitting on the sidelines, which has essentially been the
approach we have taken, is not working.
Two things I want to talk to you about. One is price
negotiation, and the other is bringing down the list prices. I
mean, just to quote your boss on price negotiation, ``We are
the largest drug buyer in the world. We don't negotiate. We
don't negotiate. You pay practically the same for the country
as if you're going into a drug store and buy the drugs
individually. If we negotiated the price of drugs, we'd save
$300 billion a year.''
Question: Do you, as the Secretary, support what appears to
be the position of President Trump to begin price negotiation
by Medicare, which is the biggest purchaser of drugs in the
world?
Mr. Azar. So, in fact, in our budget proposal we have a
very novel element there. One of the things that I've talked
about is, how can we take the techniques that we use to
negotiate in Part D and use them in Part B where we do not
negotiate--we simply pay a sales price with a markup on it
under the statute.
And so we have actually proposed giving me the authority to
move drugs from Part B into Part D, where the PBMs can
negotiate on our behalf to secure the kind of great deals. We
get the best deals of any payer in the commercial marketplace
right now in Part D because the PBMs negotiate that for us.
Mr. Welch. Right. But the Government is the biggest
purchaser.
Mr. Azar. Yes, in Part B, absolutely, and we are not
negotiating at all or getting any kind of discounts or deals,
and that's why we think it's quite important.
Mr. Welch. So I just want to understand this. Are you in
favor of your agency, essentially, having the authority to
negotiate bulk price discounts just like the VA program does,
just like many of the State Medicaid programs do?
Mr. Azar. I think it requires an understanding of how VA is
different. VA is actually acquiring medicine as a purchaser,
where we're serving as a insurer in Part B and Part D.
Mr. Welch. Right. Let me interrupt you.
Mr. Azar. It's a different dynamic and power structure----
Mr. Welch. I only have 5 minutes. I know it's complicated,
and I know you know how to do it. You've got the experience.
But there is something that's really simple and elemental that
actually was captured by the President's comments.
If you're buying on behalf of the whole country, you ought
to get a better price than if you're individually walking into
the drug store, per unit, right? That's essentially what he's
saying.
Mr. Azar. And that's why we say in Part B we'd asked for
permission for us to use those negotiating techniques in Part
D.
Mr. Welch. Well, the negotiating techniques are bargaining.
I mean, you know, Tommy Thompson, who was one of your
predecessors, did it when we had the crisis and he had to buy
an immense amount of----
Mr. Azar. Well, that was a procurement. I was actually
involved in that.
Mr. Welch. Well, you guys did a good job.
Mr. Azar. That was a procurement.
Mr. Welch. Right.
Mr. Azar. The difference in Part D, for instance--if that's
what you're getting at--is even Peter Orszag, the Democratic
head of the Congressional Budget Office and President Obama's
OMB Director, has made clear that in Part D the only way one
could get better pricing than we do now is if we had a single
restrictive, exclusionary national formulary where seniors
get----
Mr. Welch. OK. All right. Let me--this is my last word.
That's right, but what I heard you say to Mr. Carter is
that, essentially, the PBMs impose their own formulary by the
rebate system they set up, and if you want in, you've got to
pay that price.
So they, instead of doctors and pharmacists, are setting a
formulary. And in Vermont what we do under Medicaid is, we have
got this commission that sets the formulary, but then there is
flexibility so that, if a doctor says this particular patient
use this particular drug, we do it. So I hope you follow
through.
Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Burgess. Gentleman's time is expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Butterfield, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much, Chairman Burgess, and
I apologize for being late for the hearing, and I know you go
through this every day. I've been multitasking all day long.
But Chairman Burgess, thank you for holding this hearing.
Once again, the administration has shown how out of touch it is
with most Americans. It is not surprising that this
administration is proposing more changes--yet more changes--to
healthcare that will harm the middle class and make it more
difficult for our citizens to access quality healthcare.
I am from North Carolina. My constituents want healthcare,
plain and simple. People across the country want healthcare.
That is why, despite all the Republican efforts to
undermine the ACA, the program is still going. In my opinion
it's still going strong, and more than 1 million Americans
signed up for the ACA for the first time after President Trump
pulled the rug, or attempted to pull the rug, from under the
program.
This budget ignores the wishes of our constituents who
flooded our offices with calls, asking us to protect the ACA
and protect Medicaid from Republican efforts to gut these
programs.
It also ignores the bipartisan will of Congress. They just
approved a 2-year budget with increased funding for important
health programs like the National Institutes of Health. This
budget would take healthcare away from my constituents, and I
strongly oppose it. I voted for the Budget Deal Act last week.
Since the Affordable Care Act was first implemented, the
uninsured rates steadily declined year after year. From 2010 to
2016, 20 million Americans gained health insurance.
Unfortunately, this administration has done everything it can
to reverse that, in my opinion.
Since President Trump took office, the Department of Health
and Human Services has done its best--in my opinion, again--to
sabotage health coverage for individuals, make it harder for
people to get covered.
As a result, for the first time since the ACA was
implemented--and it was this committee that implemented the
ACA, I was part of it--the uninsured rate actually increased
for the first time.
According to Gallup, 3 million more Americans were
uninsured in 2017 compared to the previous year. It was also
the largest single-year increase that has been observed since
Gallup began collecting this data. Quite an accomplishment,
after years of seeing the uninsured rate go down.
Now, Mr. Secretary, I understand from my staff you've been
on the job for 14 days, so I won't be brutal with you, even
though I have some very strong feelings. I understand when
you're new to something, you have to get acclimated.
But yes or no, please: Do you agree or disagree, sir, that
3 million more uninsured does not reflect--well, first of all,
do you agree with the 3 million number? Is that accurate?
Mr. Azar. I don't know that that's accurate. I just--I
don't know. I don't have the current, up-to-date uninsured
numbers after the enrollment period that came out of the
Affordable Care Act enrollments.
We were slightly off this year from the previous year. I
don't know the aggregate change on the uninsured.
Mr. Butterfield. I think all of the stakeholders generally
agree there was a tick down.
Mr. Azar. Slightly.
Mr. Butterfield. Now, how sharp it was, I don't know--I
don't know that answer for sure. But that's not success.
Anytime the uninsured rate goes down, that is not a measure of
success. Would you agree or disagree?
Mr. Azar. I think if reflects the problems that we have
with the Affordable Care Act on that individual market program.
That's why we want to work together to try to change it, to
create a program that actually will work and deliver for those
28-plus million Americans for whom this program is not giving
them affordable access to insurance.
So we want to work together to try to solve that for those
forgotten men and women. We talk so much about the 10 million
who are in the individual market there that we are buying
insurance for, subsidized, and we forget the ones who have been
priced out of that marketplace that we really have to come up
with solutions for.
Mr. Butterfield. But you certainly agree that it's a
legitimate goal for all of us as leaders to try to make sure
that the population has access to healthcare? That goes without
saying.
Mr. Azar. We all share that goal, yes.
Mr. Butterfield. OK. And do you make a commitment to us
that you will work with us to the extent that you can to make
that happen?
Mr. Azar. Absolutely.
Mr. Butterfield. According to HHS, minorities are less
likely to receive diagnosis and treatment for their mental
illness, have less access to it, availability of mental health
services, often receive poor quality of mental healthcare.
To address these disparities, Congress just authorized a
minority fellowship in 21st Century Cures. We are very proud of
that program. This program has been supported for many years to
improve healthcare outcomes for racial and ethnic populations
by growing the number of culturally competent professionals to
serve the underserved.
Last question--yes or no, please: Is HHS proposing to
eliminate this program in fiscal year 2019?
Mr. Azar. I do not recall that program in our budget. I'd
be happy to get back to you in writing on that.
Mr. Butterfield. Get back to me. Get back to me, please.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Butterfield. That is very important. Thank you for your
patience, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. Does the gentleman from Texas continue to
reserve?
Mr. Butterfield. I am not from Texas. Oh. Oh. Oh. I am
sorry.
Mr. Green. We will be glad for you to come to Texas,
George.
Mr. Burgess. I recognize the gentleman from New York for 5
minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. He cut me off so sharply, I thought he was
coming back at me.
Mr. Burgess. Five minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. All right. There is always a little
tolerance when Members are winding down, Mr. Chairman. But
thank you.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Tonko is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Secretary Azar, first,
let me thank you for coming before this committee.
It is my fervent hope that in the days to come we can find
ways to work together to make progress on important healthcare
priorities for our Nation.
Unfortunately, today you are here to defend what I believe
is a mean budget that would take us backwards--backwards with
this budget on opioids, backwards on mental health, and
certainly backwards on providing affordable, high-quality
healthcare for all.
It's often said that a budget is a statement of our values,
and after reading this year's budget, the values of the Trump
administration couldn't be any clearer.
The overreaching, overarching message that I hear is,
you're on your own. If you are an individual who has struggled
with opioid addiction and you have put yourself on the path to
recovery with the help of treatment provided by Medicaid
coverage, too bad. You're on your own, and Medicaid has been
cut by $1.4 trillion.
If you are a senior who paid into Medicare all your life
and believed this President when he promised over and over
again that there would be no cuts to Medicare, too bad--you're
on your own to the tune of $554 billion over the next decade.
If you are a single mom working two jobs to put a roof over
your head and using your SNAP benefits to help put nutritious
food on the table, you're on your own. But don't worry, we will
send you a box of peanut butter and some Wheaties.
I could go on and on. But simply put, this budget is not
reflective of who we are and of our needs, and of our values
that I hear about when I am home in New York.
Many of my colleagues have already spoken about the
devastating cuts to Medicaid, Medicare, and the Affordable Care
Act this budget contains, and I would like very much to
associate myself with their remarks.
It cannot be said enough, but you simply can't put forward
a legitimate proposal for addressing the opioid epidemic at the
same time that you are proposing more than a trillion dollars
in cuts to Medicaid. It just doesn't pass the smell test.
Medicaid is the largest payer for behavioral health
services in our country and remains our single best tool to
address the opioid crisis. The continued partisan attacks on
this safety net program put lives in jeopardy and needs to stop
now.
Now, even after this administration has talked a big game
about prioritizing the opioid crisis, I'd like to dig a little
deeper into some specific cuts that I have seen in this budget
that will send us backwards in this fight.
First, I'd like to ask about SAMHSA's strategic prevention
framework initiative. As the name implies, the flexible funding
is used to support State-based strategies to prevent youth
substance abuse.
SAMHSA's own data show that States and communities
receiving funding from this program have made improvements in
reducing the impact of substance abuse.
Secretary Azar, your budget request would cut $60 million
from the strategic prevention framework initiative, which would
reduce funding by more than one half. In your budget rationale,
you state that this cut is made to prioritize other high-need
programs.
So, Mr. Secretary, when we have 174 individuals a day dying
of overdoses, what is more high need than continuing
investments in proven substance abuse prevention strategies
that are very much critical to the inclusive formula for
success?
Mr. Azar. So we actually are investing new money into
SAMHSA--$1.24 billion for opioids. So I believe we have
demonstrated a clear and deep----
Mr. Tonko. But you're cutting the prevention program, and
prevention treatment and recovery are all important.
Mr. Azar. I'd want to investigate more about that
particular program, but we actually are adding many new
programs. I do not know the particulars on that program. I
apologize. But the----
Mr. Tonko. But it's the point I am making. You're adding
new programs and at the same time drastically reducing standard
programs that have really been proven to be successful, and I
am trying to figure out the rationale and then the outcome--the
final line in terms of the statistics that I shared--174
individuals dying per day.
Mr. Azar. I'd be happy to get back to you on that
particular program. I can just tell you our commitment around
the opioid crisis and the SAMHSA's role in it is deep and
broad, as evidenced by the $1.24 billion commitment there just
in the 1 year.
Mr. Tonko. OK. I appreciate that and look forward to your
response.
Another program that is targeted for cuts is SAMHSA's
Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment
program, also known as SBIRT, an evidence-based practice that
helps screen for potential substance use problems in
individuals.
Funding provided by this program helps medical
professionals implement SBIRT in their practices and has
resulted in at least 2.7 million individuals being screened as
of 2016.
The fiscal year '19 budget eliminates all funding for the
SBIRT program, claiming that this successful demonstration that
has been taken up across the country can be paid for by public
and third-party insurance.
I found this rationale extremely odd because one of the
things I hear from advocates all the time is the need for
better screening and early intervention.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
would ask if he will submit that question in writing. I am
certain the Secretary will be happy to respond to it.
Mr. Tonko. I thank the Chair.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Secretary,
thank you for your patience today and being here, and you've
heard from the folks on our side of the aisle, and I share the
values.
And I think I've never met a doctor who didn't just want to
treat their patients and to make them well. It's hard for us,
though, to have that goal of making someone well when you start
talking about lifetime caps, for example.
In an earlier career here, I remember we had ``death
panels,'' and if you have a lifetime cap and someone runs out
of their Medicaid--so those are issues that need to be worked
out on the elected level.
I have the concern about the President's budget because,
again, we all heard there's not going to be any cuts in
Medicare or Medicaid during the campaign, but today we see
substantial cuts in Medicaid and Medicare. Cutting $500 billion
in Medicare and more than $1.4 trillion in Medicaid is just not
what I think a Health and Human Services Agency ought to be
doing.
We need to figure out ways we can do it, and my goal is not
to have rationed care, and I think that's probably the goal all
of us ought to share as Americans, because my goal has been to
expand access.
I represent a very urban district in Houston, and until the
Affordable Care Act, 44 percent of the people who worked in my
district did not get insurance through their employer. And now
they have that option--in fact, that requirement. We took away
the requirement, but their employers still need it, so there
have been some good things.
Mr. Secretary, particularly in light of the ongoing opioid
epidemic, does the administration not comprehend the danger of
cutting these health insurance programs, and do you agree that
people have access to needed healthcare services through that
service covered by their insurance?
Mr. Azar. So we absolutely share the commitment around
substance abuse treatment for individuals who are suffering in
the opioid crisis and, again, we share the goal. We just have
different tactics to get there. We actually believe that our
approaches will lead to more people having access to affordable
insurance. Reasonable minds can differ about this, but the goal
is the same.
We just differ on what we think would get there, and we do
believe that it's better for more people to have insurance. We
think right now the system is locking so many people out of
that in terms of affordability. But we want them to have that
access.
Mr. Green. Well, the affordability--I would hope that the
administration would not cut the subsidies that some of my
working poor who, you know, make too much money to get Medicaid
but they also don't make enough money to pay for an insurance
without the subsidies.
But let me go back to the Medicaid program. Medicaid is the
largest single payer of behavioral health in the United States,
and financing more than 25 percent of all treatment. But the
administration's budget cuts Medicaid by more than 25 percent.
So with cuts like these, it seems like if you cut Medicaid
and we still say we want to deal with people with behavioral or
opioid addictions, you can't do it. It's like me going to Aetna
or Blue Cross and say, ``I want insurance, but I am not going
to pay for it.'' That just doesn't work.
The administration continues to pursue repeal and
replacement of the Affordable Care Act. But that's a
congressional decision, both the House and the Senate, and I
would hope the agency would not make decisions on it before it
gets guidance from Congress, because that's what the law is.
Can you commit to stopping undermining or sabotaging our
health insurance markets and take urgent action to reverse the
increase of the uninsured rate?
Mr. Azar. So we believe in ensuring that our programs help
deliver affordable insurance and choice to individuals, and the
steps that we take are about trying to create stable markets,
stable risk pools. The challenge that we are having on
declining enrollment is that our offering is not good. People
are being shut out by these radically increasing premiums from
the way the market was designed. So we want to make insurance
to work for folks.
Mr. Green. Let me--I only have 45 seconds left, and I am
next to the last for you, so you'll be out of here soon.
But we did that bill in this committee, and we didn't get
everything we wanted on the House version. We ended up with the
Senate version. But I think we share that. I don't want people
paying huge premiums or even subsidizing, but there are ways we
can do it. There needs to be a partnership between the
administration and the Members of Congress.
I appreciate that you believe we share the goals. With all
due respect, it's clear that the budget proposal--we
fundamentally do not share the same goals. The picture the
administration budget paints is a harsh one where more and more
Americans join the ranks of the uninsured every day and, again,
in an urban area like I have--not a wealthy area--this would be
devastating to folks who are barely on the edge.
And Mr. Chairman, I know I am out of time, and I yield back
what I don't have.
Mr. Burgess. Chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman
yields back and I'll recognize myself for the balance of the
time, however much time I may consume, right?
Mr. Green. Well, then I'll ask for more time.
Mr. Burgess. And you have been very generous with us today,
and we appreciate it, and historically you've been generous
with your time, and I appreciate that, as well.
We did hear a lot today about--and, of course, all of us
have been here on the dais all afternoon, so we haven't kept up
with any of the news--but, as we kept up with it yesterday and
this morning, it did seem, as you listen to those stories, that
there perhaps were some significant cues or clues that were
missed somewhere along the way.
While some of that will involve other agencies and
municipal agencies and not the Department of Health and Human
Services, I hope to the extent that there were cues missed to
the mental health space that you will work with us in this
committee.
We did pass a pretty big mental health title in the Cures
bill, and if there is something that you can tighten up
administratively or something where you need legislative
direction, I just want you to know the committee is prepared to
stand by you with that.
I'd also make the observation--and this is information that
is readily available on open source--many of the individuals
who are involved in this type of crime actually do have some
type of psychotropic drug in their system, and that is not to
impugn or disparage the use of these medications. But it means
that these individuals have intersected with a mental health
professional at some point, because these are not compounds
that are available over the counter, not frequently something
that's bought on the street.
So it does seem that there has been an opportunity, at
least, to intersect with a mental health professional, and
anything we can do from the agency perspective or legislatively
to tighten that up, I'd certainly commit to you that I am
willing to work with you on that.
Your predecessor was a colleague of mine, someone who I
thought very highly of, and I will tell you from a doctor's
perspective, across the country there was a lot of anticipation
when Dr. Price was selected as the Secretary of Health and
Human Services.
To the extent, going forward, that we can be cognizant--you
at the agency and us legislatively--cognizant of things we can
do to reduce the burden on physicians and people who actually
provide the care--insurance, yes, that's one thing. But if you
haven't got someone there to provide the care, the darn
insurance card doesn't do you a bit of good. And I do worry
that we have put a lot of burden on our men and women who
practice medicine in this country.
The electronic health records have been a significant
burden. I know there is some concern as we go through some of
the Medicare structural reforms. Just for the record, it was
important to get rid of the sustainable growth rate formula. We
did that. I did think it was going to take longer than 5 years
for whatever came next. I lost that argument, and it is to be
done under a 5-year time interval.
However, I think you can see from last Friday's vote that
the Congress, the legislature is willing to provide, if there
is legislative relief that is needed as far as the time line or
as far as the flexibility, we are prepared to provide that for
you.
Remember that this bill, the Medicare Access and CHIP
Reauthorization Act, passed with 393 House votes, 93 Senate
votes--big bipartisan majority. A lot of us have a lot of
equity and ownership of this, and we want it to be done
correctly. That's probably the most important thing.
We have had a number of hearings already. We are going to
have another one as MACRA affects small practices, and
certainly work closely with Administrator Seema Verma over at
CMS. And, again, I just commit to you that we want to do what
we can to alleviate that burden.
You had mentioned the interplay between prescription drug
monitoring programs and electronic health records. That, I
guess, would be one of those opportunities to reduce the burden
on practicing physicians, if there is a way to seamlessly
integrate that. I don't know if you can do it as far as the
privacy concerns. but I think it's something worthwhile to look
at.
What I would also say--and I think you've touched on this--
there is a lot of data that the Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Services has and, to the extent that you can identify
a practitioner who is writing an inordinate number of
prescriptions, a pharmacy that's filling an inordinate number
of prescriptions, a pharmacy that's taking delivery of an
inordinate amount of product, these are things that are
actually knowable within the data that's locked up in the
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
So, again, I hope you will work with us as far as trying--I
think too often we will point to our physician community and
say, ``You guys have got to tighten this up, because we have
got an opiate crisis in this country.'' And yet, there are
places where, from the agency perspective, we could tighten
things up and perhaps drill down on where some of those
problems actually occur.
You've been very generous with us today. There are going to
be questions coming to you in writing. I have several that I
will send you.
With that, the subcommittee stands adjourned and, again,
thank you, Mr. Secretary.
[Whereupon, at 3:24 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]