- FINANCIAL STABILITY OVERSIGHT COUNCIL NONBANK DESIGNATION
[Senate Hearing 116-23]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-23
FINANCIAL STABILITY OVERSIGHT COUNCIL NONBANK DESIGNATION
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
BANKING,HOUSING,AND URBAN AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
ON
EXAMINING VIEWS ON THE FSOC NONBANK DESIGNATION PROCESS, INCLUDING THE
STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES OF THE DESIGNATION PROCESS; COMMENTS ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS MADE BY TREASURY IN ITS NOVEMBER 2017 REPORT ON FSOC
DESIGNATIONS; AND RECEIVE RECOMMENDATIONS ON LEGISLATIVE OR
ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS THAT COULD BE TAKEN TO CHANGE THE DESIGNATION
PROCESS
__________
MARCH 14, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available at: https: //www.govinfo.gov /
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-538 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON BANKING, HOUSING, AND URBAN AFFAIRS
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho, Chairman
RICHARD C. SHELBY, Alabama
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
PATRICK J. TOOMEY, Pennsylvania
JACK REED, Rhode Island
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
BEN SASSE, Nebraska
JON TESTER, Montana
TOM COTTON, Arkansas
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
JOHN KENNEDY, Louisiana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
MARTHA MCSALLY, Arizona
DOUG JONES, Alabama
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
Gregg Richard, Staff Director
Joe Carapiet, Chief Counsel
Brandon Beall, Professional Staff Member
Laura Swanson, Democratic Deputy Staff Director
Elisha Tuku, Democratic Chief Counsel
Corey Frayer, Democratic Professional Staff Member
Cameron Ricker, Chief Clerk
Shelvin Simmons, IT Director
Charles J. Moffat, Hearing Clerk
Jim Crowell, Editor
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
THURSDAY, MARCH 14, 2019
Page
Opening statement of Chairman Crapo..............................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
22
Opening statements, comments, or prepared statements of:
Senator Brown................................................
3
Prepared statement.......................................
23
WITNESSES
Douglas Holtz-Eakin, President, American Action Forum............
4
Prepared statement...........................................
24
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Kennedy..........................................
61
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
62
Paul Schott Stevens, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Investment Company Institute...................................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
28
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Toomey...........................................
63
Senator Kennedy..........................................
64
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
64
Senator Sinema...........................................
66
Jeremy C. Kress, Assistant Professor of Business Law, University
of Michigan Ross School of Business............................
7
Prepared statement...........................................
52
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Toomey...........................................
66
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
67
Additional Material Supplied for the Record
Statement submitted by Julie A. Spiezio, Senior Vice President
and General Counsel, The American Council of Life Insurers.....
70
Statement submitted by the Reinsurance Association of America....
74
Statement submitted by The Center for Capital Markets
Competitiveness, U.S. Chamber of Commerce......................
114
(iii)
FINANCIAL STABILITY OVERSIGHT COUNCIL NONBANK DESIGNATION
----------
THURSDAY, MARCH 14, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met at 10:02 a.m., in room SD-538, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Mike Crapo, Chairman of the
Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MIKE CRAPO
Chairman Crapo. This hearing will come to order.
Today we welcome to the Committee three witnesses to
testify on the Financial Stability Oversight Council, or FSOC,
relating to nonbank designation processes: Dr. Douglas Holtz-
Eakin, president of the American Action Forum; Mr. Paul Schott
Stevens, who is president and CEO of the Investment Company
Institute; and Professor Jeremy Kress, assistant professor of
business law at the University of Michigan's Ross School of
Business.
Each of these witnesses is knowledgeable about FSOC's
designation process and policy, drawing from their experiences
in industry, Government, and academia.
The Dodd-Frank Act established FSOC to identify and respond
to potential threats to U.S. financial stability.
Dodd-Frank authorizes FSOC to subject nonbank financial
companies to supervision by the Federal Reserve and prudential
standards, if it deems a nonbank to pose such a threat.
In the years after Dodd-Frank was enacted, FSOC evaluated
individual companies for designation as systemically important
and ultimately designated four nonbank financial companies:
AIG, MetLife, Prudential, and GE Capital.
At the outset, the process for nonbank designation was
immeasurable and unclear, which was not only contrary to the
long-established principles of our regulatory framework, but
also led to legal uncertainty that undermined the very
objective of FSOC.
Several years ago, I requested a comprehensive study by the
GAO on the nonbank designation process.
The report concluded that FSOC's process lacks transparency
and accountability, insufficiently tracks data, and does not
have a consistent methodology for determinations.
In recent years, FSOC voted to rescind three of those
designations, while another's designation was overturned in
court.
FSOC's decisions have costly implications for designated
companies, which inevitably translates into higher costs for
consumers and to the overall economy.
It is important that FSOC's designation process be clear,
robust, and focused on addressing real underlying risks.
The process should also take into account how the existing
regulatory structure already addresses any potential risks
before taking the drastic step of designating an individual
company.
In 2012, FSOC issued interpretive guidance that outlined
its designation process, which begins with identifying
individual companies over $50 billion in total assets for
further scrutiny based on a set of five other quantitative
thresholds and then gradually using more granular and company-
specific information along the way.
In November of 2017, Treasury issued a report entitled,
``Financial Stability Oversight Council Designations'', which
provided recommendations to improve FSOC's designation process.
One of Treasury's key recommendations was for FSOC to
prioritize an activities-based approach to designation and work
with relevant regulators to address any risks posed prior to
considering designating a nonbank financial company.
Among the other important recommendations made by Treasury
for the nonbank designation process were: to only designate a
nonbank financial company if the expected benefits to financial
stability outweigh the costs of the designation; and provide a
clear ``off-ramp'' for designated nonbank financial companies,
including by identifying key risks that led to the designation
and enhancing the transparency of FSOC's annual review process.
At its meeting on March 6, FSOC proposed to replace its
current interpretive guidance on the nonbank designation
process with new interpretive guidance that would make several
substantive changes.
Some of those changes include: prioritizing an activities-
based approach to designation that would focus on identifying
and addressing the underlying sources of risk and would only
contemplate designating individual companies if a risk could
not be addressed through an activities-based approach;
conducting a cost-benefit analysis prior to designating a
nonbank; eliminating the first of its three-stage process that
focuses on applying quantitative thresholds to identify
individual companies for further evaluation, and the six-
category framework used to analyze individual companies; and
instituting several procedural changes to improve FSOC's
engagement with companies and regulators, and clarifying off-
ramp opportunities for companies through risk mitigation
efforts prior to or after designation.
After FSOC issued the proposed guidance, Comptroller Otting
expressed support for the proposal, saying, ``The proposal
ensures FSOC continues to serve its primary function in a
transparent, efficient, and effective manner.''
The proposed guidance is a step in the right direction to
improve FSOC's effectiveness, transparency, and analyses.
Senators Rounds, Jones, Tillis, and Sinema have also
introduced the Financial Stability Oversight Council
Improvement Act, which would require FSOC to first determine
that a different action would not address risks posed to
financial stability prior to a vote on an initial nonbank
designation.
During this hearing, I look forward to discussing how an
activities-based approach will more effectively address
potential risks to U.S. financial stability; the appropriate
framework for evaluating activities; and additional
opportunities for improvements to the process.
I again thank each witness for joining the Committee this
morning.
Senator Brown.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SHERROD BROWN
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing. Welcome to the three witnesses, including Ohioan
Professor Kress. Nice to see you.
Let us remember why FSOC matters. When Wall Street takes
big risks, they do it with Americans' money.
The financial system affects who gets loans. It affects
whether people have enough money to retire or pay medical bills
or send their children to college. When banks and other big
financial firms take risks and they do not pay off, it is never
the executives, it is never the CEOs who are left with nothing.
It is never the executive and the CEOs who have to explain to
kids, to their own children at the kitchen table what has
happened. It is ordinary families who lose their jobs, who lose
their homes, who lose their life savings.
When too many financial institutions take too many risks at
once, we all pay the price.
Right now the risks to the financial system have increased,
which means the risks are greater for families buying homes and
saving for retirement and paying off student loans. The biggest
Wall Street banks have gotten even bigger and bigger and more
interconnected. The shadow banking system has grown; the shadow
banking system is taking on more risk. The business cycle is
extended and growth is slowing. The global economy faces
uncertainty from Brexit and growing debt levels in China.
And things look even worse when you look past Wall Street
and look at ordinary families: Student loan debt has hit record
levels. Seven million Americans are more than 3 months behind
on their car payments--think about that. Seven million
Americans are more than 3 months behind on their car payments.
That is the highest in 19 years. For too many Americans who
have not felt the benefits of economic recovery, decades of
income and wealth inequality have made it harder. Yet this
Committee, yet this Congress, yet this President seem not to
care--in fact, are making it worse.
This Administration is all too happy to look the other way
as long as the risks affect families' bank accounts, not bank
profits.
That is what led to the crisis a decade ago.
FSOC was created after large, interconnected firms--firms
like Lehman, Bear Stearns, and AIG--wreaked havoc on the
economy.
These firms did not have strong rules in place to ensure
they had enough liquidity or loss-absorbing capital in case of
an economic shock. There was no single regulator monitoring the
entire country and the entire company for systemic risks.
It was so important to address this problem that the
authors of Dodd-Frank created FSOC as Title I in the bill.
Today FSOC appears to be closed for business. It recently
rescinded the last remaining SIFI designation of the Obama
administration. Prudential, the giant insurance company that
grew larger and more complex after it was designated as
systemically important, is apparently no longer in need of
stronger safeguards and no longer a risk to financial
stability.
Just last week, FSOC issued proposed interpretive guidance
to make it more difficult to designate nonbank financial firms.
It shifts the burden back on the primary regulators to identify
and solve systemic risks before FSOC can take any action.
These are the same primary regulators that failed to
identify the risks that led to the worst financial crisis since
the Great Depression.
Even more concerning is this approach gives unregulated
shadow banks a free pass.
If you still do not believe that this Administration is a
threat to financial stability, look at how FSOC's staff has
been literally cut in half. FSOC member agencies have fewer
meetings; they spend less time considering financial stability
risks. Treasury has cut a third of the staff of the Office of
Financial Research, which is supposed to support the work of
FSOC.
The Financial Stability Oversight Council has all but given
up its role as the agency tasked with identifying and
constraining excessive risk in the financial system.
Wall Street continues to push legislation that would
further weaken FSOC and make it impossible for future
Administrations to designate nonbank financial firms.
We need to overcome this collective amnesia in this
Committee and in this Congress. We should be strengthening
FSOC; we should give it more authority to address risks; we
should make sure it has the staff and resources to protect
Americans' savings and homes from financial crisis. Instead the
collective amnesia of this Administration, Wall Street, and the
Senate will once again leave hardworking Americans and
taxpayers holding the bag.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Senator Brown.
We will proceed with the testimony now, and we will begin
with you, Mr. Holtz-Eakin.
STATEMENT OF DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN ACTION
FORUM
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and
Members of the Committee, it is a privilege to be here today to
discuss the Financial Stability Oversight Council.
It has a less than glorious track record in the business of
nonbank SIFI designations, and this is probably not surprising
given that it was given an almost impossible job as a systemic
risk regulator. We cannot measure systemic risk, and if you
cannot measure something, you probably cannot regulate it very
well.
As a result, the FSOC took the very strong authorities it
was given in Dodd-Frank for designations and used those as its
chief mechanism. Unfortunately, there were vague criteria for
designation, and the processes by which designations were made
turned out to be even less transparent than that. And so we had
a series of designations that were not, I think, very well
thought out and have been unwound. But that does not mean they
did not have real consequences.
AIG reported, for example, that it was relieved of about
$150 million in costs by its de-designation, and in thinking
about some designations that did not happen, asset managers,
our research indicated that this could have profound impacts on
their cost structures, and those would be passed forward onto
customers, lowering the rate of return to retirement saving by
something like 25 percent.
So FSOC's activities are very important, and this is a
great moment for the Committee to hold this hearing because at
this point there are no nonbank SIFIs, and it is a good time to
think about the criteria for designation and the processes by
which they would be done.
The key things in that regard I think have become pretty
clear. The first is to move toward an activities-based
designation and not to rely on entities. In effect, what
happened with the FSOC is it simply gave a second prudential
regulator to these nonbank entities, and having two prudential
regulators is not better than having one that does its job. And
moving to an activities-based designation would also remove the
bias against simply picking large organizations. You would have
to identify the activity that is producing the systemic risk,
and that is an important step for the FSOC to take.
The second thing that it would focus on is a disciplined
benefit-cost analysis prior to designation. Benefit-cost
analysis is not a panacea in the public policy process, but it
forces a discipline on regulators to think through clearly
those costs which will be incurred--and those are typically
relatively easy to measure--and then to try to put the scale of
the benefits, which in this case would be foregone financial
problems, in perspective. That is something that is important
to try to do because it often becomes clear that the costs are
quite large and the benefits would have to be comparably large.
And that discipline is something we need to do.
Then, finally, it should be transparent and predictable,
providing some way for remediation prior to designation and a
clear off-ramp if someone has been designated. Those have been
missing in the past.
My take on the interpretive guidance that the FSOC just
released is this is a good step in the right direction. It is
not permanent. It could be changed again in the future. But it
does, in fact, do four things that I think are important: turn
to an activities basis and stipulate that an entity cannot be
designated if it can be dealt with by dealing with its
activities; doing a benefit-cost analysis, as the Chairman
mentioned; assessing the likelihood that a firm will get into
financial trouble. The operating procedure in the past has
been, well, what if this firm got in trouble? What if it fell
apart? That is a very different calculation than what is the
probability that something will happen. A benefit-cost analysis
would roll that right into it, and that is a very good thing.
And then, finally, the information being provided to firms
and primary regulators as to what is making the institution a
risk to the financial system so that it can take steps to
mitigate predesignation or to provide a clear chance for an
off-ramp after designation.
So I thank you for the privilege of being here today, and I
look forward to the opportunity to answer your questions.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Mr. Stevens.
STATEMENT OF PAUL SCHOTT STEVENS, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, INVESTMENT COMPANY INSTITUTE
Mr. Stevens. Thank you, Chairman Crapo, Members of the
Committee. I am pleased to be before you once again today to
testify.
The registered funds that are ICI's members are major
participants in U.S. and global financial markets, and they do
so on behalf of more than 100 million American investors and
millions more overseas. The stability of the financial system
is, therefore, a matter of utmost concern to the institute and
its members as we help our investors achieve their most
important financial goals.
To that end, ICI was an early supporter of proposals to
form a council of regulators to share information and
coordinate their activities. We believe that this convening
authority can be FSOC's greatest strength.
Ten years after the financial crisis, the financial system
clearly is more robust and resilient, so the time is right to
review the effectiveness of postcrisis reforms and to make
tailored adjustments.
I will make four points in my remarks today.
First, designation of nonbank financial companies as a
SIFI, a systemically important financial institution, is a
blunt regulatory tool that should be reserved for extraordinary
circumstances. FSOC's primary goal should be to reduce systemic
risk, and there can be more effective, less burdensome, or more
expedient ways to do so. FSOC itself in 2014 decided that a
review of products and activities would be the first step in
considering potential risks in the asset management industry.
ICI welcomed this change in approach. We have long stressed
that registered funds and fund advisers do not warrant
designation as SIFIs. Thanks to their structure and regulation,
registered funds simply do not pose risks to the financial
system at large. Designation would bring banklike regulation
that would be highly ill-suited to funds and their managers and
would significantly harm fund investors.
More generally, designation of specific firms can create
significant market distortions, including increased moral
hazard and reduced competition and reduced consumer choice. We
believe there is and should be a very high bar for singling out
individual companies as SIFIs.
My second point is that SIFI designation should be reformed
to address widely recognized shortcomings. Officials from both
the current and prior Administrations have recognized the need
to allow greater engagement with a company being considered for
designation, a greater role for the company's primary financial
regulator, more analytical rigor and attention to actual
experience, and greater transparency to markets and the public.
My third point is that policymakers are moving in the right
direction. The Treasury Department's November 2017 report on
FSOC offered a series of constructive recommendations for the
designation process. Just last week, FSOC itself proposed to
implement these recommendations. It has proposed prioritizing
an activities-based approach to addressing systemic risk, while
reserving SIFI designation as a last resort whenever necessary.
We welcomed FSOC's request for public comments on these
proposed amendments to its guidance.
Despite these welcome developments, my fourth point is that
Congress still must act to confirm in statute that SIFI
designation is indeed intended as a tool of last resort and
should be used only in extraordinary circumstances. Four
members of this Committee--Senators Rounds, Jones, Tillis, and
Sinema--have introduced bipartisan legislation to achieve this
goal. S. 603, the Financial Stability Oversight Council
Improvement Act of 2019, would require the Council to consider
whether other steps could mitigate any potential risks posed by
a nonbank financial company before voting to designate that
company. These steps could include a different action by FSOC;
action by the company's primary regulator, including
industrywide regulation of products or activities; or de-
risking actions by the company itself.
The legislation, in our view, would help ensure that the
Council considers the full range of options available to
mitigate risks and makes an informed decision rather than
simply reaching for the hammer of designation in the first
instance. The result would be an FSOC that is more effective in
meetings its primary goal: reducing risk to the financial
system. ICI urges the Committee to consider S. 603 and report
it favorably to the full Senate.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Brown, thank you for your
attention. I will be happy to address the Committee's
questions.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Professor Kress.
STATEMENT OF JEREMY C. KRESS, ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF BUSINESS
LAW, UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN ROSS SCHOOL OF BUSINESS
Mr. Kress. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, Members of
the Committee, I am honored to appear before you to discuss the
Financial Stability Oversight Council's nonbank systemically
important financial institution designations. Nonbank SIFI
designations are an essential policy tool for regulating
systemic risk. I am, therefore, concerned that recent efforts
to de-emphasize nonbank SIFI designations--or eliminate them
altogether--would expose the financial system to many of the
same dangers it experienced in 2008.
I will make three points in my testimony today.
First, nonbank SIFI designations are crucial for preventing
catastrophic nonbank failures like the collapses of Bear
Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and AIG. Nonbank SIFI designations
protect the financial system by deterring nonbanks from
becoming systemically important and by applying heightened
safeguards to firms that nonetheless become excessively large,
complex, or interconnected. By contrast, nonbanks' baseline
regulatory regimes are generally not well suited to accomplish
these goals.
Second, criticisms of nonbank SIFI designations are
unpersuasive. For example, despite critics' complaints, nonbank
SIFI designations do not impose bank-centric rules on nonbanks.
To the contrary, the Federal Reserve has gone to great lengths
to recognize the distinct regulatory issues associated with
nonbank financial companies and to tailor its approach
accordingly. Moreover, to the extent that heightened
regulations create an uneven playing field for designated
nonbank SIFIs, this differential is a feature, not a bug.
Enhanced safeguards for nonbank SIFIs ensure that companies
have incentive to avoid becoming or remaining systemically
important.
Third, proposals to replace nonbank SIFI designations with
an activities-based approach are deeply misguided. Activities-
based regulation, on its own, will not prevent systemic
collapses like those we experienced in 2008. It is unrealistic
to expect that regulators will identify and appropriately
regulate all such activities ex ante, especially given
financial companies' strong incentives to restructure or rename
activities to avoid regulation. By contrast, policymakers are
much more likely to consistently and accurately identify
nonbank financial companies whose distress could threaten
financial stability.
A purely or predominantly activities-based approach to
nonbank systemic risk will fail for yet another reason: the
U.S. regulatory framework is not configured to implement
effective activities-based regulation. The U.S. regulatory
system is riddled with gaps in areas like insurance, hedge
funds, and FinTech. Because FSOC lacks authority to implement
activities-based rules directly, this pervasive jurisdictional
fragmentation would undermine efforts to enact and enforce
uniform, consistent activities-based rules throughout the
financial system.
To be sure, if configured appropriately, activities-based
regulation could address some sources of nonbank systemic risk.
But as currently configured, the U.S. regulatory framework is
simply not conducive to effective activities-based nonbank
regulation.
Proponents of an activities-based approach to nonbank
systemic risk contend that activities-based rules would merely
supplement, rather than displace, nonbank SIFI designations.
But make no mistake. The procedural barriers to nonbank SIFI
designations that FSOC proposed last week would make it
exceedingly difficult for the Council to designate new nonbank
SIFIs and for any such designation to survive judicial review.
Moreover, the Council's apparent enthusiasm for activities-
based nonbank regulation rings hollow given that the FSOC has
not used its existing statutory authority to propose a single
activities-based rule in more than 2 years under Secretary
Mnuchin's leadership.
In sum, I am deeply concerned about recent initiatives to
roll back nonbank systemic risk regulation. Efforts to
marginalize the Council by diminishing its legal authority,
politicizing its work, and reducing its budget collectively
increase risks to the financial system and ultimately threaten
the real economy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you very much.
I want to start out with you, Dr. Holtz-Eakin, and just
sort of an overall question. You address in your testimony the
fact that the nonbank SIFI designations come with a cost.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Yeah.
Chairman Crapo. Could you describe that cost? And, you
know, there has been a lot of talk about who is the beneficiary
of addressing the regulatory burden that is imposed by this
system. What is that cost? And who bears it?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Well, there are two main costs that
designation brings. The first is sheer compliance costs, which
would be borne by the institution itself--the hiring of
compliance personnel, the additional reporting requirements,
compliance with stress tests and the like, all of which can be
quite costly. Those costs never end up residing just in the
institution. They will be passed on in some way, either to the
customers in the form of higher prices, if it is an insurance
company, for example, higher premiums on insurance, or in lower
returns to the owners of the firm, the shareholders. But those
costs are real, and they have proven to be quite significant.
The second cost is really the requirement to hold more
capital and to restrict the innovation in the scale and scope
of the business practice. You have got now a new regulator who
has decided they know how you can run your business. If you
start trying to do something new, you are going to have to get
their permission to do that, and you will not have the capital
necessary to deploy it perhaps, and so you lose some of the
sort of natural institutional vitality in the process.
Chairman Crapo. And, ultimately, that impacts consumers and
the economy.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Yes. All of these costs are borne by U.S.
citizens who use financial sector products.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Stevens--and I want to get to Professor Kress' comments
on this as well--but do you agree with Professor Kress' point
that focusing on an activities-based or a risk-based approach
to regulation is just unrealistic to expect to be workable?
Mr. Stevens. You know, I took particular note of the
assertion in the testimony. I represent the mutual fund
industry. We had a statute passed in 1940 by the Congress that
has governed our industry from its birth, the modern fund
industry. It is an activities- and product-based form of
regulation that has been supervised by the SEC very
successfully for many years now, and it gave rise to, I think,
the 20th century's most prominent new formal financial
intermediation. It actually was the formal financial
intermediation which weathered the great financial crisis most
effectively.
So the idea that our regulation does not know how to deal
with activities and practices and make them safe and sound and
stable for the future is something that is simply
unrecognizable from the point of view of our industry.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Thank you.
Professor Kress, if I understood you correctly, you were
making--one of the points that you were making is that our
regulatory system as it currently exists does not provide the
appropriate, I guess I would say, seamless approach across the
regulatory world to dealing with activities. Is that correct?
Mr. Kress. That is correct.
Chairman Crapo. How would you suggest that we--well, would
you agree that it would be good for us, to improve our overall
regulation system, to do that?
Mr. Kress. Certainly. I acknowledge that activities-based
regulation can combat some sources of systemic risk. In order
for activities-based regulation to work, though, the regulatory
system has to be set up for it to succeed.
Chairman Crapo. Right. So how would we do that?
Mr. Kress. I am concerned with gaps and overlaps in our
system. When Congress mandates activities-based regulation, as
it did with investment companies, it can work. A successful
provision of the Dodd-Frank Act was mandatory derivatives
clearing. That is an example of a congressionally mandated
activities-based rule. But when it is left to the discretion of
regulators who are fractured and overlapped, I am concerned
about the consistency and uniformity with which activities-
based rules will be implemented.
Chairman Crapo. So should Congress take away that
discretion?
Mr. Kress. I do not think so, but if you wanted to empower
FSOC to write activities-based rules directly, rather than
simply make recommendations for the fragmented primary
regulators, I think that would strengthen FSOC's activities-
based approach to nonbank systemic risk.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Thank you. I only have 20
seconds left, and I would like to get both Dr. Holtz-Eakin's
and Mr. Stevens' response to that. So could you really quickly
say do you agree with the notion of giving FSOC regulatory
authority over activities-based--the authority to issue
rulemaking over activities-based--activities?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I would not start there. I would start
with the framework that is in the interpretive guidance and is
also in the proposed legislation, which is identify activities
which could be systemically dangerous and put the burden on the
primary regulator of insulating that firm from the danger of
that activity.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Mr. Stevens, real quickly,
please.
Mr. Stevens. FSOC has lots of different members with vastly
different forms of expertise. The idea that they could come
together as a council and begin writing regulation for discrete
parts of the financial system to me is implausible.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Thank you.
Senator Brown.
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Professor Kress, FSOC was created to address risks to our
economy posed by nonbank financial firms, like Lehman and Bear
Stearns and AIG, as you know, whose risky bets contributed to
the last financial crisis. Briefly, tell me why it is important
that FSOC have the ability to designate nonbank financial
companies as systemically important.
Mr. Kress. Precrisis, there was a longstanding assumption
that banks were the only types of financial companies that
could pose systemic risk. As you noted, during the crisis that
was proved untrue. Investment banks, insurance companies, other
nonbanks precipitated the economic collapse.
We still have nonbank systemic risk regulation that, at its
baseline, addresses risks unrelated to financial stability,
like consumer protection and investor protection. It is not
directly targeted to limiting those nonbanks' systemic risk. So
FSOC designations are important because they are the only way
to ensure that large, complex, interconnected nonbanks are
subject to enterprisewide safeguards, like consolidated capital
and risk management requirements that are designed to limit the
risks that those companies pose to the financial system and the
broader economy.
Senator Brown. Thanks. In the Obama years, there were four
nonbank financial companies designated as systemically
important, including AIG. It received a $182 billion Government
bailout during the crisis. Today, as you know, there are zero.
What kinds of insights into the workings of large nonbank
financial companies is FSOC losing for lack of designation? And
are other regulators stepping in?
Mr. Kress. I am concerned that FSOC is losing substantial
insight into the activities, risk exposures, and risk
management of large systemically important nonbanks. Because of
the gaps and fragments in our regulatory framework, there are
in some cases--like in insurance holding company regulation--
maybe no regulatory authority has jurisdiction to step in and
take FSOC's place.
Senator Brown. OK. That is important.
Last week, FSOC proposed to replace its existing nonbank
designations process with a new activities-based approach that
you were talking back and forth on, signaling the Council only
designate a firm as a last resort. A couple of questions. How
much time and difficulty would this add to the designation
process?
Mr. Kress. One of the parts of FSOC's proposed guidance
that I think is so problematic is its proposal to designate
nonbank SIFIs only in an emergency situation. SIFI designations
are not an emergency response tool. SIFI designations are
supposed to be prophylactic safeguards to prevent a nonbank
from becoming--from transmitting----
Senator Brown. Sorry to interrupt, but that suggests an
earlier designation so they would have time to implement
safeguards?
Mr. Kress. Absolutely.
Senator Brown. If the process described had been in place
before the last crisis, what would have prevented or mitigated
the damage to the financial system back a decade ago?
Mr. Kress. A purely activities-based approach would not
have prevented the financial crisis, and we know that because
an activities-based approach did not prevent the financial
crisis. We had a precursor to FSOC called the ``President's
Working Group on Financial Markets'', which was compromised of
many of the top regulators in the United States. The PWG had
many of FSOC's activities-based authorities to identify and
make recommendations for regulating systemically risky
activities.
If you were to go back and look at what the President's
Working Group was doing in 2004, 2005, 2006, when risks were
building in the mortgage market, PWG was focused on mutual
funds and hedge funds and terrorism risk insurance, activities
that were largely unrelated to the causes of the crisis.
The President's Working Group eventually proposed enhanced
rules for mortgages and securitizations and derivatives in
March of 2008, one week before Bear Stearns failed. I strongly
believe that asking regulators to predict ex ante what
activities will cause systemic failures is a fool's errand.
Senator Brown. Thank you, Professor Kress.
Mr. Chairman, I think that from this discussion it is
pretty clear that FSOC's proposed activities-based process is
really just another effort to weaken the rules for Wall Street
and let the largest institutions avoid requirements put in
place to prevent another taxpayer-funded bailout. We have seen
just in the last 2 weeks more and more weakening of regulation.
We have heard several Members of this Committee talk about the
collective amnesia of this Committee, of the majority in this
Committee, and of the Trump regulators, and Senator McConnell
and others in this institution, and the price that--
increasingly it looks like a price that we pay for this is
something that we just do not want to happen.
Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Rounds.
Senator Rounds. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me begin by just thanking the Chairman, Chairman Crapo,
for calling this important hearing. Also, as Chairman Crapo
indicated earlier, I am one of the sponsors of the FSOC
Improvement Act, and I did this in conjunction with my
colleagues Senators Jones, Tillis, and Sinema.
Part of our job in the Senate is to provide oversight of
Federal laws and regulations in order to make certain that they
are in the best interest of the American people. While we may
not all agree on whether Dodd-Frank was the right approach to
banking regulation--and I personally do not--we can all agree
that there is room to review and improve it.
One of the foremost examples of this is Barney Frank's
admission nearly 2\1/2\ years ago that the level of supervisory
thresholds in Dodd-Frank was, and I quote, ``a mistake.''
Revisiting the nonbank SIFI designation process is a healthy
conversation to be having, and it is the Senate's
responsibility to be doing more of this type of oversight.
The bipartisan legislation that I proposed simply suggests
that FSOC consider nondesignation alternatives, like working
with a company's primary regulator before voting on
designation. It does nothing to detract from FSOC's emergency
designation authority.
I would also like to point out that much more robust
legislation passed the House last Congress with more than two-
thirds of the chamber's support. A majority of Democrats on the
House Financial Services Committee cosponsored that more robust
approach. So it is my hope that the Senate Banking Committee
can come together on this issue this year. With that, I would
like to direct my first question to Mr. Stevens.
Mr. Stevens, one of my primary motivations for sponsoring
the FSOC Improvement Act was the impact of an unjustified SIFI
designation on mom-and-pop retail investors, people that go to
work every single day. Your organization has pointed out that
nearly three in four Americans save and invest in public
markets through a 401(k) or similar retirement plan. That means
every penny in fees counts for the long-term outlook of Main
Street's retirement savings. A small increase in unnecessary
fees through an unjustified SIFI designation could amount to
tens or hundreds of thousands of dollars in lifetime savings
for the average American.
From your perspective, why would it be important to think
about how to make FSOC work more efficiently? And how does our
legislation help?
Mr. Stevens. Thank you for your question, Senator. Thank
you also for the legislation that you have introduced.
Professor Kress has said that the Federal Reserve has
articulated these highly flexible and sensitive arrangements
under which it would regulate a nonbank financial institution
that was designated. To my knowledge, the Fed has not said a
peep about how it would regulate a fund or a fund adviser. So
we are thrown back on what Dodd-Frank says.
What does Dodd-Frank say? Dodd-Frank says, oh, let us have
an 8-percent capital requirement. Now, think about that in the
context of a large S&P 500 index firm. You are setting aside
presumably 8 percent to hold in cash. You have now created an
8-percent tracking error against the S&P.
Well, there is more because there is enhanced prudential
supervision. So the Fed's people come in and essentially tell
the fund manager how to run the fund. You know, money market--
mutual funds, rather, are largely not debtors to banks; they
are creditors to banks. So in a banking crisis, that would mean
presumably the Fed could come in and say you have to continue
maintaining your lines of credit for a bank that is failing,
not because it is good for your shareholders but because we
think it is good for the system.
So the fiduciary obligations of the fund's adviser have now
been broached in favor of protecting the banking system. And if
a bank actually goes down, that SIFI-designated fund, its
investors would have to put money into a bailout fund,
therefore having Main Street bail out Wall Street, which is
precisely what Dodd-Frank was intended to avoid.
My own view is that the market distortions that that would
create are such that that particular fund or fund complex would
not be too big to fail. It would be so regulated it could do
nothing else but fail, because investors will say, ``Thank you
very much. I do not want to be in that fund. I will go to
another one.''
So the costs are quite significant in terms of the way the
market functions and the consequences for the individual
investors in that fund.
Senator Rounds. So in a way you have answered really my
second question as well because this is--what I care about is
whether or not a consumer or somebody who is using these funds
and is investing that way and having professionals do it, they
basically see--because of these types of activities, they see
the possibility of a net return which is less because of these
being paid and because of the additional guidelines that are
laid in place that they then suffer with.
Mr. Stevens. There is no question about that, Senator, in
the event of designation.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time has expired.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Senator Rounds.
Senator Jones.
Senator Jones. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for
holding this hearing. Gentlemen, thank you all for being here
today, and I want to kind of follow up with some questions
about the legislation I have with Senator Rounds and others.
You know, one think I think it is important to keep in mind
is that Congress can pass all these laws, you know, but the
enforcement of those laws is only as good as the people that
are placed in those positions, whether it is FSOC, the SEC, the
Department of Justice, or whatever.
So with my questions with the bill that Senator Rounds and
I have, I do not want to focus on this Administration or really
a future potential Administration and take the politics. Let us
just focus on the regulatory framework of what we have got
here.
One of the things that I think we are doing here is that we
are trying to give these nonbanks an opportunity, should they
be in a position, that they are either failing, on the verge,
whatever the program is, to give them an opportunity for
correction.
So my first question with regard to our bill: Is there any
reason why FSOC, before designating a firm as systemically
important, is there any reason that they might not want to
consult with a primary regulator before that designation? Let
us just go down the panel.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. No. That would be entirely beneficial, and
it is the step that has been missing.
Senator Jones. All right.
Mr. Stevens. It is absolutely imperative because that
regulator is the entity on the Council that has the in-depth
expertise about that organization.
Senator Jones. They know those folks best.
Mr. Stevens. Far better than any others.
Senator Jones. All right. Yes, sir?
Mr. Kress. FSOC issued a detailed framework for how it
would consult with regulators in 2015, and my understanding is
that it does as a matter of routine before considering any
designation.
Senator Jones. So from your perspective, Professor Kress,
you do not have any objection to them consulting with the
regulators before they make that designation?
Mr. Kress. No. I think it is important.
Senator Jones. All right. So the next question is: Is there
any additional cost or time or things--are there any
disadvantages? Let us look at it from a different perspective,
and be very candid here. Let us look at the disadvantages--are
there any disadvantages from that, looking at the regulators
and letting regulators try to work with these entities before
the designation?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I do not think there are any
disadvantages. I think there is a tremendous advantage. Let us
just look at the history. We have these nonbank SIFIs, whether
they are insurance companies or GE Capital. They are in front
of the FSOC, and the FSOC says, ``You are systemically
dangerous,'' and a natural question is: Why? The FSOC should
have to state why they are dangerous and then be able to turn
to their primary regulator and say, ``Can you take care of
this?'' And there has not been in the past clear designation of
why they are a danger. And there has never been the chance for
their primary regulator to mediate that in any way. I think
those are important.
Senator Jones. Thank you.
Mr. Stevens. One of the important things about your
legislation, Senator, is that the timetable remains under the
control of the FSOC. There is this sensible consequence of the
legislation that they would have to at an early stage talk to
the fundamental regulator. They would have to talk to the
company, engage with the company, and, presumably, if there is
risk in the company, find the most expedient, quickest ways of
addressing it. But the idea that somehow or other this is going
to entail such inordinate delay, there is nothing in the
legislation that necessitates that. Our view is FSOC remains in
control of the timetable, and it always has the emergency
authority that Dodd-Frank provided it in the event of need.
Senator Jones. All right. Professor.
Mr. Kress. One of my concerns is that for many types of
nonbanks, there is not an appropriate regulator who would have
authority to address systemic risks under their jurisdiction.
Insurance holding companies, hedge funds, you can consult with
the supervisors of those entities, but do they have authority
to implement risk-reducing activities-based regulations? In
many cases, the answer is no.
Senator Jones. All right. So the question I have got then,
let us just stay with you, Professor. Is there a way, though--
because the problem I have got is, given my history as a lawyer
and, you know, former U.S. Attorney, I always like to try to
work with people before they get in trouble. And so for those
folks that you just talked about, is there a way to create that
process, either strictly with FSOC or someone else, that that
issue could be addressed? In other words, they see the smoke
clouds on the horizon, and they want to work with somebody to
prevent this designation. What would be the answer for that if
there is no regulator?
Mr. Kress. Senator, I understand that the goal of the
legislation is to increase collaboration among FSOC and primary
regulators as well as increase collaboration among the Council
and the company. The FSOC, under its existing interpretive
guidance, has a very clear three-step process in which it
increasingly coordinates with regulators and with the company
to get whatever information the Council needs to decide whether
to designate or to find alternative ways of addressing risk.
Senator Jones. So for the people that you are concerned
about, there is already a position in place, and ours would
just work for the regulators. Is that what you are saying?
Mr. Kress. I am concerned that adding additional
requirements over and beyond what FSOC has already laid out
would slow the process of designation, lead us to an emergency
situation, and potentially make any future designation
vulnerable to judicial review if a designated entity were to
demonstrate any shortcomings in the process.
Senator Jones. All right. Fair enough.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Warren.
Senator Warren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So the Financial Stability Oversight Council was set up
after the financial crisis to help regulators spot the kind of
big systemic risks that brought the economy to its knees and
crushed working families. And some of those risks are really
hard to imagine ahead of time, but others, like giant
interconnected financial institutions, are pretty obvious.
A few weeks ago, two big banks--SunTrust and BB&T--
announced that they are merging to create an even bigger bank,
the first new too-big-to-fail bank since the financial crisis.
Now, the Federal Reserve has to approve the merger before
it can go through, and I want to talk about what the Federal
Reserve should consider as they are thinking about this
approval.
Professor Kress, you used to work at the Fed, and the Fed's
record on this, gee, kind of all goes in one direction. They
have approved 100 percent of all mergers since before the
financial crisis. Why is the approval rate so high?
Mr. Kress. So that is correct, I was an attorney at the
Federal Reserve here in Washington from 2010 to 2014. One of my
responsibilities was analyzing bank mergers, advising the Board
on legal permissibility under the Bank Holding Company Act. And
I think there are largely two reasons why the approval rate is
so high.
One is potential bank merger applicants will have extensive
back-and-forth communications with Fed staff before even
striking a deal, let alone filing an application. And if at any
point during that prefiling back-and-forth the staff raises
concerns that perhaps staff would not be able to recommend
approval to the Board, that early warning signal, for whatever
reason--whether it is a pending enforcement action or other
supervisory concerns--that will deter the bank applicant from
even striking the deal in the first place.
The same thing is also true that if staff does not raise
early warning signals, in my experience, that can create some
internal momentum for a deal, and the Fed----
Senator Warren. And all this happens before the public has
a chance to weigh in before other competitors, before the
communities that will be affected, before the employees that
will be affected. So all this is happening behind closed doors.
Mr. Kress. That is correct, Senator.
Senator Warren. OK. And you said there is another reason.
Is that it? Oh, you were saying the internal momentum.
Let me just ask you, people often talk to me when I am out
and around, and they say that they are really worried in
banking. Small businesses, minority-owned businesses, people
who are doing work in rural communities, in small towns, say
they have a lot of trouble with access to capital. Does the
increasing concentration in the merger of these giants have
anything to do with that?
Mr. Kress. I have not seen strong evidence to that effect.
Senator Warren. OK. So in 2008, we learned that when giant
banks fail, they bring down whole communities with them. Since
then, we have put in place additional regulatory and capital
requirements to try to make these banks safer. So, Professor
Kress, do too-big-to-fail banks still pose a risk to financial
stability and ultimately to working families around the
country?
Mr. Kress. Absolutely. In addition to my research on FSOC
and nonbanks, I research and write about the too-big-to-manage
phenomenon in banking, and I think the literature is clear and
our past experience shows that traditional corporate governance
mechanisms do not work as well for very big banks as they do
for nonfinancial institutions. Big banks are opaque. They are
risky in that they are highly leveraged. They do not have the
same market discipline as nonfinancial institutions, and size
exacerbates all of those corporate governance challenges.
So, yes, I worry that too-big-to-manage institutions pose
risks both to financial stability and to consumers.
Senator Warren. OK. That is very helpful. Too big to fail
and too big to manage are problems here.
Regulators should not have been blind to the risks that led
to the 2008 financial crisis, but they were. And I hope that we
are better at detecting risks than we were in 2008, but we
still do not have a crystal ball here.
This Administration has been actively dismantling the
systems we put in place to catch the risks that we already know
about. If regulators ignore the risks to our economy, like the
giant banks and the big nonbank financial institutions,
ordinary consumers are going to bear the brunt of this all over
again. The Fed and the other regulators needs to be ready to do
their jobs.
Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Cortez Masto.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. Thank you for the hearing
this morning. Gentlemen, welcome. Thank you.
Professor Kress, let me start with you. You have written
that regulating systemically risky activities like credit
default swaps and securitizations is not enough to prevent
nonbanks from failing. Why do you think entity-specific
regulation is preferable?
Mr. Kress. I think we need entity-based nonbank SIFI
designations for several reasons. One is activities-based
regulation looks at risks of isolated activities one by one.
But risky activities, when combined within a single firm,
collectively can pose more risks than when they are conducted
in isolation.
Only entity-based SIFI designations allow regulators to
impose enterprisewide, consolidated capital requirements,
liquidity requirements, risk management requirements that are
very important to reduce the likelihood that a systemic
institution will damage the real economy. Activities-based
regulation on its own cannot do that.
Senator Cortez Masto. In essence, you could be looking for
patterns of risky behavior, right, that would lead to a larger
comprehensive concern?
Mr. Kress. Another benefit of SIFI designation is it gives
regulators an insight into the activities going on within
large, complex, interconnected firms. Without those
designations and without that insight, I am concerned that
identifying risky activities in the first place would be
extraordinarily difficult.
Senator Cortez Masto. So can I ask also then--banks have
rules regarding risk-based capital requirements, liquidity
rules, stress tests, and risk management standards. Which of
those rules are nonbank firms subject to?
Mr. Kress. Under Dodd-Frank, the expectation is that
nonbanks will be subject to versions of the enhanced prudential
standards in Section 165. The Federal Reserve has a statutory
mandate to tailor those rules to the business models of
designated nonbanks. FSOC--or, excuse me, the Federal Reserve
proposed to do that with respect to insurance companies. It
issued an advance notice of public rulemaking for designated
nonbank SIFI insurance companies, which I think it should
continue working on and finalize. And it would be expected to
tailor its regulations for a mutual fund complex or for some
different sort of nonbank if it were designated.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK. So I am from Nevada, and I will
tell you, as I sat here on the Committee for the last couple of
years, it seems to me that this current Administration is
removing the safeguards that we put in place during the worst
crisis that we had seen in Nevada and across the country.
I am curious, and this is for the panel. Would you agree
that credit default swaps on mortgage bonds were only systemic
in hindsight?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. So the credit default swaps at AIG were
the important element in the crisis, and they reflected, in my
view, more the poor internal management at AIG than a danger in
the instrument itself. I was on the Financial Crisis Inquiry
Commission, and when the AIG executives testified, their chief
financial officer, who was also their chief risk officer,
testified that he was unaware that Goldman Sachs could demand
cash of $10 billion if those swaps declined in value. So that
was just fundamental----
Senator Cortez Masto. So it was systemic in hindsight.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. ----mismanagement.
Senator Cortez Masto. That was hindsight.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. That is--but it is not systemic. It is a
company, and it is bad.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK.
Mr. Stevens. Senator, I do not know that I can answer the
question specifically, but I would say that we are faced with
two differing views here on the panel.
Senator Cortez Masto. Right.
Mr. Stevens. One view essentially would take very, very
large parts of the financial system and deliver it to the
Federal Reserve for regulation. This has never been the model
in the United States. It is a significant departure. We have
had two models historically. There has been bank regulation and
capital markets regulation, and we have benefited from both of
them. Capital markets regulation and bank regulation do not sit
very well together.
I cannot speak to the insurance sector because I am talking
really for the regulated funds for the asset management
industry. That was not an industry that had proven to be
lacking in any resilience during the crisis. Indeed, if in the
crisis those credit default swaps, as Alan Greenspan said, had
been held in a mutual fund, the investors in that fund would
have lost money, but there would have been no bailout, there
would have been no economic crisis because of the model that
the fund industry follows.
It is precisely because of that and the strengths that it
has that we believe it is highly inappropriate to put an
overlay of prudential regulation by bank regulators on top of
the fund industry.
But make no mistake. There was a headlong rush early on in
the FSOC's experience to do precisely that, and that is why our
industry has been so concerned about avoiding inappropriate
forms of regulation for a part of the financial system that has
been doing extraordinarily well on behalf of millions of
ordinary Americans.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. And I know my time is up.
Can I just follow up on that? Professor Kress, would you agree
with that?
Mr. Kress. I believe that the experience of the President's
Working Group that I referenced earlier and our regulatory
track record indicates that it was difficult to foresee the
credit default swap storm coming.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK. Thank you. Thank you, gentlemen.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Kennedy.
Senator Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, do you honestly believe we can measure with any
sort of accuracy systemic risk?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Absolutely not.
Mr. Stevens. I think it is particularly challenging,
Senator, yes.
Senator Kennedy. Professor.
Mr. Kress. I will note that FSOC's job is not to measure
systemic risk, and----
Senator Kennedy. I know that, but we all talk around here
about, you know, the level of safety that we have to reach. It
is sort of like your cholesterol level. You know, if we can get
it below that, we are going to live an extra 5 years. Do you
really think you can measure that?
Let me give you a specific example. I am not suggesting
that we should not try, but we have spent all this time and
effort and money and woman power and people power passing these
bills. The Chinese economy right now, let us say, they have set
a goal of growing at 6 percent. They say they are growing about
6\1/4\. They are lying. It is probably about 5 percent, maybe 4
percent, 4\1/2\. Let us suppose they go into negative growth.
That is going to throw the world into a recession.
Now, are our big banks going to survive that? That is a
question.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Yes, they are.
Senator Kennedy. You believe that we have banks right now
that are not too big to fail?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. There is a difference between being too
big to fail and the probability of failure.
Senator Kennedy. I understand.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I think probably the figure is quite low
in a demand-induced recession in the United States.
Senator Kennedy. Well, if we are so good at this stuff--
and, please, I do not mean that to come--I did not mean for
that to come out like it did. I am not trying to suggest that
you are not all very smart and know what you are talking about.
But if we are so good at this stuff, then how come we had 2008?
Mr. Stevens. Senator, if I could just observe, that is one
of the ironies here, isn't it? And I was struck by Senator
Warren's comments. The idea of delivering larger and larger
parts of the financial system for the regulation of the Federal
Reserve would make sense if you conclude that the Federal
Reserve does an extraordinarily stellar, sterling job about
regulating the banking sector.
I think that it is an imperfect model even for regulating
the industry for which it is fashioned to regulate. The idea
that it can then get up a learning curve about every other
conceivable part of the financial system and do an even better
job strikes me as a triumph of hope over experience.
Senator Kennedy. You see, my concern--and I am going to
come back to you, Doc. Excuse me. You go ahead.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Let me just focus on things that are
different now in a beneficial way. This is not all a negative--
--
Senator Kennedy. I know, but let me stop----
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. So the reason we had----
Senator Kennedy. Let me stop you, Doc.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. OK.
Senator Kennedy. And I do not want to get too far down in
the weeds, OK? You guys know a lot more than I do, but I am
going to look at this at a macro level for a second. We talk
about measuring systemic risk, and we talk about the
regulation, and that begs the question. OK, if we know how to
do it, why weren't we doing it in 2008? And how do you measure
systemic risk?
I mean, I think that we have many banks--strike that. I
think we have some banks that are still too big to fail, and I
do not think we would let them fail. I think if Jamie Dimon
called the President tomorrow and said, ``I hate to have to
tell you this, but I am about to go belly up,'' I think we
would bail him out.
Why don't we just go the easy route and say to all our
financial institutions--let us pick a number--``You have got to
keep 8 percent equity''?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. So I will say three things quickly, and
then your time is up.
Number one, there is no substitute for equity in the
financial system. It is the greatest buffer against failures.
Senator Kennedy. Yeah.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I am all with you on that.
Number two, if Jamie Dimon were to call--and I say this
lovingly--sure, if you want to bail out JPMorgan, that is fine,
but he should lose his job. And that is what went wrong the
last time we went through this. Nobody lost their job.
Senator Kennedy. He did not lose it in 2008.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. No. I know that.
And the third thing I would say is the thing that is
different now about the large banks is they are subject to
stress tests, so there is a macro view at their exposure to the
Chinese recession that you discussed. That is a big improvement
in the supervision----
Senator Kennedy. But the stress test assumes----
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Let me finish----
Senator Kennedy. ----that we can measure risk.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. No. It measures entity risk. So I am going
to agree with you. We are better at measuring the entity risk
posed by a large bank. We still do not know how to measure
systemic risk. I agree with you on that.
Senator Kennedy. Can I have 30 seconds?
Other than--I am not recommending this. I am asking you.
Other than a lot of folks losing their bonuses because they
will not make as much money, why wouldn't we just say--if
equity is nirvana, why wouldn't we just say, OK, all you folks
are going to maintain 8 percent equity. I know you are not
going to be able to take as much risk. Duh. That is the point.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Any equity standard involves a tradeoff in
higher costs to the consumers, and so all of the regulations
about that tradeoff, it is safety versus the capacity to have
lower-priced products.
Senator Kennedy. Yeah, but think how much we would save on
the regulation. Think how much you would save in compliance
costs. You would not have Sherrod pounding on you every day.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Are you sure about that?
[Laughter.]
Senator Kennedy. You are right about that. That part you
are right about. I mean, you know, in the old days before--the
real old days, banks held a lot more equity.
Sorry, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Senator Kennedy, and that does
conclude the questioning for today's hearing.
Again, I appreciate all three of you coming and bringing
your expertise and observations to us. We do need to seriously
look at what the regulatory structure and system and
authorities are, in my opinion, to effectively focus on a risk
and the appropriate level of regulation.
I see Senator Brown wants to make an observation.
Senator Brown. Just one quick observation. Senator Kennedy,
we will continue to work together to try to find a way on too
big to fail to get you and me on board in the same place, as I
did with your predecessor. So thank you.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Thank you. And with that, again,
thank you to our witnesses for coming, and that concludes our
hearing. We stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:08 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[Prepared statements, responses to written questions, and
additional material supplied for the record follow:]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MIKE CRAPO
Today, we welcome to the Committee three witnesses to testify on
the Financial Stability Oversight Council, or FSOC, nonbank designation
process: Douglas Holtz-Eakin, President of the American Action Forum;
Mr. Paul Schott Stevens, President and CEO of the Investment Company
Institute; and Professor Jeremy Kress, Assistant Professor of Business
Law at the University of Michigan's Ross School of Business.
Each of these witnesses is knowledgeable about FSOC's designation
process and policy, drawing from their experiences in industry,
Government, and academia.
The Dodd-Frank Act established FSOC to identify and respond to
potential threats to U.S. financial stability.
Dodd-Frank authorizes FSOC to subject nonbank financial companies
to supervision by the Federal Reserve and prudential standards, if it
deems a nonbank to pose such a threat.
In the years after Dodd-Frank was enacted, FSOC evaluated
individual companies for designation as systemically important and
ultimately designated four nonbank financial companies: AIG, MetLife,
Prudential, and GE Capital.
At the outset, the process for nonbank designation was immeasurable
and unclear, which was not only contrary to the long-established
principles of our regulatory framework, but also lead to legal
uncertainty that undermined the very objective of FSOC.
Several years ago, I requested a comprehensive study by the GAO on
the nonbank designation process.
The report concluded that FSOC's process lacks transparency and
accountability, insufficiently tracks data and does not have a
consistent methodology for determinations.
In recent years, FSOC voted to rescind three of those designations,
while another's designation was overturned in court.
FSOC's decisions have costly implications for designated companies,
which inevitably translates into higher costs for consumers and to the
overall economy.
It is important that FSOC's designation process be clear, robust,
and focused on addressing real underlying risks.
The process should also take into account how the existing
regulatory structure already addresses any potential risks before
taking the drastic step of designating an individual company.
In 2012, FSOC issued interpretive guidance that outlined its
designation process, which begins with identifying individual companies
over $50 billion in total assets for further scrutiny based on a set of
five other quantitative thresholds, and then gradually using more
granular and company-specific information along the way.
In November 2017, Treasury issued a report entitled, ``Financial
Stability Oversight Council Designations'', which provided
recommendations to improve FSOC's designation process.
One of Treasury's key recommendations was for FSOC to prioritize an
activities-based approach to designation and work with relevant
regulators to address any risks posed prior to considering designating
a nonbank financial company.
Among the other important recommendations made by Treasury for the
nonbank designation process were to: only designate a nonbank financial
company if the expected benefits to financial stability outweigh the
costs of the designation; and provide a clear ``off-ramp'' for
designated nonbank financial companies, including by identifying key
risks that led to the designation and enhancing the transparency of
FSOC's annual review process.
At its meeting on March 6, FSOC proposed to replace its current
interpretive guidance on the nonbank designation process with new
interpretive guidance that would make several substantive changes.
Some of those changes include: prioritizing an activities-based
approach to designation that would focus on identifying and addressing
the underlying sources of risk, and would only contemplate designating
individual companies if a risk could not be addressed through an
activities-based approach; conducting a cost-benefit analysis prior to
designating a nonbank; eliminating the first of its three-stage process
that focuses on applying quantitative thresholds to identify individual
companies for further evaluation, and the six-category framework used
to analyze individual companies; and instituting several procedural
changes to improve FSOC's engagement with companies and regulators, and
clarifying ``off-ramp'' opportunities for companies through risk
mitigation efforts prior to or after designation.
After FSOC issued the proposed guidance, Comptroller Otting
expressed support for the proposal, saying, ``The proposal ensures FSOC
continues to serve its primary function in a transparent, efficient and
effective manner.''
The proposed guidance is a step in the right direction to improve
FSOC's effectiveness, transparency, and analyses.
Senators Rounds, Jones, Tillis, and Sinema have also introduced the
Financial Stability Oversight Council Improvement Act, which would
require FSOC to first determine that a different action would not
address risks posed to financial stability prior to a vote on an
initial nonbank designation.
During this hearing, I look forward to discussing how an
activities-based approach will more effectively address potential risks
to U.S. financial stability; the appropriate framework for evaluating
activities; and additional opportunities for improvements to the
process.
Thank you to each witnesses for joining the Committee this morning.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR SHERROD BROWN
Thank you Senator Crapo for holding this hearing.
Let's remember why FSOC matters. When Wall Street takes big risks,
they're doing it with Americans' money.
The financial system affects who can get loans. It affects whether
people have enough money to retire, or pay medical bills, or send kids
to college. When banks and other big financial firms take risks and
they don't pay off, it's never the executives and the CEOs who are left
with nothing--it's ordinary families who lose their jobs, lose their
homes, lose their life savings.
And when too many financial institutions take too many risks at
once, we all pay the price.
Right now the risks to the financial system have increased--which
means the risks are greater for families buying homes and saving for
retirement and paying off student loans. The biggest Wall Street banks
have gotten even bigger and more interconnected. The shadow banking
sector has grown and is taking on more risk. The business cycle is
extended and growth is slowing. The global economy faces uncertainty
from Brexit and growing debt levels in China.
And things look even worse when you look past Wall Street, and look
at ordinary families: student loan debt has hit record levels. Seven
million Americans are more than 3 months behind on their car payments--
the highest level in 19 years. And for too many Americans who haven't
felt the benefits of economic recovery, decades of income and wealth
inequality have made it even harder.
This Administration is all too happy to look the other way, as long
as the risks affect families' bank accounts, not bank profits.
That's what led to the last crisis.
The FSOC was created after large, interconnected firms--firms like
Lehman, Bear Stearns, and AIG--wreaked havoc on the economy.
These firms didn't have strong rules to ensure they had enough
liquidity or loss-absorbing capital in case of an economic shock. And
there was no single regulator monitoring the entire company for
systemic risks.
It was so important to address this problem that the authors of
Dodd-Frank created FSOC in Title I of the bill.
But now, FSOC appears to be closed for business.
It recently rescinded the last remaining SIFI designation of the
Obama administration. Prudential, the giant insurance company that grew
larger and more complex after it was designated as systemically
important, is apparently no longer in need of stronger safeguards and
no longer a risk to financial stability.
Just last week, the FSOC issued proposed interpretive guidance to
make it more difficult to designate nonbank financial firms. And it
shifts the burden back on the primary regulators to identify and solve
systemic risks before FSOC can take any action.
These are the same primary regulators that failed to identify the
risks that led to the worst financial crisis since the Great
Depression.
Even more concerning is that this approach gives unregulated shadow
banks a free pass.
If you still don't believe that this Administration is a threat to
financial stability, look at how FSOC's staff has been cut in half. The
FSOC member agencies have fewer meetings and spend less time
considering financial stability risks. The Treasury has cut a third of
the staff of the Office of Financial Research, which is supposed to
support the work of the FSOC.
The Financial Stability Oversight Council has all but given up its
role as the agency tasked with identifying and constraining excessive
risk in the financial system.
And Wall Street continues to push legislation that would further
weaken FSOC, and make it impossible for future Administrations to
designate nonbank financial firms.
We should be strengthening FSOC, giving it more authority to
address risks, and making sure it has the staff and resources to
protect Americans savings and homes from financial crisis. Instead the
collective amnesia of this Administration, Wall Street, and the Senate
will once again leave hardworking Americans and taxpayers holding the
bag.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN
President, American Action Forum
March 14, 2019
Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and Members of the Committee,
thank you for convening this hearing and providing me with the
opportunity to appear today and share my views on the Financial
Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) nonbank designation process. I had
the honor and privilege of addressing the Committee on this exact topic
in 2015. Although so much in the world has changed since then, FSOC's
designation process has not. As a result, my comments will have a tenor
similar to my previous testimony. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.americanactionforum.org/testimony/fsoc-
accountability-nonbank-designations/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ten years after the financial crisis, Prudential Financial has shed
its designation as a systemically important financial institution
(SIFI). \2\ As a result, no nonbank financial companies (NBFCs) remain
designated as SIFIs. This raises questions as to the future role of
FSOC in the regulation of systemically important institutions across
the economy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/fsoc/designations/
Documents/Prudential%20Financial%20Inc.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In my testimony I wish to make two main points:
FSOC was given a challenging, if not impossible, mandate
and responded by significantly hampering U.S. NBFCs and
increasing costs for consumers without demonstrably improving
the safety or soundness of the U.S. financial system; and
The exit of the last NBFC from SIFI designation, while
welcome, has demonstrated that FSOC lacks relevance in NBFC
regulation. For FSOC to remain relevant, it must significantly
overhaul its operating procedures, beginning with a philosophy
of activities-based rather than entity-specific regulation.
Safety and Soundness
Title I, Subtitle A, of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) established FSOC, outlined
FSOC's powers, and introduced factors that must be considered when
designating NBFCs as SIFIs. Because banking companies with over $50
billion in assets are automatically considered SIFIs in the Dodd-Frank
Act, the key issues involving designation revolve around nonbanks.
Specifically, Section 113 of the Dodd-Frank Act gives FSOC the
authority by two-thirds vote (including the chairperson) to bring a
NBFC under increased supervision and regulation by the Federal Reserve
Board (FRB) if FSOC determines that ``material financial distress at
the U.S. nonbank financial company, or the nature, scope, size, scale,
concentration, interconnectedness, or mix of the activities of the U.S.
nonbank financial company, could pose a threat to the financial
stability of the United States.'' \3\ In making that determination, the
Dodd-Frank Act lists 10 criteria for FSOC to consider along with ``any
other risk-related factors that FSOC deems appropriate.'' \4\ As such,
FSOC has broad authority statutorily when evaluating companies for SIFI
designation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ 12 U.S.C. 5323 (a)(1).
\4\ 12 U.S.C. 5323 (a)(2)(K).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The three-stage evaluation process FSOC developed is intended to
narrow the pool of companies potentially subject to designation by
applying specific thresholds based on 11 criteria included in Section
113 of the Dodd-Frank Act. The 11 criteria have been incorporated into
six overarching framework categories that FSOC considers: (1) size, (2)
interconnectedness, (3) leverage, (4) substitutability, (5) liquidity
risk and maturity mismatch, and (6) existing regulatory scrutiny. \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ 12 U.S.C. 5323 (a)(2), (b)(2).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Some 30 U.S. banks were captured under the Dodd-Frank Act; FSOC
exercised its authority to additionally designate insurers AIG,
Metlife, and Prudential, and General Electric's financing arm, GE
Capital.
Implications
SIFIs are subject to ``enhanced prudential standards'' with three
key elements: first, higher capital requirements; second, the
requirement to undergo annual stress testing; and third, enhanced
reporting requirements including the creation of recovery and
resolution plans or ``living wills.'' The impact of these additional
requirements is clear: SIFIs must set aside more capital, significantly
increase compliance staff, and increase technology and data capture
processing. As a result, SIFI designation is a significant cost.
AIG estimated that de-designation would save the company $150
million a year in compliance costs once FSOC de-designated it as a SIFI
in 2017. \6\ Additionally, previous research by the American Action
Forum (AAF) found that ``SIFI designation of asset managers or funds
will be costly for investors. In some cases, investors could see their
returns reduced by as much as 25 percent (approximately $108,000) over
the long term, forgoing several multiples of their initial principal in
lost returns over the course of a working life.'' \7\ These additional
costs are, of course, passed on to consumers. \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.ft.com/content/31b36b9a-a662-11e7-93c5-
648314d2c72c
\7\ https://www.americanactionforum.org/research/the-investor-
cost-of-designating-investment-funds-as-systemically-important/
\8\ http://responsibleregulation.com/wpcontent/uploads/2013/05/
Pricing-impact-study-Oliver-Wyman-April-10-2013.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Criticisms and Policy Recommendations
The safety and soundness of the financial system is clearly a
fundamental goal. FSOC was however tasked with a difficult mandate in
that the concept of ``systemic risk'' has never been adequately defined
and cannot be measured (let alone a ``safe'' level of systemic risk).
FSOC's response to this challenge has been to create an environment
where NBFCs were laden with excessive regulation, and increased
compliance costs, that were necessarily passed on to consumers. All
this, and there was no evidence that either the NBFCs designated were a
risk to the stability of the financial sector or that enhanced
prudential measures demonstrably decreased such a risk.
The following analysis underpins the need for wholesale reform:
1. FSOC's focus on entities that might contribute to systemic risk
does not pursue the goal of systemic risk itself. Having identified
banks and insurers as potential contributors to systemic risk, FSOC
indicated it would then focus on asset managers. To date FSOC has
declined to give the asset management industry in a clear case of
picking regulatory winners and losers. Even if FSCO had given asset
managers appropriate scrutiny this would still miss the key issue of
what drives systemic risk itself.
In 2017, the White House directed Treasury to review FSOC's
designation procedures. The key recommendation of the resulting report
(the 2017 Treasury Report) \9\ was that FSOC prioritize industrywide
approaches to systemic risk, and moving from entity-specific
designation to monitoring the specific activities that increase
systemic risk across the financial system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/
Documents/PM-FSOC-Designations-Memo-11-17.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Activity-based regulation is more comprehensive, as it will
identify all of the market participants engaged in an activity that
could pose a threat to stability. This approach is substantially better
than singling out one or a few large firms or funds for designation,
which creates disparities in regulation across firms and sectors that
could have a very real and unintended economic costs.
2. Size is not a useful indicator of risk. It seems clear that the
primary factor for designation is the bluntest: the size of the
organization. Size does not necessarily correlate to risk, and larger
organizations tend to be better diversified and more capable of
absorbing systemic shock.
FSOC has not indicated that it has appropriately considered the
riskiness of the insurance industry at all. Insurers receive systemic
risk--they do not drive it. Liquidity is rarely an insurance concern,
as assets are matched at long rather than short terms. Insurers do not
lend to other insurers and are not as interrelated as banks. We will
never see a run on an insurer. AIG failed because it had come to
contain an unregulated hedge fund; risk did not stem from its insurance
activities. In his dissent from the FSOC's SIFI designation of
Prudential Financial, Roy Woodall, appointed by President Obama as
FSOC's independent member with insurance expertise, noted his concerns
stating, ``The underlying analysis utilizes scenarios that are
antithetical to a fundamental and seasoned understanding of the
business of insurance.'' \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ https://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/fsoc/council-meetings/
Documents/September%2019%202013%20Notational%20Vote.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The 2017 Treasury Report noted the lack of academic backing for
FSOC's determinations and recommended that FSOC ``increase the
analytical rigor of designation analyses.''
3. Lack of transparency. The factors used to determine SIFI status
are not weighted, and the decision-making process is extremely opaque.
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) has at several junctures
reproached FSOC for its lack of transparency. \11\ The decision to
designate (or de-designate) requires only the support of two-thirds of
FSOC, and the decision to designate both MetLife and Prudential was
made despite objections from the FSOC members with insurance experience
and after a lack of consultation with State insurance regulators. \12\
GAO is not alone in suggesting more open communication with the public
and companies under consideration--the Bipartisan Policy Center and
many others have echoed such concerns. \13\ Designation decisions
available to the public should reflect the shared goal of minimizing
systemic threats; if there is a specific activity or subsidiary of a
designated firm that poses an acute threat, the final decision should
disclose it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-15-51
\12\ http://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/fsoc/council-meetings/
Documents/September192013NotationalVote.pdf; http://www.treasury.gov/
initiatives/fsoc/council-meetings/Documents/
December182014MeetingMinutes.pdf
\13\ http://bipartisanpolicy.org/library/report/Dodd-Frank's-
missed-opportunity-road-map-more-effective-regulatory-architecture
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. FSOC's focus has been to punish, not to remediate. As a company
moves through FSOC's three-stage evaluation process, FSOC does not
inform companies of what changes could be made to either their
structure or operations to avoid designation. In the supplemental
procedures adopted in 2015, FSOC made some effort toward increasing the
amount of communication between firms under consideration and FSOC
staff. Yet ultimately, FSOC does not encourage companies to work with
the Office of Financial Research and FSOC staff to clearly define a
potential systemic threat through data and modeling and then explore
lower cost alternatives to designation. In meeting its aim of financial
stability, FSOC should consider all the tools available instead of
quickly moving to designation.
5. The designation process has never involved a cost-benefit
analysis. FSOC should attempt to fully assess the economic effect, both
costs and benefits, of designating only certain nonbanks as SIFIs. This
means producing a convincing model that a firm's failure, its financial
distress, or its activities could destabilize the financial system. In
such a way, FSOC can demonstrate what is at stake and how a designation
will help, and then justify the costs. Preventing the next financial
crisis may undoubtedly have enormous benefit, but FSOC has not clearly
outlined how each firm or industry segment it has scrutinized poses an
actual threat to stability. Since the economic cost of eliminating
systemic risk entirely is prohibitive, FSOC's goal must be to find the
``right'' amount of risk, a difficult feat since FSOC can neither
measure its progress nor know its target. Because of the difficulty of
regulating entities posing only a potential systemic threat,
designations should be firmly rooted in sound economic analyses that
explore all costs and benefits (as well as alternatives to designation)
and be substantially justified by applicable Dodd-Frank Act statutes.
The 2017 Treasury Report recommended that FSOC revise its guidance
to specifically require a cost-benefit analysis.
6. FSOC and its staff must continue actively to engage the public,
experts, and stakeholders to examine comprehensively potential systemic
threats, firm types, and changes in the financial economy environment
as well as areas for FSOC procedural improvement. In 2015, FSOC began
the process of reviewing and evaluating its SIFI designation process
for nonbanks, seeking input from stakeholders and assessing potential
changes. Ultimately, this process led to the adoption of a number of
positive steps toward increasing communication between FSOC staff and
firms under review and adding transparency to the process. If anything,
this change should encourage FSOC to continue to collaborate with
stakeholders, seek input from the public, and continue to advance
efforts that open up its opaque process. As FSOC considers increasingly
different potential threats, firms, and industry changes, engagement
with outside experts will be integral and may substantially improve
public confidence in its efforts.
FSOC Proposes Amending Interpretive Guidance
It is in this context that last week FSOC voted unanimously to
amend its interpretative guidance relating to the designation of NBFCs.
FSOC has stated its intent to dedicate itself to a new approach that
would replace entity-based designation with activities-based
supervision. FSOC will also ``enhance the analytical rigor and
transparency of the Council's process for designating nonbank financial
companies'' and commit to the performance of cost-benefit analyses.
\14\ This revision to the interpretative guidance, and all future
revisions to internal procedures, will be made available for public
comment--a welcome demonstration of willingness to continue engaging
with all stakeholders.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm621
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusions
The nonbank designation process is arbitrary, inconsistent, and
opaque. Four years later the only thing that has changed is the exit of
the last unwilling participant from this system. Now FSOC must consider
its role as a regulator. The passing of the Economic Growth, Regulatory
Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (S. 2155) \15\ demonstrated the
need and an appetite to redress the overreach of the Dodd-Frank Act.
FSOC must redefine its mission, which must involve a shift from entity-
specific regulation to activities-based regulation, or be disbanded as
a regulator. FSOC's decision to amend its interpretative guidance is to
be welcomed and we look forward to seeing how policy will evolve in
this area.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/senate-bill/
2155/text
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF PAUL SCHOTT STEVENS
President and Chief Executive Officer, Investment Company Institute
March 14, 2019
Introduction
Financial stability is a matter of the utmost concern to ICI and
its members. As major participants in U.S. and global financial markets
on behalf of over 100 million American investors, registered funds and
their managers have every reason to support policy measures that
promote the robustness and resiliency of those markets. Our investors
are counting on their registered fund investments to help them achieve
their most important financial goals, such as saving for college,
purchasing a home, or providing for a secure retirement.
Since the financial crisis, ICI and its members have engaged
actively in U.S. and global policy discussions concerning systemic
designation of nonbank financial companies, particularly as they relate
to asset management, and whether there are potential risks to financial
stability from asset management products or activities. We have made
detailed submissions to the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC
or Council), the Office of Financial Research (OFR), the Financial
Stability Board (FSB), and numerous other bodies. ICI has testified
before Congress on several occasions; we have engaged in extensive
public commentary; and we have sought to inform the policymaking
process by providing empirical research about registered funds and
their investors. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ A compendium of selected ICI work on financial stability (with
links to comment letters, speeches, research papers, Congressional
testimony, and other commentary) is available at https://www.ici.org/
pdf/misc_18_finstability_compendium.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ten years after the financial crisis, the financial system clearly
is more robust and resilient. ICI and its members believe that this is
an appropriate time for policymakers to review postcrisis reforms and
make tailored adjustments where needed to fix unintended consequences
and achieve balanced regulation. Let me underscore that point--we
advocate for using the experience of the past several years to inform
tailored adjustments that increase regulatory efficiency and
effectiveness, not measures that would undermine the progress that has
been made toward a more resilient financial system.
The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act
(Dodd-Frank Act), by design, provides FSOC and its member agencies with
an array of regulatory tools, including SIFI designation authority. The
Council, for example, has a risk monitoring mandate and the authority
to identify gaps in regulation and make recommendations to financial
regulators. As the Council observed in its proposal just last week on
the SIFI designation process, the Dodd-Frank Act provided FSOC with
broad discretion as to how to employ its range of authorities.
This Committee held a hearing 4 years ago to examine the SIFI
designation process and consider ways to improve transparency and
accountability. Testifying at that hearing, I advised that, to truly
advance financial stability, that process must be open to the public,
analytically based, and grounded in the historical record. I reiterate
that message in my testimony today. Indeed, these principles should
apply not just to SIFI determinations but across the whole of FSOC's
work.
In 2017, the Treasury Department issued a thoughtful and thorough
report that included specific recommendations on how to recalibrate the
SIFI designation process. The report also considered--appropriately, in
my view--how the SIFI designation process should fit into the broader
context of the Council's authorities and recommended in effect that
SIFI designation be a regulatory tool of last resort. FSOC has now
issued a proposal to implement the Treasury recommendations. Based on
our preliminary review, there is much to commend in the proposal. ICI
will evaluate the proposal closely in consultation with our members,
and we look forward to commenting on behalf of the registered fund
industry.
Even if FSOC adopts such reforms, as we hope it will, ICI firmly
believes that legislation is necessary to provide a more durable
solution. We believe Congress should confirm that SIFI designation of
nonbank financial companies should be used by the Council only in rare
circumstances, where no other regulatory action suffices to address the
potential risk to financial system stability. So long as FSOC's
statutory authority remains unchanged, nonbank financial companies
(including regulated funds and their managers) will continue to face
the risk, even if remote, of inappropriate SIFI designation.
In Section II, we discuss the limitations of SIFI designation and
why its use should be reserved for extraordinary circumstances. We note
our continuing concern that FSOC at some future time might proceed with
the designation of a registered fund or fund manager, and we describe
why this course of action would be unwarranted and harmful to fund
investors. In Section III, we explain that reform of the SIFI
designation process is necessary in several key areas: greater
engagement with a company being considered for possible designation; a
greater role in the process for the company's primary financial
regulator; more rigorous analysis of the company and its potential to
pose risk to U.S. financial system stability; and greater transparency
to the financial markets and market participants. In Section IV, we
discuss the Treasury Department's 2017 recommendations for improving
the SIFI designation process and FSOC's proposal, issued just last
week, to implement those recommendations. We also observe that the
global Financial Stability Board likewise is considering improvements
in how it conducts its work, following a review of its processes and
transparency. In Section V, we urge the Committee's support for
legislation to confirm that SIFI designation is intended to be a
regulatory ``tool of last resort.'' Finally, Section VI briefly
outlines our recommendations for Congress.
SIFI Designation Is a Blunt Regulatory Tool, and Its Use Should Be
Reserved for Extraordinary Circumstances
ICI's support for improving the U.S. Government's capability to
monitor and mitigate risks across the financial system--including by
creating a new council of financial regulators--dates from the
beginning of the legislative debate over financial services regulatory
reform in the wake of the financial crisis. \2\ Then, as now, we saw
the value of bringing together diverse perspectives and expertise from
across the spectrum of financial services to consider emerging risks.
The coordination of regulatory policies is altogether important in
light of the size and complexity of the financial system and the sheer
number of Government entities involved in overseeing it. Ever since
Congress created FSOC as part of Title I of the Dodd-Frank Act, we have
continued to believe that the convening and coordinating power of the
Council is its greatest strength.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See, e.g., Testimony of Paul Schott Stevens, President and
CEO, ICI, Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs,
United States Senate, on Establishing a Framework for Systemic Risk
Regulation (July 23, 2009).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title I also gave FSOC the authority to designate nonbank financial
companies as SIFIs, and our early views concerning the use of this
power likewise remain unchanged. \3\ It is fundamentally important to
view SIFI designation authority in context--recognizing that it is just
one regulatory tool among many afforded to financial regulators under
the Dodd-Frank Act to address abuses and excessive risk taking by
financial market participants, and that in many cases such designation
is merely an addition to other preexisting powers. We continue to
emphasize to the Committee that there are numerous reasons why the
Council should invoke this extraordinarily potent, but blunt, legal
authority only in very limited circumstances. As we indicated
previously, these reasons include:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See, e.g., Letter from Paul Schott Stevens, President and CEO,
ICI, to FSOC, dated Nov. 5, 2010, available at https://www.ici.org/pdf/
24696.pdf.
The inherent difficulty of trying to predict in advance
whether a given nonbank financial company is, or may prove to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
be, systemically significant
The potential mismatch between the remedies that the Dodd-
Frank Act prescribes for designated companies (i.e.,
consolidated supervision by the Federal Reserve Board and
enhanced prudential standards, such as capital requirements,
that largely reflect banking regulation concepts) and the risks
that FSOC has identified as the basis for designation \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ We elaborate on this point later in this section of the
testimony.
Uncertainty about the reaction of markets and market
participants to a company's designation--which could result in
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
a competitive advantage, or disadvantage, for the company
Increased moral hazard, if market participants succumb to
the temptation to relax their own due diligence with respect to
a designated company based on the expectation that the
Government is monitoring and preventing risks
Reduced competition and consumer choice--for example, if
companies exit certain businesses, or reduce their
participation in those businesses, to avoid designation by FSOC
To the preceding list, we would add that SIFI designation authority
necessarily requires FSOC to single out individual companies--even
though other companies may have similar structures or engage in similar
activities. As all this suggests, there is and should be a very high
bar for determining that a single company has the potential to threaten
the stability of the U.S. financial system.
These challenges, potential negative consequences, and shortcomings
of the SIFI designation tool are why we repeatedly have advised that
the use of this tool should be reserved for extraordinary
circumstances. By this, we mean those (presumably quite limited)
circumstances when FSOC has determined that a specific company clearly
poses significant risks to the financial system that cannot otherwise
be adequately addressed through other means. Moreover, use of the tool
should reflect FSOC's determination that the regulatory regime
presented by Title I of the Dodd-Frank Act is the appropriate response
to address the identified risks.
Our long-standing position is in line with views expressed by
senior Government officials directly involved in the formation of FSOC
and its early years of operation. With foresight, as we have noted
previously, former Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke
expressed his expectation that use of the SIFI designation tool would
be limited. \5\ And in hindsight, former Treasury Under Secretary for
Domestic Finance Mary Miller recently lamented that she now believes
that during the time she was involved, FSOC spent too much time on
designations and not enough on regulatory coordination. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ During a Congressional hearing in connection with the
development of the Dodd-Frank Act, Chairman Bernanke was asked
expressly for his views on the number of firms that might be considered
to be ``systemically significant, too big to fail, too interconnected
to fail.'' He responded: ``A very rough guess would be about 25. But I
would like to point out that virtually all of those firms are organized
as bank holding companies or financial holding companies, which means
the Federal Reserve already has umbrella supervision. So, I would not
envision the Fed's oversight extending to any significant number of
additional firms.'' See ``Regulatory Perspectives on the Obama
administration's Financial Regulatory Reform Proposals, Part II'':
Hearing before the House Committee on Financial Services (Serial No.
111-68), 111th Congress (2009), p. 47 (question by Rep. Campbell).
\6\ Remarks by Mary Miller at Functions and Firms: Using Activity
and Entity-based Regulation to Strengthen the Financial System,
conference cosponsored by the Office of Financial Research and the
University of Michigan Center on Finance, Law and Policy (Nov. 15-16,
2018, Washington, DC) (Functions and Firms Conference) (``with the
hindsight of now 4 years out of the Government and back in the real
economy and Main Street, I would say that we probably spent too much
time on the designation work and not enough time on another very
important role that FSOC can play, which is regulatory coordination.
And I think if we could have done that differently we would have moved
some things through the pipeline sooner, we might have gotten more buy-
in on some very important concepts that followed the financial crisis
that we should have jumped on.''), available at http://
financelawpolicy.umich.edu/conferences/functions-and-firms-using-
activity-and-entity-based, video for day 2, panel 6 at approximately
12:35 to 13:10. See also ``Is Dodd-Frank Oversight Council Still
Relevant?'' by John Heltman, American Banker (March 5, 2019) (noting
the observation by former Treasury official David Portilla that FSOC's
success ``will be in the power of convening the body and ensuring the
regulators talk to each other and are sharing information and . . . not
leaving [risks] unaddressed.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Underpinning our views about limiting the use of SIFI designation
is the simple notion that FSOC's primary goal should be to reduce
systemic risk, and that there can be more effective, less burdensome,
and/or more expedient ways to do so. Even those who argue for broader
use of SIFI designation as a regulatory tool acknowledge that it is not
a panacea. \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ A key ``take away'' from the discussion at the Functions and
Firms Conference was that several of the participants view activities-
based and entity-based approaches as complementary--as even the full
name of the conference suggests. See conference video, supra n. 6.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Designation of a Registered Fund/Fund Manager Would Be Unwarranted and
Harmful to Fund Investors
ICI and its members consistently have called for improvements to
the SIFI designation process that will help avoid the risk of
inappropriate designations. We remain concerned that FSOC at some
future time might proceed with the designation of a registered fund or
fund manager. Why would such a designation be inappropriate? Because
registered funds don't fail like banks do--fund investors bear any
investment losses, so there's no need for a Government bailout. \8\
Unlike banks, fund managers act solely as agents, providing investment
services to a fund by contract. The registered fund structure and
comprehensive regulation of funds and their managers under the Federal
securities laws already limit risks and risk transmission. And, as more
than seven decades of historical experience demonstrates, registered
fund investors do not panic or redeem heavily in the face of market
downturns or turmoil. \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ See, e.g., Investment Company Institute, ``Orderly Resolution
of Mutual Funds and Their Managers'' (July 15, 2014), available at
https://www.ici.org/pdf/14_ici_orderly_resolution.pdf.
\9\ For more detail on this experience, see ``Regulated Fund
Shareholders' Reaction to Market Turmoil, 1944-January 2019'', at
Appendix A to this testimony.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Testifying in the House of Representatives years ago, William
McNabb, then ICI Chairman and Chairman and CEO of the Vanguard Group,
pointed to press reports that FSOC was evaluating two large asset
management firms for possible designation. He warned:
If the FSOC continues down this path, it could result in
extension of the Federal Reserve's supervisory authority to
companies whose business is rooted in the capital markets and
which the Federal Reserve does not have the expertise to
regulate. And it could mean the application of bank regulatory
standards that are entirely out of keeping with the way in
which [registered] funds and their managers are structured,
operated and currently regulated and with the expectations of
investors and the capital markets. \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ See Statement of F. William McNabb III, Chairman and CEO, The
Vanguard Group, and Chairman, ICI, on ``Examining the Dangers of the
FSOC's Designation Process and Its Impact on the U.S. Financial
System'' (May 20, 2014) at 2, available at https://www.ici.org/pdf/
14_house_fsoc.pdf. The testimony highlights several ways in which
registered funds and their managers are fundamentally different from
banks. It explains why SIFI designation of a fund manager is
unwarranted and why even the very largest registered funds likewise are
not SIFIs. And it discusses the investor harm and market distortion
that would stem from such a SIFI designation.
It is important for the Committee to bear in mind what is at stake.
Of greatest concern are the harms that SIFI designation would bring to
fund investors by applying measures that are designed to moderate bank-
like risks and are ill-suited to registered funds and their managers.
These measures include capital and liquidity requirements, along with
prudential supervision by the Federal Reserve Board. Designated funds
or managers also would have to pay additional fees or assessments to
defray Federal Reserve supervisory costs and FSOC and OFR expenses. And
a designated fund could be assessed to cover costs associated with the
resolution of a distressed financial institution deemed systemically
important. Stated more plainly, this means that fund investors could
have to help bail out a distressed, ``too big to fail'' financial
institution--even though a major goal of the Dodd-Frank Act was to
prevent ``Main Street'' from having to bail out ``Wall Street.''
Based on these requirements, designated funds would face higher
costs resulting in lower investment returns for individuals saving for
retirement, education, and other life goals. The resulting competitive
imbalances would distort the fund marketplace, potentially reducing
investor choice. Designation also could have far-reaching implications
for how a fund's portfolio is managed, depending on how the Federal
Reserve exercises its supervisory charge under the Dodd-Frank Act to
``prevent or mitigate'' the risks presented by large, interconnected
financial institutions. As I have explained in previous Congressional
testimony, regulated funds and their managers could be subject to a
highly conflicted form of regulation, pitting the interests of banks
and the banking system against those of millions of investors. \11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ See Statement of Paul Schott Stevens, President and CEO, ICI,
on ``FSOC Accountability: Nonbank Designations'' (March 25, 2015) (2015
FSOC Testimony), available at https://www.ici.org/pdf/
15_senate_fsoc.pdf, at 15-18 (discussing in greater detail the highly
adverse consequences of inappropriate designations to investors and the
capital markets). See also Paul Schott Stevens, ``Designation's Vast
Reach Into Investor Portfolios'', ICI Viewpoints (March 24, 2015),
available at https://www.ici.org/viewpoints/view_15_designation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While the prospect of such an ill-suited designation does not
currently loom as large as it did in 2014, there are improvements that
can be made to the SIFI designation process and to the Council's
designation authority that would help avoid such an outcome in the
future. I discuss those areas for improvement in the remainder of my
testimony.
The SIFI Designation Process Should Be Redesigned in Light of ``Lessons
Learned''
Calls for reform of the SIFI designation process are not new. And
these calls have not come just from industry stakeholders. They have
come from the Government Accountability Office, in reports dating back
to 2012. \12\ They have come from Republican and Democratic members of
Congress in letters to FSOC. \13\ And they have come most emphatically
from members of the House of Representatives from both parties, with
the April 2018 passage of H.R. 4061, the FSOC Improvement Act, by a
bipartisan vote of 297 to 121.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ See, e.g., 2015 FSOC Testimony at n. 4.
\13\ Id. at n. 3.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Council itself has recognized shortcomings in its own process.
By this, I do not mean just the current FSOC, but also the Council as
constituted under the prior Administration. In November 2014, just 2\1/
2\ years after adopting its rule and guidance outlining the designation
process, FSOC staff convened roundtable discussions including academics
and various stakeholders, including ICI. In early 2015, FSOC principals
endorsed a set of ``supplemental procedures'' designed to improve the
Council's engagement with companies and other regulators and increase
transparency to the public. \14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ See FSOC, ``Supplemental Procedures Relating to Nonbank
Financial Company Determinations'' (Feb. 4, 2015), available at https:/
/www.treasury.gov/initiatives/fsoc/designations/Documents/Supplemental-
Procedures-Related-to-Nonbank-Financial-Company-Determinations-
February-2015.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In my 2015 FSOC Testimony, I explained that ICI welcomed those
changes as an initial positive first step toward providing greater
fairness and clarity in the designation process. But I also advised
that more needed to be done to achieve that goal.
My message today, 4 years later, is much the same. The SIFI
designation process is still in need of reforms in several key areas:
Greater engagement with a company being considered for
possible designation;
A greater role in the process for the company's primary
financial regulator;
More rigorous analysis of the company and its potential to
pose risk to U.S. financial system stability; and
Greater transparency to the financial markets and market
participants.
I discuss each of these areas briefly below.
Greater Engagement With a Company Being Considered for Possible
Designation
Meaningful dialogue between a company being considered for SIFI
designation and FSOC and its staff is of utmost importance. To be
meaningful, such a dialogue needs to begin as early as possible in the
process. If a company is given an early indication as to why FSOC has
selected it for review, the company is in a position to provide
pertinent information about its business, structure and operations.
With a more complete picture of the company and its risk profile, the
Council and its staff can engage in a more informed review of the
company or determine that no further investigation is necessary. This
benefits FSOC by allowing it to make smart use of its limited
resources, and it provides a fairer process for the company.
To its credit, FSOC recognized early on the value of more robust
engagement with companies under review. Its 2015 supplemental
procedures include several measures designed to increase communications
with the company at various stages of the designation process. But
these are not guaranteed protections, because FSOC issued them
informally. Unless and until FSOC incorporates these procedures into
its interpretive guidance through a public notice and comment process,
they will remain ``supplemental'' and thus subject to amendment or
rescission at the Council's discretion. \15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Last week, FSOC adopted a rule stating that the Council shall
not amend or rescind its interpretive guidance on nonbank financial
company determinations, which appears in Appendix A to 12 CFR part
1310, without providing the public with notice and an opportunity to
comment consistent with the Administrative Procedure Act. FSOC,
``Authority To Require Supervision and Regulation of Certain Nonbank
Financial Companies'', RIN 4030-AA03 (March 6, 2019), available at
https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/261/Final-Rule-Regarding-Notice-
and-Comment.pdf. The 2015 supplemental procedures are not part of
Appendix A to 12 CFR part 1310.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Greater Role for the Company's Primary Financial Regulator
The current process calls for consultation with a company's primary
financial regulator prior to any final designation of the company. This
is merely a recitation of the requirement in Section 113(g) of the
Dodd-Frank Act. The supplemental procedures contemplate that the
Council will notify and consult with the primary regulator at an
earlier stage of the process but, as mentioned above, those procedures
are not currently incorporated into the existing guidance and thus are
subject to amendment or rescission at the Council's discretion.
ICI strongly believes that the designation process should expressly
require early and robust involvement by the primary regulator. A
company's primary financial regulator has its own regulatory tools,
some of which may provide another, possibly better avenue to address
identified risks than SIFI designation. In addition, a primary
financial regulator can evaluate whether an identified risk at one
company exists more broadly and therefore would be more effectively
handled on an industrywide or cross-industry basis.
Working with a primary financial regulator in this manner gives
FSOC more flexibility to address identified risks. Importantly, FSOC
would retain control of the designation process and would still be able
to make systemic designations when necessary.
More Analytical Rigor and Attention to Actual Experience
It has long been ICI's view that such an important and
consequential regulatory decision as SIFI designation must be based on
a robust, empirical analysis that considers all of the factors that
Congress enumerated in Section 113 of the Dodd-Frank Act, including the
degree to which a firm is already regulated and the prospects of using
that preexisting regulatory structure to address perceived risks. In my
2015 FSOC Testimony, I called for this analysis to be thorough and
objective, and to include consideration of the company's structure,
activities and historical experience. I also observed that requiring a
consideration of the costs and benefits of designation would put the
Council's decision making on par with the Administrative Procedure
Act's requirements for significant rulemakings and the Obama
administration's executive orders regarding rulemaking processes. \16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Exec. Order No. 13563, 76 FR 3821 (Jan. 21, 2011) (requiring
certain agencies to engage in cost-benefit analysis before rulemaking);
Exec. Order 13579, 76 FR 41585 (July 14, 2011) (encouraging independent
regulatory agencies to engage in cost-benefit analysis before
rulemaking).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regrettably, the Council's analysis in many instances has fallen
well short of these standards. This was seen, for example, in the
Council's stated basis for designating Prudential Financial, Inc. as a
SIFI in 2014. The independent member with insurance expertise on the
Council at the time, Roy Woodall, dissented from that decision,
observing that FSOC's ``underlying analysis utilizes scenarios that are
antithetical to a fundamental and seasoned understanding of the
business of insurance, the regulatory environment, and the state of
insurance company resolution and guaranty fund systems.'' \17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ See ``Views of the Council's Independent Member Having
Insurance Expertise'' (Sept. 19, 2013), available at https://
www.treasury.gov/initiatives/fsoc/council-meetings/Documents/
September%2019%202013%20Notational%20Vote.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The same has been true outside the SIFI context. Following a
lengthy review of asset management products and activities, the Council
released an April 2016 public update discussing what it found to be
financial stability risks stemming from liquidity and redemption risks
in mutual funds, particularly in funds invested in less liquid assets.
ICI was disappointed by the Council's findings, because they largely
ignored the extensive data and analysis that ICI and other commenters
had provided to the Council in early 2015 on these very questions.
ICI's letter highlighted the tremendous growth in both stock and bond
funds since the mid-1940s, the several episodes of severe market stress
occurring over the same seven decades--and the lack of any empirical
evidence of destabilizing redemptions by stock and bond funds during
those episodes. ICI's 2015 letter also explained why the historical
data paint a consistent picture--i.e., because mutual funds' historical
experience is grounded in their comprehensive regulatory framework, the
nature of their investor base, and the realities of fund portfolio
management. \18\ In announcing its findings of potential financial
stability risks, however, the Council cited no evidence that long-
established, historical patterns of mutual fund investor behavior have
changed or are likely to do so. In effect, its observations about ``the
potential for outflows [from mutual funds] to cause fund distress, and
hence broader stress'' amounted to mere conjecture.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ See, e.g., Letter to FSOC from Paul Schott Stevens, President
and CEO, ICI, dated March 25, 2015 (March 2015 Letter), available at
https://www.ici.org/pdf/15_ici_fsoc_ltr.pdf. As explained in detail on
pp. 14-36 of the letter, the ``realities'' of registered fund portfolio
management include the following: funds have sources of cash to meet
redemptions, other than through sales of portfolio assets; funds
typically have multifaceted liquidity management practices; portfolio
rebalancing in accordance with stated investment strategies helps keep
funds' cash ratios relatively stable, irrespective of market events;
and funds can vary their purchases and sales of portfolio securities to
accommodate redemptions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To underscore the importance of rigorous empirical analysis as a
basis for sound policymaking, ICI undertook a case study of the
scenario that seemed to concern FSOC the most--the prospect of
destabilizing redemptions from mutual funds invested in less liquid
assets. Using publicly available data about high-yield bond funds and
their experience from early 2014 to early 2016 (a period that included
significant stress in the high-yield bond market), ICI's chief
economist tested the predictions about destabilizing redemptions that
had been suggested by the Council and by other policymakers and
academics. The result? Contrary to those predictions, the data show
that investors were purchasing (as well as selling) shares in high-
yield bond funds, and in the underlying bonds, during this period of
market stress. And, on a net basis, trading volumes of high-yield bonds
actually rose when the high-yield bond market was under the greatest
degree of stress. We submitted this analysis to the Council and urged
it to reexamine its hypotheses about mutual funds in accordance with
ICI's findings. \19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ For further detail, see Letter from Paul Schott Stevens,
President and CEO, ICI, to FSOC, dated July 18, 2016 (commenting on
FSOC Update on Review of Asset Management Products and Activities), and
accompanying analysis in Appendix B to the letter, available at https:/
/www.ici.org/pdf/16_ici_fsoc_ltr.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fortunately, recent analyses by the Council appear to be putting
greater weight on evidence and less on conjecture. In its 2017 decision
to rescind the designation of American Insurance Group (AIG), for
example, the Council made clear that it had reexamined one of its key
theories. When FSOC designated AIG as a SIFI, one of the arguments it
used was that if AIG ever came under financial distress, ``there could
be a forced, rapid liquidation of a significant portion of AIG's assets
as a result of [insurance] policyholder surrenders or withdrawals that
could cause significant disruptions to key markets, including corporate
debt and asset-backed securities markets.'' In other words, the Council
postulated that if AIG experienced financial distress, its
policyholders could behave like depositors at a bank, causing a ``run''
on AIG that would cascade through the financial markets. But in
determining to rescind AIG's designation, the Council reconsidered that
view. Based upon ``additional consideration of incentives and
disincentives for retail policyholders to surrender policies, including
analysis of historical evidence of retail and institutional investor
behavior,'' the Council determined that there was ``not a significant
risk that asset liquidation by AIG would disrupt trading in key markets
or cause significant losses or funding problems for other firms with
similar holdings.'' \20\ ICI welcomes this development, because more
precise and accurate analysis is essential to sound policy outcomes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ For further detail, see Sean Collins, ``Applying Evidence to
Theories on Regulated Funds'', ICI Viewpoints (Oct. 12, 2017),
available at https://www.ici.org/viewpoints/view_17_fsoc_aig.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Greater Transparency to Financial Markets and Market Participants
In the four cases in which FSOC voted to designate a nonbank
financial company as a SIFI, the company received a lengthy, detailed
report discussing FSOC's findings and conclusions, and only a very
abbreviated summary was made available to the public. These summaries
did not give other companies and the broader public sufficient insight
into FSOC's concerns about systemic risk or the business practices
giving rise to those risks. ICI has long believed that a more detailed
public report--perhaps a redacted version of FSOC's report to the
company--could offer these insights while still maintaining the
confidentiality of sensitive, proprietary information about the
designated company.
Greater transparency from FSOC also would be helpful in areas other
than SIFI designation, and we have two suggestions to offer in that
regard. First, while we welcome FSOC's practice of issuing prompt
``readouts'' after closed-door meetings, the readouts and subsequent
minutes from those meetings provide the public with little insight into
FSOC's observations and areas of focus or concern. ICI recommends that
FSOC release detailed minutes shortly after its closed meetings, as is
the practice of the Federal Reserve Board's Federal Open Market
Committee.
Second, as a matter of good Government, FSOC should inform the
public about which staff members at the different agencies are involved
in FSOC work. This information, which is not currently available, would
promote engagement by stakeholders and other interested parties with
the appropriate staff members on issues relevant to the FSOC agenda.
Among other benefits, such engagement can provide educational
opportunities and information resources to staff of agencies that do
not otherwise possess expertise with respect to a particular financial
industry sector.
Proposed Reforms Would Promote FSOC's Pursuit of Its Mission
As we have established, there has been growing recognition of the
continuing need for reforms to address the areas highlighted above.
Recent developments in this regard are significant and promising. Most
notably, in November 2017, the U.S. Treasury Department published a
report making recommendations for improving FSOC's nonbank SIFI
designation process (FSOC Report). \21\ And at an open meeting just
last week, FSOC voted to issue for public comment a proposal to
implement those recommendations and other changes. \22\ There also are
encouraging signs in the global financial stability policy realm--a
related area of interest to the Committee. \23\ We discuss these
developments below.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Department of the Treasury, ``Financial Stability Oversight
Council Designations'' (Nov. 2017), available at https://
www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Documents/PM-FSOC-
Designations-Memo-11-17.pdf. The report came in response to a
Presidential Memorandum that is available at https://
www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2017/04/21/presidential-memorandum-
secretary-treasury.
\22\ FSOC, ``Authority To Require Supervision and Regulation of
Certain Nonbank Financial Companies'', RIN 4030-ZA00 (March 6, 2019)
(FSOC Proposal), available at https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/
261/Notice-of-Proposed-Interpretive-Guidance.pdf.
\23\ For example, in July 2015, the Committee held a hearing on
``The Role of the Financial Stability Board in the U.S. Regulatory
Framework'' at which I testified. See https://www.banking.senate.gov/
hearings/the-role-of-the-financial-stability-board-in-the-us-
regulatory-framework.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
FSOC Report
ICI welcomed the release of the FSOC Report as an important step in
the right direction. \24\ This thorough and thoughtful report reviews
the purposes, composition, and authorities of the Council and
articulates five policy goals--in our view, laudable and appropriate
ones--that Treasury believes FSOC's processes should be designed to
achieve:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ See ICI News Release, ``ICI Applauds FSOC Reforms of SIFI
Designation Process'' (March 6, 2019), available at https://
www.ici.org/pressroom/news/19_news_sifi.
Leverage the expertise of primary financial regulatory
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
agencies;
Promote market discipline;
Maintain a level playing field among firms;
Appropriately tailor regulations to minimize burdens; and
Ensure the Council's designation analyses are rigorous,
clear, and transparent.
The report discusses the effects and efficacy of nonbank financial
company designations in achieving the Council's purposes. It
acknowledges many of the concerns ICI and others have been raising for
almost a decade and offers a series of constructive recommendations for
improvements. The recommendations and related discussion in the report
reflect a solid understanding of the lessons learned from experience to
date and seek to address the areas highlighted in the previous section
of this testimony.
The FSOC Report followed on the heels of another Treasury
Department report--one that reviewed the U.S. regulatory structure for
asset management and insurance (Asset Management Report). \25\
Consistent with ICI's long-held views, the Asset Management Report
acknowledged that entity-based systemic risk evaluations generally are
not the best approach for mitigating risks arising from asset
management. Presaging aspects of the FSOC Report, Treasury recommended
that Federal regulators focus on risks arising from asset management
products and activities and on implementing regulations that strengthen
the asset management industry as a whole.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Department of the Treasury, ``A Financial System That Creates
Economic Opportunities: Asset Management and Insurance'' (Oct. 2017),
available at https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/
Documents/A-Financial-System-That-Creates-Economic-Opportunities-
Asset_Management-Insurance.pdf. The report made recommendations--
including with respect to asset management and systemic risk--to better
align the current regulatory structure with the Administration's ``Core
Principles'' for regulation of the U.S. financial system. Exec. Order
No. 13772 (Feb. 3, 2017).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For its part, the FSOC Report recommends that FSOC:
Prioritize an activities-based or industrywide approach to
addressing risks to U.S. financial stability. The report
indicates that prioritizing an activities-based approach would
have many benefits. It would: (a) enable FSOC to ``identify the
underlying sources of risks to financial stability, rather than
addressing risks only at a particular nonbank financial
company''; (b) ``address some of the potential limitations that
could arise from designations'' (e.g., competitive
disadvantages and unnecessarily burdensome regulatory
requirements); and (c) ``preserve the option to consider
designation in the rare instance, such as the historical case
of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, where it was clear that
individual institutions could pose a threat to financial
stability, but a primary regulator has not taken or cannot take
adequate steps to address the risk.'' \26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ FSOC Report at 19.
Increase the analytical rigor of designations analyses. The
report recognizes the ``considerable and continuing uncertainty
among market participants about how the Council makes its
decisions, which factors the Council views as most relevant in
identifying a company that could pose risks to financial
stability, and how a company can take action to avoid
designation.'' \27\ According to the report, increased
analytical rigor would promote certainty in FSOC's conclusions
and increase transparency to firms and the public. The report
makes several specific recommendations in this regard,
including that FSOC evaluate the likelihood of the company's
material financial distress as a threshold question and conduct
a cost-benefit analysis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ FSOC Report at 23.
Improve engagement and transparency in the designation
process. The report recommends enhancements to FSOC's
engagement with companies under review, engagement with primary
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
regulators, and public transparency.
Engagement with Companies Under Review. The report
recommends that FSOC explain to a company at an earlier stage
the key risks that have been identified. The report notes:
``[i]f a company is aware of the potential risks the Council
has identified during its preliminary review, the company can
take action to mitigate those risks'' prior to designation,
thus helping achieve the goal of addressing potential risks to
U.S. financial stability. \28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ Id. at 30.
Engagement with primary regulators. The report describes
several benefits of deep engagement with a nonbank financial
company's primary financial regulator and recommends that FSOC
(i) actively solicit the regulator's views regarding risks at
the company and potential mitigants, (ii) share its preliminary
views regarding potential risks at the company, and request
that the regulator provide information regarding those risks
and whether they are adequately mitigated, e.g., by existing
regulation or the company's business practices, and (iii)
during the designation process, continue to encourage the
regulator to use its existing authorities to address any risks
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
to U.S. financial stability.
Public transparency. The report recommends that FSOC
release publicly the full explanation of its basis for any
future nonbank financial company designations or rescissions of
designations (redacting confidential information), to give the
public the greatest possible understanding of FSOC's reasons
for its actions.
Provide a clear ``off-ramp'' for designated nonbank
financial companies. The report recommends, for example, that
FSOC's explanation of the final basis for any designation
highlight the key risks that led to the designation and the
factors that were most important, which would make clear to the
company the steps it could take to address the Council's
concerns.
ICI strongly supports the Treasury recommendations. If implemented
appropriately, they will bolster substantially the effectiveness and
integrity of FSOC's work while minimizing the potential for unsound
policy outcomes.
FSOC Proposal
Since the release of the Treasury FSOC Report, ICI and its members
have been urging prompt action to implement the recommendations. At the
same time, we recognize that the subject matter is complex and
determining how to implement the recommendations effectively and
appropriately--and to the satisfaction of the range of FSOC members--
involves challenges. Further, we commend FSOC for making known early on
its intent to handle this matter through a notice and comment process.
Given the important themes underlying many of the recommendations, FSOC
should proceed in a transparent and accountable manner.
Consistent with its plan, FSOC last week proposed for public
comment revised guidance to govern the nonbank SIFI designation
process. \29\ ICI is reviewing the proposal carefully and looks forward
to submitting comments. Our preliminary reaction is very positive, as
it appears that FSOC has hewed closely to the recommendations in the
Treasury report. Under the proposal:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ FSOC Proposal, supra n. 22. FSOC also adopted a rule
requiring that any future changes to the guidance be subject to a
notice and comment process. See supra n. 15.
FSOC has firmly committed to addressing risks through an
activities-based approach and would only consider designating
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
entities as SIFIs as a last resort--as we have long urged.
If FSOC did decide to pursue designation, that process
would be more transparent, accountable, and rigorous.
The proposed changes seek to facilitate more constructive--
and appropriate--engagement between nonbank financial companies
and the Council.
The proposed changes would elevate the crucial role of
primary regulators, who are best suited to work with the
company under review to mitigate potential risks before
imposing the costly burden of SIFI designation.
For the benefit of the Committee, we include a more detailed
summary of the FSOC proposal in Appendix B.
Similar Recalibration at FSB
In testimony before this Committee in July 2015, I discussed the
role of the FSB in the U.S. regulatory framework. \30\ Like FSOC, as
part of its postcrisis agenda, the FSB trained its focus on the asset
management sector and on large registered U.S. funds and fund managers.
At first, the FSB set out to develop methodologies to identify global
systemically important funds or fund managers, closely following a
pattern it had established in the banking and insurance sectors. It
later put this work on pause while conducting a review of potential
``structural vulnerabilities'' in asset management. My testimony
illustrated that the work of the FSB related to asset management
exhibited many of the same fundamental problems that have pervaded
FSOC's work. \31\ These problems included: a tendency to view the asset
management sector through a banking lens; an inadequate role for
subject matter experts; reliance on conjecture and theory rather than
empirical data and actual experience; indications that desired results,
rather than the public record, might be driving the FSB's work; and
insufficient transparency and accountability in the FSB's consultation
and designation process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ See Statement of Paul Schott Stevens, President and CEO,
``ICI on The Role of the Financial Stability Board in the U.S.
Regulatory Framework'' (July 8, 2015), available at https://
www.ici.org/pdf/15_senate_banking_fsb.pdf.
\31\ For details, see id. See also Statement of Paul Schott
Stevens, President and CEO, ICI, Before the U.S. House of
Representatives Committee on Financial Services Subcommittee on
Monetary Policy and Trade, on The Financial Stability Board's
Implications for U.S. Growth and Competitiveness (Sept. 27, 2016),
available at https://www.ici.org/pdf/16_house_fsc_fsb.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I am pleased to report some signs of progress on the FSB front. For
example, consistent with ICI's urging, the FSB properly entrusted the
implementation of several of the policy recommendations that emerged
from its asset management review to the International Organization of
Securities Commissions (IOSCO)--a body with a deep well of relevant
subject matter expertise.
More generally, late last year, after conducting a review of its
processes and transparency, the FSB agreed to take certain actions--
including actions to improve communication and engagement with external
stakeholders along the lines ICI has recommended. \32\ In addition, the
FSB has turned some of its focus to evaluating the effectiveness and
efficiency of reforms that have been implemented and considering
whether any adjustments are needed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ See Letter from Paul Schott Stevens, President and CEO, ICI,
to the Secretariat of the FSB, dated Sept. 21, 2016 (responding to
Consultative Document; ``Proposed Policy Recommendations to Address
Structural Vulnerabilities from Asset Management Activities''),
available at https://www.ici.org/pdf/16_ici_fsb_ltr.pdf, at 40.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Some of these changes appear to reflect the direction in which the
new FSB chairman, Federal Reserve Board Vice Chairman for Supervision
Randal Quarles, is seeking to steer the organization. Based on his
recent inaugural speech as FSB chairman, there is reason to be
encouraged. \33\ His remarks focused on the core principles he believes
should guide the FSB's future work: engagement, including improved
outreach and transparency with a broad range of constituencies; rigor,
so that assessment of financial sector vulnerabilities is based on
``cutting edge thinking and a disciplined methodology''; and analysis,
including critical analysis of the effects of reforms to determine if
there are improvements that can be made--for example, to achieve
resiliency in less burdensome and more efficient ways.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ See ``Ideas of Order: Charting a Course for the Financial
Stability Board'', Remarks by Randal K. Quarles, Vice Chairman for
Supervision, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Chair,
Financial Stability Board, at Bank for International Settlements
Special Governors Meeting, Hong Kong (Feb. 10, 2019), available at
http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/Quarles-Ideas-of-order-Charting-
a-course-for-the-Financial-Stability-Board.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I believe Chairman Quarles' leadership and policy approach will
serve the interests of all who participate in and benefit from a robust
financial system, including millions of Americans who invest in
registered funds to meet their most important financial goals.
A Legislative Solution Is Still Appropriate and Necessary
In the release explaining its proposal, the Council emphasizes that
the Dodd-Frank Act gives it broad discretion to determine how to
respond to potential threats to financial stability. As we indicate
above, our initial analysis of the proposal is quite positive. ICI
believes that the Council has outlined a sound approach to using its
range of authorities, from information sharing to SIFI designation.
Nevertheless, we continue to believe that Congress should confirm in
statute that SIFI designation is intended to be a regulatory ``tool of
last resort.''
Bipartisan legislation recently introduced by Members of this
Committee--Senators Mike Rounds (R-SD), Doug Jones (D-AL), Thom Tillis
(R-NC), and Kyrsten Sinema (D-AZ)--would do just that. S. 603, the
``Financial Stability Oversight Council Improvement Act of 2019'',
would add a modest but important step to the SIFI designation process.
It would require that, before voting on a proposed designation, the
Council must consider whether the potential threat posed by a nonbank
financial company could be mitigated through other means--a different
action of the Council; action by the company's primary regulator (which
could include implementing standards/safeguards pursuant to Council
recommendations under Section 120); or action by the company itself, as
detailed in a written plan submitted promptly to the Council. If the
Council determines that such other means are impracticable or
insufficient to mitigate the potential threat, the Council may proceed
with a proposed designation.
The bill preserves maximum flexibility for the Council. While it
requires the Council to consult with the primary regulator and the
company, it does not dictate how the Council should do so. Nor does the
bill preclude the Council from proceeding expeditiously. What it does
do is help to ensure that the Council consider the range of options
available and make an informed decision about how to address the
potential threat to financial stability.
S. 603 comports well with the current requirements of the Dodd-
Frank Act. Section 113(g) of the Act already requires FSOC to consult
with the primary regulator for a company that is being evaluated for
possible designation. The bill simply would specify that this
consultation must happen at an early stage of the process--that is,
before FSOC votes on a proposed designation. And, importantly, S. 603
affirmatively preserves the Council's emergency powers as outlined in
Section 113(f).
ICI accordingly urges this Committee to consider S. 603 and report
it favorably to the full Senate.
Recommendations
ICI is pleased to offer its recommendations for addressing the
matters we discuss above.
Congress should encourage FSOC's current effort to
implement the Treasury Department's FSOC reform recommendations
through the pending proposal and a public notice and comment
process.
Congress should enact legislation, such as S. 603, to
codify in statute that FSOC's nonbank SIFI designation
authority is intended to be used only in extraordinary
circumstances, as a regulatory tool of last resort.
Congress should continue to monitor U.S. involvement in the
FSB. It also should support Chairman Quarles in his reform
efforts which, if successful, will benefit U.S. investors.
I appreciate the opportunity to share these views with the
Committee. ICI looks forward to continued engagement with Congress on
these important matters.
PREPARED STATEMENT OF JEREMY C. KRESS
Assistant Professor of Business Law, University of Michigan Ross School
of Business
March 14, 2019
Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, Members of the Committee, I
am honored to appear before you to discuss the Financial Stability
Oversight Council's nonbank systemically important financial
institution (SIFI) designations. Nonbank SIFI designations are an
essential policy tool for regulating systemic risk. I am therefore
concerned that recent efforts to de-emphasize nonbank SIFI
designations--or eliminate them altogether--would expose the financial
system to many of the same dangers it experienced in 2008.
I will make three points in my testimony today. \1\ First, nonbank
SIFI designations are crucial for preventing catastrophic nonbank
failures like the collapses of Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and AIG.
Nonbank SIFI designations protect the financial system by deterring
nonbanks from becoming systemically important and by applying
heightened safeguards to firms that nonetheless become excessively
large, complex, or interconnected. By contrast, nonbanks' baseline
regulatory regimes are generally not well suited to accomplish these
goals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Portions of this testimony are adapted from Jeremy C. Kress,
Patricia A. McCoy, and Daniel Schwarcz, ``Regulating Entities and
Activities: Complementary Approaches to Nonbank Systemic Risk'', 92 S.
Cal. L. Rev. (forthcoming 2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, criticisms of nonbank SIFI designations are unpersuasive.
For example, despite critics' complaints, nonbank SIFI designations do
not impose bank-centric rules on nonbanks. To the contrary, the Federal
Reserve has gone to great lengths to recognize the distinct regulatory
issues associated with nonbank financial companies, and to tailor its
approach accordingly. Moreover, to the extent that heightened
regulations create an uneven playing field for designated nonbank
SIFIs, this differential is a feature, not a bug. Enhanced safeguards
for nonbank SIFIs ensure that companies have incentive to avoid
becoming or remaining systemically important.
Third, proposals to replace nonbank SIFI designations with an
activities-based approach are deeply misguided. Activities-based
regulation, on its own, will not prevent systemic collapses like those
we experienced in 2008. It is unrealistic to expect that regulators
will identify and appropriately regulate all such activities ex ante,
especially given financial companies' strong incentives to restructure
or rename activities to avoid regulation. By contrast, policymakers are
much more likely to consistently and accurately identify nonbank
financial companies whose distress could threaten financial stability.
A purely or predominantly activities-based approach to nonbank
systemic risk will fail for yet another reason: the U.S. regulatory
framework is not configured to implement effective activities-based
regulation. The U.S. regulatory system is riddled with gaps in areas
like insurance, hedge funds, and FinTech. Because FSOC lacks authority
to implement activities-based rules directly, this pervasive
jurisdictional fragmentation would undermine efforts to enact and
enforce uniform, consistent activities-based rules throughout the
financial system.
To be sure, if configured appropriately, activities-based
regulation could address some sources of nonbank systemic risk. As
currently structured, however, the United States' regulatory framework
is simply not conducive to effective activities-based nonbank
regulation.
Proponents of an activities-based approach to nonbank systemic risk
contend that activities-based rules would merely supplement, rather
than displace, nonbank SIFI designations. But make no mistake: the
procedural barriers to nonbank SIFI designations that FSOC proposed
last week would make it exceedingly difficult for the Council to
designate new nonbank SIFIs and for any such designation to survive
judicial review. Moreover, the Council's apparent enthusiasm for
activities-based nonbank regulation rings hollow given that the FSOC
has not used its existing statutory authority to propose a single
activities-based rule in more than 2 years under Secretary Mnuchin's
leadership.
In sum, I am deeply concerned about recent initiatives to roll back
nonbank systemic risk regulation. Efforts to marginalize the Council by
diminishing its legal authority, politicizing its work, and reducing
its budget collectively increase risks to the financial system and
ultimately threaten the real economy.
Background on Nonbank SIFI Designations and Proposed Procedural
Barriers
A. The Financial Crisis, Nonbank Systemic Risk, and the FSOC
The 2008 financial crisis demonstrated unequivocally that nonbank
financial institutions can threaten U.S. and global financial
stability. The failures of Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and AIG
proved that nonbanks--like banks--are capable of propagating risk
throughout the financial system. Yet, traditionally, investment banks,
insurance companies, and other nonbank financial companies generally
have not been subject to macroprudential regulation designed to limit
the risks these firms pose to the financial system and the broader
economy.
After the crisis, Congress created FSOC to address the problem of
nonbank systemic risk. \2\ The Dodd-Frank Act gave FSOC two tools to
achieve this goal. First, under section 113 of Dodd-Frank, FSOC may
designate an individual nonbank SIFI for enhanced regulation if the
Council determines that the firm's material financial distress or ``the
nature, scope, size, scale, interconnectedness or mix of [its]
activities'' could pose a threat to U.S. financial stability. \3\ Any
nonbank entity that FSOC designates as a SIFI becomes subject to
consolidated supervision and regulation by the Federal Reserve,
including risk-based capital, leverage, liquidity, and risk-management
requirements. \4\ This is FSOC's so-called ``entity-based'' approach.
Second, under section 120 of Dodd-Frank, FSOC may recommend that the
primary financial regulatory agencies adopt ``new or heightened
standards or safeguards'' for any financial activity that could
propagate systemic risks. \5\ This is FSOC's ``activities-based''
approach.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ My views about FSOC have been shaped by excellent scholarship
on the Council and nonbank systemic risk. See, e.g., Hilary J. Allen,
``Putting the `Financial Stability' in Financial Stability Oversight
Council'', 76 Ohio St. L. J. 1087 (2015); Jeffrey N. Gordon, ``Dynamic
Precaution in Maintaining Financial Stability: The Importance of
FSOC'', in Ten Years After the Crash (Sharyn O'Halloran and Thomas
Groll, eds., forthcoming 2019); Patricia A. McCoy, ``Systemic Risk
Oversight and the Shifting Balance of State and Federal Authority Over
Insurance'', 5 U.C. Irvine L. Rev. 1389 (2015); Daniel Schwarcz and
David Zaring, ``Regulation by Threat: Dodd-Frank and the Nonbank
Problem'', 84 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1813 (2017); Christina Parajon Skinner,
``Regulating Nonbanks: A Plan for SIFI Lite'', 105 Geo. L. J. 1379
(2017); Robert F. Weber, ``The FSOC's Designation Program as a Case
Study of the New Administrative Law of Financial Supervision'', 36 Yale
J. Reg. 359 (2019).
\3\ 12 U.S.C. 5323(a)(1).
\4\ 12 U.S.C. 5365(b)(1)(A).
\5\ 12 U.S.C. 5330(a).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
B. Nonbank SIFI Designations and De-Designations
At first, FSOC embraced its SIFI designation authority. The Council
promulgated, through notice-and-comment rulemaking, formal procedures
for evaluating a nonbank's systemic importance. \6\ Then, in 2013 and
2014, the Council designated three insurance-focused companies--
Prudential, AIG, and MetLife--and General Electric's captive finance
subsidiary, GE Capital, as nonbank SIFIs. FSOC concluded, through
increasingly detailed analyses, that material financial distress at any
of these four companies could pose a threat to U.S. financial stability
and that enhanced oversight was therefore appropriate for each firm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ ``Authority To Require Supervision and Regulation of Certain
Nonbank Financial Companies'', 77 FR 21,637 (Apr. 11, 2012).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
But now, just 5 years later, FSOC has reversed all of its original
nonbank SIFI designations. To be sure, the Council's unanimous
rescission of GE Capital's SIFI status in 2016 was well warranted.
After its SIFI designation, GE Capital substantially reduced its
systemic footprint, shrinking by more than half and reducing its
reliance on risky short-term funding. \7\ GE Capital's designation,
restructuring, and consequent de-designation demonstrate that nonbank
SIFI designations, when used appropriately, are effective deterrents
against firms becoming and remaining systemically important.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See Ted Mann and Joann S. Lublin, ``Why General Electric Is
Unwinding Its Finance Arm'', Wall St. J. (Oct. 13, 2015), https://
www.wsj.com/articles/why-general-electric-is-unwinding-its-finance-arm-
1444784781.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Each of the Council's three subsequent de-designations, however,
was hasty and ill-conceived. After Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin
became Chair of the Council, FSOC rescinded AIG's SIFI status by a
contested 6-3 vote. AIG's de-designation was considerably more
controversial than GE Capital's, as AIG--one of the primary culprits of
the financial crisis--did not appreciably reduce its systemic footprint
following its designation. \8\ Then, after MetLife prevailed in its
lawsuit contesting its SIFI designation on procedural grounds, the
Council abruptly reversed its litigation position and dropped its
appeal of MetLife's case. \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ See Gregg Gelzinis, ``Deregulating AIG Was a Mistake'', Ctr.
for Am. Progress (Oct. 11, 2017), https://www.americanprogress.org/
issues/economy/reports/2017/10/11/440570/deregulating-aig-mistake/.
\9\ Interestingly, FSOC's decision to drop its appeal in the
MetLife case was supported by a majority of FSOC's voting members,
rather than the two-thirds of voting members that would have been
required to formally rescind MetLife's designation. See Press Release,
Dept. of Treasury, Secretary Mnuchin Statement on the MetLife, Inc. v.
Financial Stability Oversight Council Appeal (Jan. 18, 2018), https://
home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm0254.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Most troublingly, FSOC de-designated Prudential in October 2018,
even though Prudential had increased in size and complexity since
becoming a SIFI. \10\ The Council's rescission of Prudential's SIFI
status was not only unwise, it was also illegal. \11\ When it de-
designated Prudential, FSOC (1) violated its formal procedures by
second-guessing the Council's original assessment of Prudential's
systemic importance, (2) performed misleading quantitative analyses
while dismissing more reliable indicators of Prudential's systemic
importance, and (3) ignored its statutory mandate to consider
Prudential's existing regulatory scrutiny. \12\ These shortcomings
substantially undermine the Council's conclusion that Prudential is not
systemically important and render FSOC's action arbitrary and
capricious. \13\ Unfortunately, in contrast to MetLife, which had an
unambiguous statutory right to contest its SIFI designation, it is
unclear whether individual citizens or public interest groups have
standing to sue FSOC when the Council illegally de-designates a SIFI.
\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Prudential had grown by more than $100 billion in assets
since its designation. Meanwhile, Prudential's complexity and
interconnectedness with other financial companies also increased. Its
notional derivatives exposures and repurchase agreements rose by more
than 30 percent after its designation. See Jeremy Kress, ``Prudential
Hasn't Earned the Right To Shed SIFI Label'', Am. Banker (March 13,
2018), https://www.americanbanker.com/opinion/prudential-hasnt-earned-
the-right-to-shed-sifi-label.
\11\ See Jeremy C. Kress, ``The Last SIFI: The Unwise and Illegal
Deregulation of Prudential Financial'', 71 Stanford L. Rev. Online 171
(2018).
\12\ See id.
\13\ An agency's decision is arbitrary and capricious if the
agency did not rely on the factors Congress intended or the decision
runs counter to the evidence before the agency. See Motor Vehicle Mfrs.
Ass'n v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co. 463 U.S. 29, 42-43 (1983). In
addition, an agency may not ``simply disregard rules that are still on
the books.'' FCC v. Fox Television Stations, Inc., 556 U.S. 502, 515
(2009).
\14\ See Weber, supra n. 2, at 425-32.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
C. Proposed Procedural Barriers to New Nonbank SIFI Designations
These de-designations appear to be part of a concerted effort by
the Trump administration and some members of Congress to de-emphasize--
or permanently eliminate--nonbank SIFI designations as a regulatory
tool. In November 2017, the Treasury Department published a report
deriding nonbank SIFI designations as a ``blunt instrument'' and
proposing procedural barriers to new nonbank SIFI designations. \15\
For example, the Treasury Department would require FSOC to assess a
potential designee's likelihood of financial distress and perform a
quantitative cost-benefit analysis of each designation. Just last week,
FSOC proposed to adopt these procedural barriers through amendments to
its interpretive guidance. \16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ U.S. Dep't of the Treasury, Financial Stability Oversight
Council Designations, ``Report to the President of the United States
Pursuant to the Presidential Memorandum Issued April 21, 2017''.
\16\ Notice of Proposed Interpretive Guidance Regarding Nonbank
Financial Company Determinations (March 6, 2018), https://
home.treasury.gov/system/files/261/Notice-of-Proposed-Interpretive-
Guidance.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If enacted, these new policies would substantially undermine FSOC's
ability to designate nonbank SIFIs in the future. First, consider the
proposed requirement that FSOC assess a company's likelihood of
financial distress. As a threshold matter, this proposal directly
conflicts with the text of the Dodd-Frank Act, which instructs FSOC to
assume that a firm is in distress and analyze whether that distress
could pose a threat to U.S. financial stability. \17\ Even setting
statutory considerations aside, however, this proposed requirement is
seriously misguided. As FSOC's prior experience demonstrates, it can
take years for the Council to evaluate a nonbank for potential
designation, for the Federal Reserve to establish regulations
appropriately tailored to a nonbank SIFI's business model, and for a
designated nonbank SIFI to bring itself into compliance with those
safeguards. Thus, waiting to designate a nonbank until it is vulnerable
to distress could be too late. By the time the relevant capital,
liquidity, and other safeguards associated with designation go into
effect, the nonbank SIFI may already have collapsed. \18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ 12 U.S.C. 5323(a)(1).
\18\ Moreover, conditioning a firm's designation on its
vulnerability could actually hasten its collapse. Any SIFI designation
issued under this standard would signal that FSOC views the company as
unstable, potentially triggering a run and creating the instability
SIFI designations are designed to prevent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Subjecting nonbank SIFI designations to quantitative cost-benefit
analyses would be equally unwise. Quantifying the costs and benefits of
nonbank SIFI designations poses serious analytical challenges. For
example, the stability-enhancing benefits of financial regulations are
notoriously difficult to calculate accurately. As many scholars have
recognized, quantifying the benefit of a crisis averted is nearly
impossible. \19\ Moreover, because of the infrequency of financial
crises, financial regulatory cost-benefit analyses are highly sensitive
to crude economic loss and discount rate assumptions. For these
reasons, empirical cost-benefit analysis of the Council's nonbank SIFI
designations would be susceptible to ex post second-guessing by a
reviewing court, thereby creating litigation risk for the Council and
deterring it from attempting to use its SIFI designation authority in
the first place.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ See, e.g., John C. Coates IV, ``Cost-Benefit Analysis of
Financial Regulation: Case Studies and Implications'', 124 Yale L. J.
882, 960-69 (2015); Jeffrey N. Gordon, ``The Empty Call for Benefit-
Cost Analysis in Financial Regulation'', 43. J. Legal Stud. S351, S373-
75 (2014).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In lieu of nonbank SIFI designations, FSOC now purports to
prioritize an activities-based approach to nonbank systemic risk. In
its proposed interpretive guidance, the Council states that it will
consider using its SIFI designation authority ``only if a potential
risk or threat cannot be addressed through an activities-based
approach.'' Under this activities-based approach, the Council would
coordinate with various Federal and State financial regulatory agencies
and encourage them to address risks arising from specific activities,
either informally or through the Council's formal section 120
recommendation authority. \20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Interestingly, the Council states that it will ``make
recommendations under section 120 of the Dodd-Frank Act only to the
extent that its recommendations are consistent with the statutory
mandate of the relevant primary financial regulatory agency.'' Notice
of Proposed Interpretive Guidance Regarding Nonbank Financial Company
Determinations, supra n. 16, at 14. It is not clear how FSOC intends to
address stability risks within the jurisdiction of agencies, like the
Securities and Exchange Commission and State insurance regulators, that
lack a statutory financial stability mandate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Parallel initiatives in Congress would codify similar procedural
barriers to nonbank SIFI designations and formally prioritize FSOC's
activities-based approach. For example, the Financial Stability
Oversight Council Improvement Act would prohibit FSOC from voting on a
proposed nonbank SIFI designation unless the Council determines that a
different approach would be impracticable or insufficient to mitigate
the threat the company could pose to U.S. financial stability. \21\ For
the reasons explained below, these administrative and legislative
efforts to de-emphasize nonbank SIFI designations are ill-advised and,
if enacted, would recreate the same feeble approach to nonbank systemic
risk that proved woefully inadequate in 2008.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ S. 3577, 115th Cong. (2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nonbank SIFI Designations Are Critical for Preventing Systemic Nonbank
Insolvencies
Retaining nonbank SIFI designations as a viable regulatory tool is
necessary to prevent catastrophic nonbank failures like Bear Stearns,
Lehman Brothers, and AIG. FSOC's nonbank SIFI designation authority
achieves two essential regulatory objectives: the threat of designation
deters nonbanks from becoming systemically important, and tailored
Federal Reserve regulation safeguards companies that nonetheless become
excessively large, complex, or interconnected.
First, the prospect of nonbank SIFI designation serves as a
powerful deterrent against nonbanks becoming systemically important.
Ordinarily, a nonbank has strong incentive to expand its systemic
footprint. That is because any financial company perceived as
systemically important can borrow at favorable rates if the market
believes that the Government would bail out the firm, rather than allow
it to fail. \22\ FSOC's nonbank SIFI designation authority, however,
counteracts this incentive. Because designation subjects a company to
potentially costly regulation, the threat of designation dissuades
firms from seeking to become systemically important. Thus, as
Professors Daniel Schwarcz and David Zaring have written, ``the FSOC
designation regime incentivizes nonbanks to eschew activities and
strategies that they anticipate would subject them to designation.''
\23\ Moreover, as GE Capital's experience demonstrates, this incentive
is even stronger for companies ultimately designated as nonbank SIFIs.
Indeed, such firms have especially powerful motivation to simplify or
shrink themselves in an effort to escape their designations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ See, e.g., Viral V. Acharya et al., ``The End of Market
Discipline? Investor Expectations of Implicit Government Guarantees''
35 (Munich Personal RePEc Archive, Working Paper No. 79700, 2016).
\23\ Schwarcz and Zaring, supra n. 2, at 1851.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, in the event that a nonbank becomes and remains
systemically important, FSOC's nonbank SIFI designation authority
enables the Council to subject the firm to appropriately tailored
safeguards and thus protect the broader financial system. The Federal
Reserve's macroprudential regulatory tools are uniquely suited to limit
the risk that a designated nonbank SIFI will experience a systemic
failure. For example, consolidated risk-based capital and leverage
limits ensure that SIFIs maintain a sufficient capital cushion to
absorb potential losses. Liquidity rules require SIFIs to hold a
minimum amount of liquid assets to protect against funding runs. Stress
tests simulate adverse economic conditions to ensure that SIFIs can
withstand a severe downturn. Corporate governance reforms focus on
improving enterprise risk management across SIFI's operations. Finally,
ex ante resolution planning is crucial if a systemically important
nonbank must be liquidated through Dodd-Frank's Orderly Liquidation
Authority.
To be clear, these macroprudential safeguards are necessary because
most traditional nonbank regulatory regimes lack reliable financial
stability regulatory tools. Insurance regulation is the most
straightforward example. In the United States, insurance regulation has
long been the responsibility of the States, with little Federal
involvement. But the State-based system of insurance regulation suffers
from serious flaws with respect to systemic risk regulation. Most
critically, the U.S. insurance regulatory system lacks well developed
consolidated regulation and supervision of insurance holding companies.
\24\ And, in most States, the insurance commissioner is subject to a
narrow regulatory mandate to protect an insurance subsidiary's
policyholders, not to limit financial stability risks. In sum, absent
nonbank SIFI designations and ensuing Federal Reserve oversight, some
systemically important nonbanks will not be subject to consolidated,
macroprudential supervision and regulation that is necessary to prevent
a repeat of the 2008 crisis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ While the States have attempted to improve groupwide
supervision of insurance holding companies since 2008, they still have
not implemented consolidated capital requirements and other critical
regulatory tools. Moreover, the efficacy of these State-level reforms
is speculative because they largely have not been tested since the
financial crisis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Criticisms of Nonbank SIFI Designations Are Unpersuasive
Critics of FSOC's nonbank SIFI designation authority have long
complained that SIFI designations impose bank-centric rules on
nonbanks, create an uneven playing field, are opaque, and are driven by
international advisory bodies. None of these criticisms is convincing.
Some critiques were overblown from the start; others have been
addressed through reforms adopted by FSOC and the Federal Reserve. In
any event, these arguments have little merit.
First, despite critics' complaints, nonbank SIFI designations do
not result in the imposition of bank-centric rules on nonbanks. To the
contrary, policymakers have taken several steps to tailor nonbank SIFI
regulation to the distinct regulatory issues associated with designated
nonbank financial companies. For example, Congress passed The Insurance
Capital Standards Clarification Act of 2014, which specifically
authorized the Federal Reserve to tailor its capital standards for
insurers to the distinctive risks posed by each firm. And, in fact, the
insurance SIFI capital standards the Federal Reserve proposed in 2016
reflect thoughtful consideration of the differences between bank and
insurance company business models. \25\ Moreover, the Federal Reserve
has established a specialized team of insurance-focused experts to
supervise nonbank SIFIs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ ``Capital Requirements for Supervised Institutions
Significantly Engaged in Insurance Activities'', 81 FR 38,631 (June 14,
2016).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second the fact that nonbank SIFI designations create an uneven
playing field for designated firms is by design. Heightened capital,
liquidity, and other rules help to ensure that nonbank firms have
incentive to avoid being designated in the first place, and to shed
their status quickly if they are so designated. Further, the costs of
being designated are less unfair than critics suggest, as they help
offset the funding advantages that come along with being perceived as
systemically important.
Third, FSOC has taken numerous steps to enhance the transparency of
the nonbank SIFI designation process. For example, it developed a
formulaic quantitative test to select only a small subset of all
nonbank financial firms for potential designation. \26\ The Council
began informing firms earlier when they were being considered for
designation, and it established a formal process for reevaluating such
designations. \27\ FSOC also began releasing more detailed explanations
for its designation decisions that provide clearer indications of how
firms can achieve de-designation. Thus, while FSOC can surely further
improve the transparency of its designation process, critics' concerns
about opacity are overblown.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Financial Stability Oversight Council Guidance for Nonbank
Financial Company Determinations, 12 CFR pt. 1310, app. A., III.a
(2018)
\27\ See Examining Insurance Capital Rules and FSOC Process:
Hearing Before the Senate Subcomm. on Securities, Insurance, and
Investments, 114th Cong. 7-8 (2015) (testimony of Daniel Schwarcz,
Professor, University of Minnesota Law School).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, in contrast to critics' complaints, the Council's nonbank
SIFI designation decisions are not driven by international advisory
bodies. FSOC alone selects firms to evaluate for potential designation,
and the Council makes its own, independent judgment about whether a
firm meets the criteria for SIFI designation. While international
advisory groups like the Financial Stability Board (FSB) have processes
for evaluating financial institutions' systemic importance, their
evaluations are not binding on the Council. Indeed, FSOC reversed the
designations of AIG and MetLife even though the FSB considered those
firms to be global systemically important insurers. \28\ Thus, while
the FSB and other advisory bodies facilitate global coordination, they
do not detract from the independence of FSOC's nonbank SIFI
designations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ Fin. Stability Bd., 2016 List of Global Systemically
Important Insurers (G-SIIS) (Nov. 21, 2016), http://www.fsb.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016-list-of-global-systemically-important-insurers-G-
SIIs.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In sum, criticisms of FSOC's nonbank SIFI designation authority are
wholly unconvincing. Critics' complaints were either exaggerated from
the outset or have been largely addressed by reforms policymakers
adopted to improve the SIFI designation process. Accordingly,
opponents' critiques should hold little weight in the continued debate
over the appropriateness of nonbank SIFI designations.
An Activities-Based Approach, On Its Own, Would Not Prevent a
Recurrence of the 2008 Crisis
Recent efforts to prioritize an activities-based approach to
nonbank systemic risk--by codifying a preference for activities-based
regulation or erecting procedural barriers to nonbank SIFI
designations--are deeply misguided. Proponents of this approach assume
that by regulating systemically risky activities, policymakers can
prevent the systemic failures of nonbank entities. This assumption,
however, is wrong. Activities-based regulation, on its own, cannot
prevent catastrophic nonbank failures like Bear Stearns, Lehman
Brothers, and AIG. Instead, a purely activities-based approach would
recreate the conditions that led to the last financial crisis.
Legislative and regulatory proposals to prioritize an activities-
based approach are problematic for three distinct reasons. First,
activities-based regulation is poorly suited to prevent systemically
important nonbanks from imperiling financial stability. Second, even if
activities-based regulation could work in theory, an effective
activities-based approach is impossible in practice, given the current
U.S. regulatory framework. Finally, prioritizing an activities-based
approach would slow the process of designating nonbank SIFIs and
thereby increase the likelihood of a catastrophic nonbank collapse.
A. An Activities-Based Approach Will Not Prevent Systemic Nonbank
Failures
On its own, an activities-based approach is insufficient to stop
nonbanks from propagating risks throughout the financial sector. That
is because policymakers are unlikely to identify and appropriately
regulate all potentially systemic activities ex ante. Moreover, even if
regulators were to issue appropriate activities-based rules, a purely
activities-based approach ignores the unique and potentially dangerous
ways in which individual activities might interact when combined within
a single financial institution.
First, an activities-based approach is inherently grounded in an
unrealistic expectation that policymakers will identify and
appropriately regulate all potentially systemic activities ex ante. As
the 2008 crisis demonstrated, numerous known and unknown activities can
create systemic risk. In the last crisis alone countless activities and
products--subprime mortgages, mortgage-backed securities,
collateralized debt obligations, repurchase agreements, commercial
paper, and securities lending, among others--contributed to systemic
risk. The prospect that policymakers will identify and properly
regulate all such systemic activities ex ante seems far-fetched. A
purely activities-based approach is especially unlikely to succeed
given financial companies' incentives to restructure or rename
activities to avoid regulation.
The experience of the President's Working Group on Financial
Markets (PWG) in the lead-up to the 2008 financial crisis exemplifies
the difficulty of identifying systemically risky activities. President
Reagan formed the PWG in 1988 to coordinate financial market oversight
across various jurisdictions. \29\ Comprised of the heads of the major
U.S. regulatory agencies, the PWG was essentially a precursor to FSOC,
with a mandate to address systemically risky activities. \30\ While the
financial sector amassed mortgage-related risks during the mid-2000s,
however, the PWG focused on issues entirely unconnected to the looming
crisis. Indeed, at the time, the PWG was primarily concerned with hedge
funds, mutual funds, and terrorism risk insurance. It was not until
March 2008 that the PWG finally recommended improved standards for
mortgage origination, securitizations, and derivatives--the week before
Bear Stearns failed. \31\ This is not to fault the PWG for failing to
anticipate the crisis--few people foresaw the market crash. But PWG's
experience during the mid-2000s underscores that regulators face
serious challenges in identifying the specific activities that will
transmit systemic risks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ See Exec. Order No. 12,631, 3 CFR 559 (1988).
\30\ In contrast to FSOC, the PWG lacked authority to designate
systemically risk entities for enhanced regulation or supervision.
\31\ See The President's Working Group on Financial Markets,
Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (2008), https://
www.treasury.gov/resource-center/fin-mkts/Documents/
pwgpolicystatemktturmoil_03122008.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
By contrast, policymakers are much more likely to consistently and
accurately identify nonbank entities whose distress could threaten
financial stability. As FSOC has demonstrated through its analytical
framework, it is relatively straightforward to predict which nonbank
entities could plausibly transmit systemic risks and which would not.
Furthermore, nonbank SIFI designations need not perfectly distinguish
between nonbanks that are systemically significant and those that are
not. To the contrary, FSOC can deter nonbanks from seeking out systemic
importance as long as the designation process is even roughly accurate.
The mere prospect of being designated as a SIFI creates uncertainty,
which a firm will likely seek to avoid by reducing its size and
complexity.
Furthermore, even if policymakers could identify and regulate each
potentially risky activity, that alone would not be enough to prevent a
systemically important nonbank from failing. That is because an
activities-based approach is designed to limit risks associated with
individual financial activities or products, in isolation. But a
financial institution's risk profile is the product of all of the
firm's activities and how they interact with one another. AIG is a
classic example. AIG's failure was not solely attributable to its now-
infamous credit default swaps on mortgage-related assets. Instead,
AIG's failure was also due to its securities lending activities, in
which the firm invested collateral in mortgage-backed securities. \32\
AIG's credit default swaps and securities lending activities posed
highly correlated risks--the firm suffered significant losses from both
activities when mortgage assets declined in value and counterparties
demanded payouts. A purely activities-based approach, however, is blind
to these types of interactions among all of a firm's activities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ See Daniel Schwarcz and Steven L. Schwarcz, ``Regulating
Systemic Risk in Insurance'', 81 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1569, 1585-86 (2014).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In sum, a purely or predominantly activities-based approach will
not prevent a recurrence of the systemic nonbank failures the financial
sector experienced in 2008. Entity-based nonbank SIFI designations, by
contrast, are well suited to safeguard systemic nonbanks. Nonbank SIFI
designations address the interrelationship of a firm's activities
through enterprise-level safeguards like capital requirements,
liquidity rules, and risk management standards. And, as noted above,
policymakers are much more likely to be able to identify nonbank SIFIs,
rather than trying to predict the precise activities through which such
firms might transmit systemic risk. Accordingly, proposals to
prioritize an activities-based approach while erecting procedural
barriers to nonbank SIFI designations will weaken regulators' ability
to prevent another financial crisis.
B. Effective Activities-Based Regulation Is Impossible in the Current
U.S. Regulatory Framework
Proposals to shift to an activities-based approach suffer from
another critical drawback: even if activities-based regulation could
work in theory, effective activities-based regulation is not possible
in the current U.S. legal and regulatory framework. FSOC faces two
significant obstacles in carrying out an activities-based approach to
nonbank systemic risk.
1. Effective Activities-Based Regulation Is Impossible Because FSOC
Lacks Authority To Mandate Activities-Based Rules
First, FSOC lacks legal authority to implement activities-based
reforms. Instead, the Council's section 120 activities-based power is
strictly precatory. FSOC may recommend that an agency adopt new
activities-based rules. But an agency has no legal obligation to
actually implement such rules. \33\ And, in fact, there are many
reasons why an agency might resist implementing activities-based
regulations at FSOC's urging. For example, the agency might be captured
by the financial sector it regulates, or it might try to protect its
regulatory turf against intrusion by the Council. Thus, it is
inadvisable to rely heavily or exclusively on an activities-based
approach to nonbank systemic risk because FSOC's activities-based
powers are extremely weak.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ If an agency elects not to adopt an FSOC recommendation under
section 120 of the Dodd-Frank Act, it must only ``explain in writing''
why it chose not to implement the rule. 12 U.S.C. 5330(c)(2).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The feebleness of FSOC's activities-based approach is especially
concerning because the Council proposes to forfeit its one credible
threat when an agency declines to adopt activities-based rules at
FSOC's urging. Ordinarily, if an agency refuses an FSOC recommendation,
the Council may respond by designating firms within the agency's
jurisdiction as nonbank SIFIs. In fact, the Council threatened to do
just that in 2012, after the SEC initially resisted enacting enhanced
regulations on money market mutual funds. \34\ Because agencies fear
losing authority over companies within their jurisdiction, the threat
of SIFI designation may encourage an agency to adopt FSOC's recommended
rules. \35\ Indeed, that is what happened when the SEC ultimately
implemented MMMF reforms after the Council threatened to designate
certain MMMFs or their advisors. Now, however, FSOC essentially
proposes to take the threat of nonbank SIFI designations off the table.
By enacting onerous procedural barriers, FSOC will make the threat of
SIFI designations noncredible. In sum, creating new hurdles for nonbank
SIFI designations further decreases the likelihood that an activities-
based approach will work in practice.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ See Allen, supra n. 2, at 1118-19; Schwarcz and Zaring, supra
n. 2, at 1862-63.
\35\ Schwarcz and Zaring, supra n. 2, at 1860-64.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Jurisdictional Fragmentation in U.S. Financial Regulation Would
Make an Activities-Based Approach Unworkable
The second obstacle to effective activities-based regulation is the
jurisdictional fragmentation that pervades the U.S. regulatory system.
This fragmentation prevents policymakers from overseeing and regulating
systemically important activities on a systemwide basis. In some cases,
the regulatory system suffers from problematic gaps, where no
regulatory agency has authority over particular conduct. For instance,
in areas like insurance, hedge funds, and FinTech, even if the Council
were to recommend heightened macroprudential rules, it is not clear
that any Federal agency would have jurisdiction to implement those
recommendations. In other cases, the U.S. regulatory system features
complicated overlaps, where multiple agencies share responsibility for
certain financial activities. This happens in areas like mortgages,
securities, and derivatives. These overlaps would unduly complicate
efforts to enact and enforce uniform, consistent activities-based rules
throughout the U.S. financial system.
None of this is to say that a well-designed activities-based
approach cannot help preserve financial stability. To the contrary,
activities-based regulation has the potential to combat some--but not
all--sources of nonbank systemic risk, if configured appropriately. For
example, an activities-based approach is uniquely well-suited to
address systemic risks that may arise from correlations across numerous
different nonbanks' investment activities, risk management practices,
or product features. An activities-based approach may also be better
designed to address certain risks arising from complex relationships
among firms that require regulators or other market actors to mediate
intercompany relationships through market infrastructure, such as
clearinghouses and exchanges.
As currently configured, however, the fragmented U.S. regulatory
framework is not designed to realize these potential benefits of
activities-based regulation. To operationalize an effective activities-
based approach, Congress would need to dramatically reform the U.S.
regulatory system. For example, Congress could create a single
stability regulator with authority to oversee activities spanning
different segments of the financial sector, similar to the regulatory
structure in Australia and other ``multi-peaked'' systems. A regulator
of this sort would obviate many of the structural problems with
activities-based regulation. Absent these reforms, however, an
activities-based approach to nonbank systemic risk will not succeed in
the current U.S. regulatory framework.
C. Prioritizing an Activities-Based Approach Would Slow the Process of
Nonbank SIFI Designations
Finally, proposals to prioritize an activities-based approach--and
consider nonbank SIFI designations only as a last resort--could
dramatically slow the process of designating a nonbank SIFI, even when
conditions clearly warrant such a designation. The designation process
that FSOC and some members of Congress envision would involve multiple
rounds of consultation and coordination among the relevant regulatory
agencies before the Council could potentially resort to nonbank SIFI
designations. This multistep process would take so long in practice
that by the time FSOC even considered addressing escalating risks
through nonbank SIFI designations, it could be too late. \36\ The SIFI
designation process is already lengthy, with extensive evaluation and
ample opportunity for the relevant company to present evidence to the
Council. Moreover, it takes additional time for the Federal Reserve to
develop appropriately tailored rules for any company designated as a
nonbank SIFI, and even more time for the company to bring itself into
compliance with those safeguards. Further delaying the designation
process by mandating that the Council first exhaust all activities-
based remedies is therefore highly inadvisable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ This is especially true if, as the Council proposes, it only
designates nonbanks it determines to be vulnerable to financial
distress.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Proponents of an activities-based approach mistakenly view nonbank
SIFI designations as an emergency response to be used if activities-
based regulation fails to address systemic risks. Indeed, the Council's
proposed amendments to its interpretive guidance commit that FSOC will
consider a nonbank SIFI designation ``only in rare instances such as an
emergency situation.'' \37\ This view gravely misconstrues the purpose
of nonbank SIFI designations. A nonbank SIFI designation is not an
emergency tool; instead, it is a prophylactic strategy to protect a
systemically important nonbank from experiencing distress in the first
place. \38\ In order for the capital, liquidity, resolution planning,
and other safeguards associated with nonbank SIFI designations to have
their intended effect, FSOC must proactively use nonbank SIFI
designations as an ex ante crisis-prevention strategy, not as a belated
crisis response.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ ``Notice of Proposed Interpretive Guidance Regarding Nonbank
Financial Company Determinations'', supra n. 16, at 27.
\38\ See Gregg Gelzinis, ``Don't Put SIFI Designations on the Back
Burner'', Am. Banker (Jan. 29, 2018), https://www.americanbanker.com/
opinion/dont-put-sifi-designations-on-the-back-burner.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion
In sum, it is critical that FSOC retain nonbank SIFI designations
as a viable regulatory tool. Recent proposals to de-emphasize or
eliminate nonbank SIFI designations--either formally or through onerous
procedural requirements--ignore the unique ways in which SIFI
designations can prevent catastrophic nonbank failures. Moreover, these
proposals overlook the serious practical challenges that an activities-
based approach would face in the United States' fragmented regulatory
framework. Nonbank SIFI designations are therefore essential to
mitigate nonbank systemic risk and prevent the next Bear Stearns,
Lehman Brothers, or AIG from triggering another financial crisis.
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR KENNEDY
FROM DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN
Q.1. Please discuss the potential threats posed by ILC's to
safety and soundness because their commercial owners are exempt
from consolidated supervision.
A.1. I do not see any particular issue with the safety and
soundness of an ILC per se, as they have been regulated
successfully by the FDIC and States for a number of years.
Q.2. Should a handful of States be allowed to unilaterally
determine national financial regulatory and economic policy?
A.2. The U.S. has typically embraced a fair amount of Federal-
State heterogeneity in its regulatory structure without having
any single State force the Federal Government's hand.
Presumably the same outcome can prevail in this instance.
Q.3. Are you concerned that if the FDIC approves Square's
application to become an insured depository institution, other
FinTech companies like Amazon or Google or Paypal that have
extensive commercial interests will also attempt to become
banks?
A.3. We have seen interest from Walmart, SoFi, and others. It
is entirely conceivable that there could be additional
applications for an ILC charter. Opposition to Walmart
obtaining a charter was for the most part motivated not by any
fears of the safety and soundness of the financial system at
large but more by dislike of Walmart itself and fears of the
competitive advantages such a large institution would enjoy.
Any inherent advantages Walmart could have offered consumers--
particularly those with less or no access to credit--would have
necessarily lowered the prices of banking services across the
system.
Q.4. Would you agree that holding companies are created to
strengthen safety and soundness, not weaken it?
A.4. Holding companies are usually created to better organize
connected financial institutions, to the enjoy the benefits of,
for instance, economies of scale or a centralized
administration. Holding companies enjoy protection from losses.
Holding companies usually confer considerable tax advantages on
the entities in the group. I would not agree that safety and
soundness--particularly of the industry of a whole--are
considerations when the decision is made to incorporate.
Q.5. Without consolidated supervision, how can regulators
effectively enforce the source of strength doctrine for
commercial ILC holding companies?
A.5. The pervasive use of bank holding companies as the vehicle
for Federal financial regulation was greatly expanded during
the financial crisis when Goldman Sachs and other investment
banks were essentially forced to become bank holding companies.
That might suggest that this one-size-fits-all approach is not
needed and that the key is to avoid a financial crisis.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF
SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN
Q.1. How do the regulators for insurance companies and hedge
funds become fully informed of all the activities in which
insurance companies participate?
A.1. There is no substitute for the experience gained as a
result of being a financial institution's primary regulator. It
is for this reason that any action by a nonprimary regulator--
in this case FSOC--will usually be an inferior substitute, as
action is taken without the benefit of this experience. Key to
the development of an effective activities-based regulatory
framework will be the requirement that the FSOC consult first
with primary regulators, particularly before making any future
designations.
Q.2. Could a large complex nonbank financial entity engage in
risky activities completely unbeknownst to its board or
regulator? Do you have historic examples of regulators being
unaware that a regulator was unaware of risky investments or
activities by a nonbank large and complex financial
institution?
A.2. It is possible but unlikely that a nonbank financial
entity engage in risky activities completely unbeknownst to its
regulator. It is even less likely that the entity's board is
completely unaware. Instead the more likely scenario is that an
activity is known but that the scope or riskiness of that
activity is not adequately measured (to the extent that such
things can be adequately measured). Responsibility is shared by
the financial entity (for a failure in internal controls or a
failure to adequately disclose), its auditor (for a failure to
adequately test the entity's assumptions), and its primary
regulator (for permitting activities it is not itself capable
of supervising).
The best example of failure on the part of entity, auditor,
and regulator is of course the role of American Insurance Group
(AIG) in the 2008 financial crisis. A London-based division of
AIG insured collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) against
possibility of default via a credit default swap. Although
insurance is the primary business of AIG credit default swaps
are complex contract/derivatives that have more in common with
banking products. The CDOs AIG insured involved the failure of
an additional actor in this space, credit rating agencies,
which inadequately assessed the risk of these highly complex
instruments. It is not clear that AIG's primary regulator in
the U.S., the U.K., or at group level was aware of the
riskiness of this portfolio. We do however note that the
difficulties with AIG stem from it effectively acting as an
unregulated hedge fund rather than an insurer.
Q.3. Do you think the FSOC as it is currently comprised has
both the expertise and the authority to appropriately assess
nonbank significantly important financial institutions?
A.3. One cannot expect a third-party regulator such as the FSOC
to somehow have better information than the involved parties,
especially in light of the dearth of insurance experience on
the FSOC. A single voting member with dedicated insurance
expertise is not sufficient to assess these large, complex, but
not inherently unsafe institutions. That is even if the advice
of the insurance expert is taken. As noted in my written
statement, the FSOC independent member with insurance
expertise, Roy Woodall, dissented from the decision to
designate Prudential Financial a systemically important
financial institution.
The alternative is to ensure that FSOC procedures ensure
the accumulation of a sufficient body of evidence and expertise
to support any decision to designate.
Q.4. What progress has the G20 made in terms of adopting
reforms that allow for a resolution framework in their
jurisdictions?
A.4. This is not an area of personal expertise, but I will note
that since the adoption of the series of Basel Accords
resolution frameworks for U.S. and other jurisdictions are more
alike than different. There also does not seem to be appetite
at the level of G20 for significant regulatory advancement at
this point on resolution frameworks--even Basel IV is seen as
simply the final implementation of the Basel III framework.
Q.5. What more needs to be done in terms of cross-border
cooperation on orderly resolution of globally significant
financial institutions--both banks and nonbanks?
A.5. To a large extent this is already embedded as policy
within resolution frameworks. When vetting and approving
resolution plans domestic regulators are instructed to look
closely at a bank's activities, regardless of jurisdiction.
Hence there does not seem to be any crucial gap that needs to
be filled.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR TOOMEY
FROM PAUL SCHOTT STEVENS
Q.1. Your testimony expresses support for moving to an
activities-based or industrywide approach to addressing risks
to financial stability.
Could such an approach expose small firms that pose no
systemic risk to increased regulatory burdens? How should we
mitigate such an outcome?
A.1. The Dodd-Frank Act provided FSOC with authority to
evaluate systemic risk on an entity and/or an activity basis.
An activities-based approach may be more appropriate where
potential risky activity is spread across parts of the
financial system. Rulemakings by the relevant financial
regulator(s) should be tailored to the potential risks
identified by FSOC, and done in accordance with the
Administrative Procedures Act and applicable protections to
help mitigate burdens to small firms.
Q.2. Does an activities-based approach to designation pose a
risk to industry competition and innovation?
What additional steps should be taken to ensure consumers
continue to benefit from a competitive and innovative
marketplace?
A.2. An activities-based approach is less likely to present
risks to industry competition and innovation. By targeting
activities, problematic behavior can be curtailed across the
board. No one firm will operate at a disadvantage vis-a-vis its
competitors.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR KENNEDY
FROM PAUL SCHOTT STEVENS
Q.1. Please discuss the potential threats posed by ILC's to
safety and soundness because their commercial owners are exempt
from consolidated supervision.
Should a handful of States be allowed to unilaterally
determine national financial regulatory and economic policy?
Are you concerned that if the FDIC approves Square's
application to become an insured depository institution, other
FinTech companies like Amazon or Google or Paypal that have
extensive commercial interests will also attempt to become
banks?
Would you agree that holding companies are created to
strengthen safety and soundness, not weaken it? Without
consolidated supervision, how can regulators effectively
enforce the source of strength doctrine for commercial ILC
holding companies?
A.1. The Investment Company Institute (ICI) is the leading
association representing regulated funds, including mutual
funds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), closed-end funds, and unit
investment trusts (UITs) in the United States, and similar
funds offered to investors in jurisdictions worldwide. ICI is
not involved in matters related to ILCs and is not in a
position to answer your questions.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF
SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM PAUL SCHOTT STEVENS
Q.1. How do the regulators for insurance companies and hedge
funds become fully informed of all the activities in which
insurance companies participate?
A.1. The Investment Company Institute is the leading
association representing regulated funds, including mutual
funds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), closed-end funds, and unit
investment trusts (UITs) in the United States, and similar
funds offered to investors in jurisdictions worldwide.
While a number of ICI members are affiliated with insurance
companies, ICI is not expert in matters involving the
regulation of insurance companies and hedge funds. Accordingly,
I am not in a position to comment on how regulators oversee
their activities.
Q.2. Could a large complex nonbank financial entity engage in
risky activities completely unbeknownst to its board or
regulator? Do you have historic examples of regulators being
unaware that a regulator was unaware of risky investments or
activities by a nonbank large and complex financial
institution?
A.2. It is widely recognized that in the most recent financial
crisis, regulators were caught off guard by excessive risk
taking in various areas--by banks as well as by nonbanks. The
Dodd-Frank Act aimed to solve for these gaps and shortcomings
in part by raising the regulatory bar (for example, through
increasing capital and liquidity requirements for banks and
overhauling the derivatives markets) and in part by creating
the Financial Stability Oversight Council. FSOC provides a
forum for financial regulators to share information, identify
potential risks to financial stability, promote market
discipline, and respond to emerging threats.
Q.3. Do you think the FSOC as it is currently comprised has
both the expertise and the authority to appropriately assess
nonbank significantly important financial institutions?
A.3. As a former chief of staff to the National Security
Council, I agree that convening a forum of experts with diverse
perspectives can serve an important function. Given the
multiagency structure of our financial regulatory system, the
mere creation of the FSOC, to bring together the many U.S.
financial regulators, is worthwhile. Section 113 of the Dodd-
Frank Act clearly gives FSOC the authority to assess nonbank
financial companies for potential designation as systemically
important financial institutions (SIFIs). Based on the makeup
of the U.S. regulatory system, however, banking regulators
outnumber capital markets regulators on the FSOC. FSOC should
take care to avoid any bank-centric bias as it analyzes firms
and activities. Legislation ICI supports, S. 603, the FSOC
Improvement Act, would assure early involvement by a nonbank
financial company's primary regulator in assessing potential
risks and how best to address them. For the mutual fund
industry, our primary regulator is the Securities and Exchange
Commission. The SEC has the expertise to properly assess
companies under its jurisdiction and should play a leading role
in any FSOC analysis of companies and activities over which it
has authority.
Q.4. What progress has the G20 made in terms of adopting
reforms that allow for a resolution framework in their
jurisdictions?
A.4. The Financial Stability Board is made up of the national
financial authorities from the G20 and several other
jurisdictions around the globe, as well as various
international standard-setting bodies such as the International
Organization of Securities Commissions. Resolution has been a
key area of focus for the FSB. According to a November 2018
progress report by the FSB, \1\ jurisdictions have made the
most progress on a resolution regime for global systemically
important banks (G-SIBs), and all G-SIBs have resolution plans
in place. The report notes that only some jurisdictions have
introduced similar plans for insurers, and more work remains to
be done.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ FSB 2018 Resolution Report: ``Keeping the Pressure Up'',
available at https://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P151118-1.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Resolution planning is of critical importance for banks. If
a bank fails, taxpayers would be on the hook to meet the bank's
obligations to depositors. In sharp contrast, resolution
planning is simply not necessary for ICI's member funds.
Mutual funds do not experience ``disorderly failure.''
Mutual funds do not guarantee returns to investors, and
investors know a fund's gains or losses belong to them alone.
Unlike banks, mutual funds typically use little to no leverage.
Without leverage, it is virtually impossible for a fund to
become insolvent, i.e., for its liabilities to exceed its
assets. A fund that does not attract or maintain sufficient
assets ordinarily will be merged with another fund or
liquidated through an established and orderly process.
Several features of the structure and regulation of mutual
funds, along with the dynamic and competitive nature of the
fund management business, facilitate ``orderly resolution'' of
funds and their managers. These features include the
independent legal character of a fund and Investment Company
Act provisions concerning separate custody of fund assets,
restrictions on affiliated transactions, and board oversight.
The industry is very competitive, and mutual funds and their
managers are highly substitutable. No single mutual fund or
fund manager is so important or central to the financial
markets or the economy that the Government would need to
intervene or offer support to protect financial stability.
Q.5. What more needs to be done in terms of cross-border
cooperation on orderly resolution of globally significant
financial institutions--both banks and nonbanks?
A.5. As discussed in response to your first question, ICI is
the leading trade association for regulated funds. Given the
unnecessary resolution planning for funds described in response
to Question 4, it is not within our expertise to comment on
cross-border cooperation on orderly resolution of globally
significant financial institutions.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR SINEMA
FROM PAUL SCHOTT STEVENS
Q.1. In addition to alternate actions by FSOC and the nonbank's
primary regulator, your testimony contemplates actions by the
companies themselves to mitigate systemic risk. How does the
FSOC Improvement Act improve the precision and accuracy of the
FSOC's analysis, which as you alluded to in your testimony,
improves overall policy outcomes?
A.1. The FSOC Improvement Act helps to ensure that the Council
consider the range of options available and make an informed
decision about how to address a particular potential threat to
financial stability. Meaningful dialogue between a company
being considered for SIFI designation and FSOC and its staff is
of utmost importance. If a company is given an early indication
as to why FSOC has selected it for review, the company is in a
position to provide pertinent information about its business,
structure, and operations. With a more complete picture of the
company and its risk profile, the Council and its staff can
engage in a more informed review of the company and its
activities. In some situations, it may be possible for the
company to take steps, such as making changes to a line of
business, that would address the Council's concerns. Whether or
not such action is sufficient, of course, would remain a matter
of sole discretion for the Council.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR TOOMEY
FROM JEREMY C. KRESS
Q.1. What impact would designating a particular mutual fund as
a nonbank SIFIs have on that fund's investors?
Would you expect a designation to cause investors to move
their investments to other, nondesignated mutual funds?
A.1. It is not accurate to assume that the designation of a
mutual fund as a nonbank SIFI would cause the funds' investors
to move their investments to nondesignated mutual funds. The
Federal Reserve is responsible for developing prudential
standards for companies that FSOC designates as nonbank SIFIs.
Congress has directed the Federal Reserve to tailor prudential
standards for nonbank SIFIs, taking into account their unique
capital structure and activities, among other factors. \1\ The
Federal Reserve must specifically consider differences between
nonbank SIFIs and bank holding companies when developing such
standards. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 12 U.S.C. 5365 (a)(2)(A).
\2\ 12 U.S.C. 5365 (b)(3)(A).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Consistent with this statutory mandate, the Federal Reserve
has gone to great lengths to recognize the distinct regulatory
issues associated with nonbank financial companies, and to
tailor its approach accordingly. For example, the insurance
SIFI capital standards the Federal Reserve proposed in 2016
reflect thoughtful consideration of the differences between
bank and insurance company business models. \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ ``Capital Requirements for Supervised Institutions
Significantly Engaged in Insurance Activities'', 81 FR 38,631 (June 14,
2016).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If the FSOC were to designate a mutual fund, the Federal
Reserve would be required to tailor its prudential standards to
mutual funds' unique regulatory issues. Until the Federal
Reserve develops such standards, it would be presumptuous to
draw any conclusions about how mutual funds' investors would be
affected, or how such investors would react.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF
SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM JEREMY C. KRESS
Q.1. How do the regulators for insurance companies and hedge
funds become fully informed of all the activities in which
insurance companies participate?
A.1. Regulators are inherently limited in their oversight of
insurance holding companies and hedge funds because they lack
well-defined legal authority to oversee such firms on a
consolidated, enterprisewide basis.
In the United States, insurance regulation has long been
the responsibility of the States, with little Federal
involvement. But the State-based system of insurance regulation
suffers from serious flaws. Most critically, although State
insurance commissions regulate insurance subsidiaries,
insurance conglomerates like AIG, MetLife, and Prudential
traditionally have not been regulated at the holding company
level. This critical gap in insurance regulation may allow
insurance holding companies to engage in activities or amass
risks without detection, as AIG did by issuing credit default
swaps out of an unregulated, non-insurance, affiliate before
the Financial Crisis. While some States now purport to
supervise insurance holding companies on a groupwide basis, it
is doubtful that State supervisors have the resources or
incentives to appropriately police insurance conglomerates'
worldwide activities. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Jeremy Kress, ``Prudential Hasn't Earned the Right to Shed
SIFI Label'', Am. Banker (March 13, 2018), https://
www.americanbanker.com/opinion/prudential-hasnt-earned-the-right-to-
shed-sifi-label.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hedge fund regulation suffers from similar limitations.
Hedge funds have traditionally been exempt from prudential
regulation and supervision. In 1998, this lack of oversight had
disastrous consequences, when the country's largest hedge fund,
Long-Term Capital Management, collapsed, necessitating a
Government-orchestrated bailout. Although the Dodd-Frank Act
enhances the SEC's ability to collect information from hedge
fund advisers, it did not authorize the SEC to adopt
meaningful, risk-reducing regulations for hedge funds and their
advisers. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See Cary Martin Shelby, ``Closing the Hedge Fund Loophole: The
SEC as the Primary Regulator of Systemic Risk'', 58 B.C. L. Rev. 639
(2017).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In sum, I am concerned that the baseline regulatory regimes
for insurance companies and hedge funds are not well suited to
identifying and appropriately regulating the potentially risky
activities in which such firms engage.
Q.2. Could a large complex nonbank financial entity engage in
risky activities completely unbeknownst to its board or
regulator? Do you have historic examples of regulators being
unaware that a regulator was unaware of risky investments or
activities by a nonbank large and complex financial
institution?
A.2. AIG is the most prominent example of a large, complex
nonbank financial institution that engaged in risky activities
without appropriate oversight by its board or regulators. AIG's
collapse in 2008 stemmed, in large part, from its issuance of
credit default swaps on mortgage-linked securities out of its
subsidiary AIG Financial Products (AIGFP). Neither AIG's board
nor its regulators appreciated the risks of this activity. The
board of directors was ``too removed from the activities on the
ground to understand the risks.'' \3\ Moreover, no agency had
authority to supervise--let alone regulate--AIG's credit
default swap activities because AIGFP was a noninsurance
subsidiary.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See Edward Simpson Prescott, ``Too Big To Manage? Two Book
Reviews'', 99 Econ. Q. 143, 157 (2013). See id. at 143 (``[U]nder the
Sullivan regime, there is evidence that AIG's senior management was
unaware of the risks that AIGFP was actually taking.'').
Q.3. Do you think the FSOC as it is currently comprised has
both the expertise and the authority to appropriately assess
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
nonbank significantly important financial institutions?
A.3. In general, I believe that FSOC has appropriate authority
to assess the systemic importance of individual nonbank
financial institutions. Section 113 of the Dodd-Frank Act
authorizes FSOC to designate a nonbank financial company if the
firm ``could pose a threat to the financial stability of the
United States'' in one of two ways: (1) in the event of its
``material financial distress'' or (2) based on ``the nature,
scope, size, scale, interconnectedness, or mix of [its]
activities.'' \4\ In 2012, FSOC issued, through notice-and-
comment rulemaking, a three-step formal process for evaluating
a nonbank's systemic importance. \5\ As outlined in this
process, FSOC generally has the legal authority it requires to
identify nonbank SIFIs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ 12 U.S.C. 5323(a)(1).
\5\ ``Authority to Require Supervision and Regulation of Certain
Nonbank Financial Companies'', 77 FR 21,637 (Apr. 11, 2012).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I am deeply concerned, however, that the FSOC, as it is
currently comprised, does not have the requisite authority to
implement the activities-based approach to nonbank systemic
risk that the Council proposed in March 2019. Under section 120
of the Dodd-Frank Act, FSOC may recommend that the primary
financial regulatory agencies adopt new or heightened standards
for any financial activity. \6\ FSOC now proposes to rely
primarily or exclusively on this authority, in lieu of its
nonbank SIFI designation power.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ 12 U.S.C. 5330(a).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
But in practice, FSOC lacks the ability to implement even a
minimally effective activities-based approach. Critically,
FSOC's authority to recommend activities-based rules is
nonbinding. Thus, even if FSOC were to propose new regulations
on certain financial activities--for example, derivatives
trading or securities lending--the primary financial regulatory
agencies would have no obligation to adopt the Council's
recommendation. There are many reasons why an agency might
resist implementing activities-based regulations at FSOC's
urging. For example, the agency might be captured by the
financial sector it regulates, or it might try to protect its
regulatory turf against intrusion by the Council. Furthermore,
even if agencies wanted to adopt FSOC's activities-based
recommendations, jurisdictional gaps or overlaps could prevent
them from enacting and enforcing uniform, consistent
activities-based rules. \7\ As I suggested in response to
Chairman Crapo's question at the hearing on March 14, Congress
could mitigate these problems by giving FSOC direct rule-
writing authority.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ My written testimony contains a more complete analysis of the
limitations of FSOC's activities-based authority.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, I am also concerned that FSOC currently lacks the
expertise to appropriately monitor systemic risks because of
misguided budget and staffing cuts by the Council and Office of
Financial Research. \8\ Systemic risk prevention is of the
utmost importance. The Trump administration's unwise decision
to slash the budgets and staffs of these critical agencies
leaves the financial system vulnerable to another financial
crisis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ See, e.g., Ryan Tracy, ``Washington's $500 Million Financial-
Storm Forecaster Is Foundering'', Wall St. J. (Feb. 19, 2018), https://
www.wsj.com/articles/washingtons-500-million-financial-storm-
forecaster-is-foundering-1519067903.
Q.4. What progress has the G20 made in terms of adopting
reforms that allow for a resolution framework in their
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
jurisdictions?
A.4. Cross-border resolution is outside the scope of my
expertise. I would be happy to speak with your staff to suggest
other financial regulatory scholars who would be better
equipped to opine on this topic.
Q.5. What more needs to be done in terms of cross-border
cooperation on orderly resolution of globally significant
financial institutions--both banks and nonbanks?
A.5. Cross-border resolution is outside the scope of my
expertise. I would be happy to speak with your staff to suggest
other financial regulatory scholars who would be better
equipped to opine on this topic.
Additional Material Supplied for the Record
STATEMENT SUBMITTED BY JULIE A. SPIEZIO, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND
GENERAL COUNSEL, THE AMERICAN COUNCIL OF LIFE INSURERS
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
STATEMENT SUBMITTED BY THE REINSURANCE ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
STATEMENT SUBMITTED BY THE CENTER FOR CAPITAL MARKETS COMPETITIVENESS,
U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]