- MEDICAID FRAUD AND OVERPAYMENTS: PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS
[Senate Hearing 115-543]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-543
MEDICAID FRAUD AND OVERPAYMENTS: PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JUNE 27, 2018
__________
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
34-316PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).E-mail,
[email protected]
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin, Chairman
JOHN McCAIN, Arizona
CLAIRE McCASKILL, Missouri
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
HEIDI HEITKAMP, North Dakota
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
KAMALA D. HARRIS, California
STEVE DAINES, Montana
DOUG JONES, Alabama
Christopher R. Hixon, Staff Director
Gabrielle D'Adamo Singer, Chief Counsel
David N. Brewer, Chief Investigative Counsel
Jerome F. Markon, Senior Policy Advisor
Margaret E. Daum, Minority Staff Director
Stacia M. Cardille, Minority Chief Counsel
Courtney C. Cardin, Minority Counsel
Laura W. Kilbride, Chief Clerk
Bonni E. Dinerstein, Hearing Clerk
C O N T E N T S
------
Opening statements:
Page
Senator Johnson..............................................
1
Senator McCaskill............................................
3
Senator Carper...............................................
5
Senator Hassan...............................................
12
Senator Heitkamp.............................................
15
Senator Jones................................................
19
Senator Daines...............................................
21
Prepared statements:
Senator Johnson..............................................
33
Senator McCaskill............................................
35
WITNESSES
Wednesday, June 27, 2018
Hon. Eugene L. Dodaro, Comptroller General of the United States,
U.S. Government Accountability Office..........................
6
Brian P. Ritchie, Assistant Inspector General for Audit Services,
Office of Inspector General, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services.................................................
8
Alphabetical List of Witnesses
Dodaro, Hon. Eugene L.:
Testimony....................................................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
39
Ritchie Brian P.:
Testimony....................................................
8
Prepared statement...........................................
73
APPENDIX
Health Care Who Pays Chart (percentage)..........................
85
Health Care Who Pays Chart (dollars).............................
86
Health Spending Chart............................................
87
Medicaid Spending Chart..........................................
88
Improper Payment Chart...........................................
89
Majority Staff Report on Medicaid Fraud..........................
90
Minority Staff Memo..............................................
114
CMS Press Release................................................
121
CMS Fact Sheet...................................................
123
Humana Underwriting Guide........................................
127
Information submitted by Mr. Dodaro..............................
170
Responses to post-hearing questions for the Record:
Mr. Dodaro...................................................
181
Mr. Ritchie..................................................
198
Attachments to QFRs..............................................
202
MEDICAID FRAUD AND OVERPAYMENTS: PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS
----------
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 27, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Homeland Security
and Governmental Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:30 a.m., in
room SD-342, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Ron Johnson,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Johnson, Daines, McCaskill, Carper,
Heitkamp, Hassan, Harris, and Jones.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN JOHNSON
Chairman Johnson. Good morning. This hearing will come to
order.
I want to thank Gene Dodaro and our witness from the
Inspector General (IGs) office, Mr. Brian Ritchie, for taking
the time and for preparing your testimony. I am looking forward
to your answering our questions.
This hearing is on ``Medicaid Fraud and Overpayments:
Problems and Solutions.'' I am really looking for--solutions
would be nice. Last week, in anticipation of this hearing,
where we delayed it a week for a number of reasons, we did
issue our staff report, primarily based on the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) and IG findings, just kind of
summarized all the good work you have done. And what I would
like to do is I have a series of charts. Members have paper
copies at their desks. I just want to quick show why this is
such an important issue.
The first chart\1\ just shows who pays for health care as a
percentage of total health care spending. You can see the trend
since 1940 where patients were paying more than 80 cents out of
every dollar. Today it is around 11 cents out of every dollar.
And government has gone from not quite 20 percent to almost 50
percent. Insurance is the remaining 40 percent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The chart referenced by Senator Johnson appears in the Appendix
on page 85.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
So what we have seen is a huge shift from patients being
connected to the payment of the product to that disconnect. And
when patients do not pay for products, they do not even know
what they cost, and so there is not that discipline of a free
market really disciplining the cost increase in health care.
And from my standpoint, that is the root cause of our broken
health care financing system, which is why health care costs
have really risen dramatically.
The next chart\1\ is who pays just in dollar terms. A
little bit different-looking chart, but it basically makes the
same point. We do have investment at the very bottom. But you
can see what
Americans spend totally pretty much has been the same dollar-
wise--these are inflation-adjusted dollars--but government's
role has dramatically increased and, again, the third-party
payer in terms of insurance has also increased dramatically.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The chart referenced by Senator Johnson appears in the Appendix
on page 86.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The result of all this is the next chart,\2\ health care
spending as a percent of GDP. When you remove the discipline of
the free market system in terms of ensuring the highest
possible quality, lowest possible cost, best possible level of
customer service, you see costs rise dramatically.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The chart referenced by Senator Johnson appears in the Appendix
on page 87.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Now, we also can do far more--and this is a good thing--in
terms of our medical system. We have so many miracles. So that
also drives costs. But I have to believe the fact that
consumers really do not care--they do not know what things
cost, and they really do not care, other than their insurance.
They really care about how much they pay for insurance, but the
individual health care items, they really do not care. And so
as a result, we have gone from in the 20s, 3.1 percent of grodd
domestic product (GDP) being spent on health care, to in 2016
17 percent, and there is really no relief from that in sight.
Now, what I would say, truthfully, if Americans are
spending their own money and in freedom were deciding to spend
17 percent of their disposable income on improving their
health, I would not have a problem with that. But because they
are not spending their own money directly for this, I think
this is a real distortion of the marketplace.
The next chart\3\ is total Medicaid spending, which is
really the subject of the hearing today in terms of why we have
to be very careful with taxpayer dollars. You can see going
back to 1965--and, again, these are just nominal dollars. They
are not inflation-adjusted. But I did a chart inflation-
adjusted, and it looks the exact same. Medicaid was not even
mentioned by Lyndon Johnson when he unveiled Medicare, but you
can see the dramatic increase in Medicaid spending. Just in the
last 10 years, it has more than doubled, from right around $200
billion to $430 billion. That is just Federal Government
spending.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The chart referenced by Senator Johnson appears in the Appendix
on page 88.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Now, in our report we show that total taxpayer spending on
Medicaid in 2017 was $554 billion. I think it is 2017, correct?
Which, when you take a look at what the Federal Medicaid
percentages should be, somewhere between 58 and 60 percent, we
are only seeing $124 billion spent by the States versus $430
billion spent by the Federal Government. That is a 22/78
percent split. So I am going to dig more into those numbers.
What happens--and it drives me nuts being an accountant--
numbers come from different sources, and it is very difficult
to reconcile. That is something, as I am preparing for the
hearing, that just jumped off the page for me. Why is that such
a disconnect from, let us say, the 60 percent Federal match to
this thing shows almost 78 percent? Maybe, General Dodaro can
comment on that.
Our final chart\1\ is, again, really the highlight of what
GAO and the IG have uncovered in terms of improper payments.
You can see in 2013 improper payments in Medicaid was $14.4
billion. In 2017 it was $37 billion, the largest percentage of
any agency, any program in the Federal Government in terms of
improper payments. Coming into this role, I always thought the
term ``improper payment'' was a little odd because it covered
both underpayment and overpayment. In this case, only 0.8
percent of the improper payment is underpayment, which means
99.2 percent is overpayment. So this is payments that should
not be made, whether they are to ineligible recipients, what
percent of that is fraud. It is kind of hard to understand all
that, which is another problem as well.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The chart referenced by Senator Johnson appears in the Appendix
on page 89.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
So we will be talking about a letter we got from
Administrator Verma yesterday announcing increased action on
this, audits, those types of things. I will probably ask
General Dodaro to kind of speak to his comments on that when he
makes his opening remarks. But, anyway, this is an important
issue. We are spending hundreds of billions of dollars. We want
this money spent well. We certainly want to support
individuals, help them gain access to quality care, those that
cannot afford it. And when we have $37 billion of improper
payments in a program that large, it is something that we need
to pay attention to and we need to provide oversight of.
So, with that, I will turn it over to Ranking Member
McCaskill.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR MCCASKILL
Senator McCaskill. I have a formal statement that I would
ask be made part of the record.\2\ I want to make a couple of
comments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The prepared statement of Senator McCaskill appears in the
Appendix on page 35.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
First of all, the Chairman and I agree totally that we need
to go after improper payments, and so does Senator Carper, who
has been working on this for many years. All of us think we can
find efficiencies in these programs, and we should find the
fraudsters up front so we are not chasing payment. We should be
more efficient with the technology, which we have struggled
with in terms of improper payments. But there are a couple of
things that I think need to be pointed out.
I certainly agree with the Chairman that transparency on
costs would help a great deal. Americans are great shoppers.
You give me a coupon off on a cheeseburger, and I can go online
and figure out where the very best cheeseburger is and compare
the coupons available, and I can do that in 2 or 3 minutes
within a 1-mile radius of anywhere I am in this country. But me
getting my knee replaced, as a U.S. Senator, I could not get a
straight answer on what it cost. So we cannot be good shoppers
if we do not know what things cost, and that is all hidden
behind the curtain. Anybody who says we have a free market in
health care is deluding themselves. It is not a free market.
All you have to look at is the pharmaceutical costs and what is
happening in this country.
We did an investigation and determined that the 20 most
prescribed drugs in the Medicare Part D program have gone up
consistently 10 times the rate of inflation 5 years running.
That is because most of them do not have competition. That is
because the system is rigged with a bogus patent system and
with a barrier to entry for generics and, frankly, the fact
that we are refusing to use free market principles by
negotiating for volume discounts or allowing reimportation of
drugs. It is ridiculous that we are handcuffing Americans with
higher costs because we are protecting profits of the
pharmaceutical industry, to say nothing of what has happened
with the insurance industry.
And I do not believe, frankly, Mr. Chairman, that the out-
of-pocket costs for the American citizen has not gone up in the
last several years. I believe the out-of-pocket costs for
insurance have gone up and for health care have gone up. I do
not believe it is any longer on a downward trajectory. And the
government spending, I think it is really important that the
government number on this chart shows 49 percent. The majority
of that is Medicare. So are we going to suggest that we
privatize Medicare? I am absolutely opposed to privatizing
Medicare.
I think there are a lot of things we can do to put
incentives in the right places in the system. I think we have
done a little of that in the Affordable Care Act (ACA) where we
punished hospitals for readmission. So now when you get out of
the hospital, I mean, you have to sit and listen to--I know
because when my husband had to check out of the hospital, it
took us three times, four different people coming in, and
telling us all the after-care and setting up the next
appointment. That did not used to happen. But these hospitals
know now if they are not paying attention to after-care and
this patient comes back in, they are going to get financially
dinged. It is working. Readmission is down, and that is a very
expensive part of our health care delivery system.
So if we can change where the incentives are, rewarding
quality not quantity, this fee-for-service (FFS) thing has
gotten our system all out of whack. A Medicare doctor cannot
even bill for taking time with patients to explain end-of-life
care so that someone has the opportunity to say to their loved
ones, ``Do not keep me on a ventilator. I do not want to be on
a ventilator.'' And most of these costs are in the last 6
months of someone's life.
So there are a whole lot of things we can do to bring down
these costs, and I am all in on improper payments. But this
notion that we are going to go after the Medicaid or Medicare
programs or that somehow the private sector is a shining
example of good free market behavior in this country, we have
set up all kinds of ways to make sure they have guaranteed
profits. That is not the way the free market is supposed to
work.
So I just wanted to make those points, and I do want to
spend some time today talking about the issues, especially the
enrollment of providers and how badly that is going, and the
digital systems and how badly that is going in terms of cutting
down on improper payments. But I also want to spend some time
today talking about a previous report you did, Mr. Dodaro, on
preexisting conditions and the behavior of insurance companies
before we had the protections for people with preexisting
conditions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the hearing.
Chairman Johnson. Let me just qualify that the chart
showing what consumers were paying, patients, that is just
directly paid to the provider. We pay the bill, whether it is
our taxes to fund the government funding or whether it is
insurance premiums to fund the insurance portion. All I am
saying is direct payment by the patient to the provider, which
that is where you know what things cost in general. And even
that is generally done as co-pays, and you still do not even
know what you are really buying. We have a broken health care
financing system, and that drives up all these costs.
So, again, I do not think we really disagree on a lot of
these things. There are a lot of details. This $37 billion of
Medicaid improper payments is just one small little chunk but
one that I think we need to take a look at.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR CARPER
Senator Carper. Mr. Chairman, I do not have a statement. I
would like to say something. These are interesting charts. I am
glad you provided them. One of the things I am just sitting
here thinking, it would be interesting to know what is going on
in terms of the amount of money that is being spent in
uncompensated care by hospitals. As the government has spent
more, has uncompensated care come down? It would be interesting
to know that.
Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. We did issue a larger report with a lot
more charts and graphs to try to answer that. One thing I did
find--again, I always find it really aggravating--it is hard to
get the information. It really is. How much do we really spend
on drugs? What is the profitability of the entire health care
system? It is far less than I think people imagine. So I would
love to get more and more accurate information across the board
on these things because in order to solve a problem, you need
to start with information, problem definition, acknowledging we
have the problem.
So, anyway, I do want to ask consent to have my written
atatement entered into the record\1\ and the letter I received
from Seema Verma as well entered into the record.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Johnson appears in the
Appendix on page 33.
\2\ The letter referenced by Senator Johnson appears in the
Appendix on page 121.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With that, it is the tradition of this Committee to swear
in witnesses, so if you will both stand and raise your right
hand. Do you swear that the testimony you will give before this
Committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, so help you, God?
Mr. Dodaro. I do.
Mr. Ritchie. I do.
Chairman Johnson. Please be seated.
Our first witness absolutely deserves but does not really
need an introduction, not before this Committee, but we have
the Honorable Gene Dodaro, the Comptroller General of the
United States and head of the U.S. Government Accountability
Office. General Dodaro.
TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE EUGENE L. DODARO,\1\ COMPTROLLER
GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY
OFFICE
Mr. Dodaro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Good morning
to you, Ranking Member McCaskill, and Senator Carper. I am very
pleased to be here today to talk about this important topic.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Dodaro appears in the Appendix on
page 39.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Medicaid program, serving over 73 million Americans, is
a very critical part of our health care system as currently
configured. But I have been very concerned about the payment
integrity in this program for a number of years, for three main
reasons: number one, as both of you have mentioned, Senator
Johnson and Senator McCaskill, in your opening statements,
improper payments are an issue. There were over $36 billion in
overpayments for the Medicaid program for 2017. And this does
not represent what I believe to be the full risk of the
program.
There are three components of the improper payment rate.
One is fee-for-service, and right now that is over a 12 percent
rate and is a problem. But there are two other components. One
is managed care. That are measured by the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services (CMS) is 0.3 percent. About half of total
Medicaid spending now is in managed care. So the efforts to
estimate the improper payment rate do not fully represent the
risk in the managed care portion of Medicaid, which is growing
every year.
Also, the beneficiary eligibility component of the improper
payment rate has been frozen at 3.1 percent since 2014, so they
have not really gone back in since the Affordable Care Act and
checked on States' determination of beneficiary eligibility.
While $36 billion of overpayments is an issue in and of
itself and that component has been growing in fee-for-service,
there really is not a full measure of the payment issues and
payment integrity in the Medicaid program, number one.
Number two are supplemental payments. These are payments
made for uncompensated care or high concentrated rates of
Medicaid recipients. They have been growing as well. In 2017 it
was up to $48 billion. There are two types. One type is capped
by statute. The other has not been capped and is discretionary.
That has almost doubled over the years. There is no
transparency over supplemental payments, and CMS does not have
accurate reporting. Also it is not clear to payments are
efficient and economical, which is one of the requirements. And
they are potentially shifting, with the lack of transparency,
shifting some of the costs from the States to the Federal
Government without CMS even knowing that it is occurring. So
that is problem number two.
Problem number three is demonstrations where the law allows
CMS to permit States to experiment with different approaches in
Medicaid. Three-quarters of the States have approved
demonstrations. Right now demonstration spending accounts for
one-third of the total Medicaid costs. What we have found,
though contrary to CMS policy, the approved demonstrations are
not budget neutral. They are actually costing more money
because they have been very liberal in how they have allowed
States to set spending limits.
And the evaluations of the demonstrations have serious
limitations that have prevented anyone from learning what is
happening with the demonstrations that could be used by others.
Now, CMS recently took action on one aspect of this based
on our recommendations, which is to limit the amount of excess
spending capacity that could be carried over from one year to
the next year. They put some limits on that. So from 2016 to
2018, that one change that was based on our recommendations
will save Medicaid costs of over $100 billion, and the Federal
share will be $62.9 billion that would be saved. But that still
does not fully respond to all our recommendations.
Mr. Chairman, you mentioned the plan that CMS released
yesterday. That addresses some but not all of the
recommendations we have made. We have 83 recommendations we
have made over the years. Only 25 have been fully implemented.
We think the plan is a step in the right direction, and I can
elaborate more on what we see as some of the limitations in the
plan. But I would say, in order to stay within my limits here
in the opening statement, that much more urgent and aggressive
action is needed by CMS in this area, because the CMS Actuary
estimates that Medicaid spending will be growing at 5.7 percent
annually. And as you pointed out in your chart, the Federal
share, the total estimated spending for Medicaid by 2025 is
estimated to be $958 billion. So it will be knocking on the
door of $1 trillion a year.
So based upon that expected growth, known problems of the
current system, I think it calls for a much more aggressive
action plan on the part of CMS in order to deal effectively
with payment integrity issues in the program.
Thank you very much. I look forward to responding to
questions at the appropriate time.
Chairman Johnson. You said $1 trillion in 2028, correct?
Mr. Dodaro. 2025.
Chairman Johnson. 2025?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. 2025.
Chairman Johnson. OK. In 2008 we were about $200 billion.
It has gone from $200 billion in not even 20 years. That is
rather shocking.
Mr. Dodaro. This is one of the fastest-growing parts of the
Federal Government budget. Interest is becoming a problem, too,
on our debt, but that is a different hearing.
Chairman Johnson. Yes, a large subject in and of itself.
Our next witness is Brian Ritchie. Mr. Ritchie is the
Assistant Inspector General for Audit Services in the Office of
Inspector General (OIG) of the Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). Mr. Ritchie oversees audits of Medicare,
Medicaid, and the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP)
Mr. Ritchie.
TESTIMONY OF BRIAN P. RITCHIE,\1\ ASSISTANT INSPECTOR GENERAL
FOR AUDIT SERVICES, OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
Mr. Ritchie. Good morning, Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member
McCaskill, and distinguished Members of the Committee. Thank
you for inviting me here today, and thank you for your
longstanding commitment to ensuring that the Medicaid program's
67 million beneficiaries are well served and the taxpayers'
more than half trillion dollar investment is well spent. I
appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Office of Inspector
General's work and what more can be done to ensure that this
important program operates as intended.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Ritchie appears in the Appendix
on page 73.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
OIG shares your commitment to protecting Medicaid from
fraud, waste, and abuse and has an extensive body of work in
this area. Our oversight work has identified high improper
payment rates, inadequate program integrity safeguards, and
beneficiary health and safety concerns.
I will use my time today to focus on three critical areas:
first, the need for accurate beneficiary eligibility
determinations; second, curtailing inappropriate State
financing mechanisms; and, third, improving national Medicaid
data. My written testimony also notes the importance of
provider screening, fiscal controls, quality of care, and our
valuable partnerships.
A strong program integrity strategy starts with prevention.
Correctly determining beneficiary eligibility prevents Medicaid
from making improper payments for people that are not eligible
for the program. However, recent OIG audits in three States
estimated that more than $1.2 billion in Federal payments were
made on behalf of beneficiaries that were not eligible or may
not have been eligible for Medicaid. These three States did not
comply with requirements to verify applicants' income,
citizenship, identity, and other eligibility criteria.
The second area that I want to discuss is the need to
curtail inappropriate State financing mechanisms. Over the
years OIG has identified a number of State policies that may
have improperly shifted costs by inflating the Federal share of
Medicaid expenditures. States have misused provider taxes,
intergovernmental transfers, supplemental payments, and
inflated payment rates to increase the Federal funding that
States receive. While CMS has tried to limit the inappropriate
financing mechanisms, more needs to be done. CMS should closely
review State Medicaid plans and amendments to identify any
potentially inappropriate cost shifting.
And, finally, I want to discuss a consistent impediment to
effective prevention, detection, and enforcement within the
Medicaid program. The lack of complete, accurate, and timely
national Medicaid data hampers the ability for CMS, States,
managed care entities, providers, OIG and GAO, and others to
quickly identify and address problems in the program. Enhanced
national Medicaid data would also promote value and improve
quality of care by allowing OIG and others to leverage advanced
data analytics to identify vulnerabilities to avoid and best
practices to replicate. Congress has recognized the value of
enhanced Medicaid data, but more needs to be done to achieve
this goal. CMS must ensure that States consistently report and
uniformly interpret the same data elements. In addition, with a
large part of the Medicaid population receiving part or all of
their services through managed care, CMS needs to ensure that
States report encounter data for all managed care entities.
So, in conclusion, OIG will continue prioritizing Medicaid
oversight to prevent and detect fraud, waste, and abuse and
take appropriate action when it occurs. We are committed to
ensuring that Medicaid pays the right amount for the right
provider, for the right service, on behalf of the right
beneficiary.
Thank you for your ongoing leadership and for affording me
the opportunity to testify on this important topic.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Ritchie.
I do want to quick correct the record. The numbers I was
using, the reason I was confused, is we got the 2016 actuarial
report in 2017, but it was on 2015 spending, the 554, versus
the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) 2017. So I was conflating
both the 2017--but one--so never mind on the one. But, again,
it is just part of the problem here. You just do not have a
consistent set of numbers and trying to get to the bottom of
these things is like pulling teeth.
But, again, I appreciate our other colleagues here showing
up for the hearing, so I will defer my questions to the end and
be respectful of their time. Senator McCaskill.
Senator McCaskill. I am happy to defer also to my
colleagues.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. Thanks so much. It is great to see both of
you. Thank you for your long-time service and for being here. I
said to some of the staff sitting behind me, Gene, I said if we
had to pay you by the visit, we would be broke, because you
come a lot and we are grateful here for your appearances.
My colleagues have heard me saying and you have probably
heard me say before that we talk about Matthew 25, the least of
these, we have a moral imperative to those who are hungry,
thirsty, naked, people who are sick and in prison, we have a
moral imperative to those who are strangers in our land. And
while we have a moral imperative to the least of these, there
is also a fiscal imperative that is involved. Matthew 25 does
not say anything about when they did not have any health care.
My only access to health care was showing up at the emergency
room of a hospital. They had to give me some kind of care. But
there is a fiscal imperative to finding a way to meet those
moral imperatives in a fiscally responsible way.
One of the things that I learned a long time ago when I was
new on this Committee was that this Committee, as hard as we
might work, we can only do so much in terms of oversight over
the Federal Government. But if we could somehow work with GAO,
if we could work with the Inspectors General, if we could work
with the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and other
watchdog organizations, we can actually make some progress.
One of my first questions would be: Where do you think is
the basis agreement between the two? Where do you see some
areas of just really strong agreement that you both embrace and
think we should?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, I think in listening to Brian's
statement, we are in almost total agreement on all issues. I
think on the improper payment issue, there is strong agreement
that the current approach does not fully account for program
risk. The supplemental payments that Brian mentioned have not
gotten enough oversight. There is not enough accurate
reporting, and as a result it is not clear where costs may be
inappropriately being shifted from the States to the Federal
Government and not really based upon actual Medicaid spending
in those areas. And then the demonstration projects I am not
sure where we agree or disagree on that area because I did not
hear him mention that. But the last comment he made was on the
need for more and better, accurate, and timely data.
One of the problems that has hindered us all in the past in
the oversight community has been the fact that Medicaid data
has been 2 and 3 years old, and that has been very problematic.
So they have a big effort underway to addresss this issue, but
it has to be done properly.
So I do not see too much disagreement between the two of us
on the analysis of the problems, and I will let Brian speak for
himself.
Senator Carper. OK. Thank you. Mr. Ritchie.
Mr. Ritchie. Yes, I agree. I cannot recall ever picking up
a GAO report and disagreeing. And I think we coordinate up
front because we are both watchdogs over the program, and with
the health care side of GAO, we coordinate on the Medicare and
Medicaid work. We did not mention the demonstrations, but we
have certainly had the body of work ongoing, and in the past on
different waiver programs where we have seen issues. I think we
just try not to duplicate each other's efforts but yet
complement it, because the dollars are so valuable and rare
that we do not want to be doing the same thing.
I know with Mr. Dodaro's staff, with Carolyn Yocom and
others, we will coordinate, and we will have our staff
coordinating to make sure, but I do think the data is the key
to a lot of this, and national data especially would really be
helpful. Quality oversight comes at a cost, and you do need
that data, and both the age of the data and then just the
consistency of it.
Some of the things we have found--I think two examples
really drive it home--are investigators going out on the opioid
crisis. They had a lead of a provider prescribing drugs, and
they went and they checked one State. They knew the prescriber
was abusing drugs in one State. They checked another State.
They looked at the national provider identifier, and they did
not find any hits in the claims data and thought, OK, they are
not prescribing drugs in that State. Later they found out this
cannot possibly be, and they looked and they found out they
were using the Drug Enforcement Administrator number. So they
were interpreting it differently and it did not work. And then
on the beneficiary health and abuse side, we have a series of
group home audits where we are looking at potential abuse and
neglect in group homes. And to do that, we are starting at the
emergency room, and we are looking at diagnosis codes that
indicate potential abuse and neglect and backing up. And in one
of the States, when we looked, the primary diagnosis code was
not there. So we had to take steps to get around it, but it is
not there to allow us to quickly do the job. So I think it
would help all of us, including CMS, States, and the entities
themselves.
Senator Carper. Going back to the charts that the Chairman
shared with us earlier today, they show an increasing
commitment by the Federal Government, up to now 49 percent of
the costs of health care are paid by the Federal Government or
by some government. The charts do not show the number of people
who are uncovered now, and I think it would probably look a
good deal different, because back in 1940, 1950, and 1960, we
had a whole lot of people who did not have coverage, any kind
of coverage. What we have tried to do is to reduce that, and
reducing that uncompensated care for providers.
One of the questions I oftentimes ask when we have
oversight hearings is: What would you do if you were in our
shoes? And time and again over the last 17 years the witnesses
have said, ``I would do more oversight.'' At almost every
hearing, they say, ``Do more oversight. Keep us honest,'' that
sort of thing.
If you were in our shoes, given what we are facing here in
terms of continued growing costs in Medicaid, what would you do
if you were in our shoes? Give us three things that you would
be doing if you were on this side of the dais.
Mr. Dodaro. Well, I do not want to break the string of
saying you need more oversight, but I believe that to be the
case here. I think CMS needs to take much more aggressive and
assertive action in these areas.
We have some recommendations to the Congress where we have
had disagreements with CMS in the past, and I think Congress
could pass legislation. For example, on the budget neutrality
issue, they have had a policy that when they approve
demonstrations, it should be budget neutral. And we have
repeatedly found that that is not the case. They approve
demonstrations, and they end up costing the Federal Government
more. And then when we looked at whether we are learning
anything from the demonstrations, it is not clear.
I think we have called for Congress to pass a law to
require CMS to make sure that there are clear criteria for
approving demonstrations that are budget neutral so it does not
add to the costs of the Federal Government without any
measurable benefits.
In addition, on supplemental payments, the criteria for the
use of approving these and how they distribute the supplemental
payments is a problem, particularly in what is called the
``non-disproportionate share.'' The disproportionate share is
mandated by Congress. That is, for uncompensated care for
hospitals or where they have high concentrations of Medicaid
payments. These are payments over and above reimbursing them
for the services. But there are also a lot of these non-
disproportionate share payments. They have doubled over the
past several years, and what we have seen is that--and Brian
mentioned this in his comment--they can meet the State share by
having provider taxes and other intergovernmental transfers so
that the local governments and provider provide more money.
That requires the Federal Government to then match, and it does
not increase the State share at all in that process. And it is
not clear that the money is going to the people who were giving
the greatest service or the people who have given more in
provider taxes and payments up front. So there are questions of
equity. We have some matters for Congress there.
So there is oversight and legislative fixes that you could
do.
Senator Carper. Thank you. My time has expired. Could we
get just maybe two quick points from Mr. Ritchie, just really
quick? Same question. Give us two. If you were us, what would
you be doing to follow on what Gene said? Very briefly.
Mr. Ritchie. I think that is the answer, more oversight.
Our focus is very much focused on prevent, detect, and enforce.
I think specifically for Congress, I noticed in the report that
was issued last week, touching on Mr. Dodaro's last point, you
mentioned maybe limiting the safe harbor on the financing
mechanisms. I think that is something in Congress' wheelhouse
that could be done. That is something that States, we have seen
where they have manipulated it and just shifted. I think any
financing mechanism that is considered or in place now, I just
think you need to ask: Are these dollars being well spent, and
are they providing additional quality care for beneficiaries?
And in these cases, when we are looking at it, it often seems
like the intent is really to sort of shift the burden, not to
provide additional care. And another one, again, prevent,
detect, and enforce. On the enforcement side we partner with
the Medicaid Fraud Control Units (MFCUs) a lot, and I know--I
am not a MFCU expert, so I will throw that out there, but I
know with our office they work closely with our investigators,
and MFCUs enforce fraud and then they enforce the beneficiary
abuse and neglect. And they have a limitation on that side
where they can only do it in facilities. So on the home and
community-based services side, they do not have the authority
to go after those cases. So I think pursuing that, especially
as the population moves more there. In some of the group home
work I mentioned before, we have certainly seen a lot of
potential abuse and neglect. To protect these beneficiaries,
the MFCUs could play a part to enforce that and ensure the
safety, and that is something the Congress could help with.
Senator Carper. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, it always comes back to the MFCUs.
Chairman Johnson. Apparently. Senator Hassan.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HASSAN
Senator Hassan. Thank you, Mr. Chair and Ranking Member
McCaskill, and thank you, Mr. Dodaro and Mr. Ritchie, for being
here today.
Thousands of Granite Staters rely on Medicaid for really
critical care. They use it to stay healthy, and they also use
it to access substance use disorder services. As you know, New
Hampshire has been particularly hard-hit by the opioid
epidemic, and Medicaid has been a true lifeline for those
suffering from addiction, which is why Granite Staters were so
adamant last year in their opposition to Republican attempts to
dismantle the Medicaid program.
Last year Granite Staters and people from all across
America raised their voices and spoke out against Republican
attempts to cut and cap Medicaid. They recognized the
importance of the Medicaid program for kids, for families, for
older adults. I will note that after we expanded Medicaid in
New Hampshire, the number of cases in which people got health
care and then could return to work, having been sidelined by
chronic illness, were substantial. So protecting Medicaid's
integrity is critical to protecting the Medicaid program for
vulnerable populations.
I agree with your findings that CMS should be doing more to
ensure that States are doing all they can to ensure the
integrity of the Medicaid program because millions of Americans
rely on Medicaid for care. From the reports that form the basis
of your testimony, it appears that improving provider screening
and analyzing claims data for patterns of fraud would go a long
way toward reducing improper payments because most improper
payments stem from the conduct of providers rather than from
Medicaid beneficiaries.
Do both of you agree with that assessment? I will start
with you, Mr. Dodaro.
Mr. Dodaro. I think so far the data indicates that, but
that is because most of the focus has been on the providers.
They really have not focused on the beneficiary eligibility
area. That rate has been frozen since 2014. They are planning
now to start looking at that in 2019 through 2022, so that we
would learn more about the beneficiary area. So I think both
need to be attended to.
Senator Hassan. OK. Thank you. Mr. Ritchie.
Mr. Ritchie. I am sorry. Could you repeat the question?
Senator Hassan. So the reports that form the basis of the
testimony that you provided, it appears that it is critical to
improve provider screening and analyzing claims data for
patterns of fraud, because most improper payments stem from the
conduct of providers rather than Medicaid beneficiaries.
Mr. Ritchie. Yes, I do not know that we really have work
specifically targeting that, but I would say our beneficiary
eligibility concerns are--our three recent eligibility reports
that I referred to in our testimony, those were cases where the
State systems did not work, and beneficiaries that did not meet
the criteria were enrolled. So it was not a case of intentional
fraud or anything like that, but they were improper payments
that were made to beneficiaries who----
Senator Hassan. But I also just do not want to take the eye
off the ball that there are providers who are engaged in----
Mr. Ritchie. Oh, absolutely.
Senator Hassan [continuing]. Fraud and abuse, and I do not
want to be scapegoating beneficiaries who may think they are
eligible, even if they are not.
Mr. Ritchie. I totally agree. And when I mentioned before
our prevent, detect, and enforce, I mean, prevention to us is
by far the key. If you can up front get an enrollment system,
get an eligibility system that keeps bad actors out, that does
a thorough job of knowing who you are doing business with, we
have seen cases where States are not collecting the correct
ownership information, cases where someone gets terminated in
one State and another State does not have the data to tell so
they can enroll there. So just a consistent--again, back to the
data theme, sorry, but to know that these people are not there
and keep the bad players out, it can prevent a lot of improper
payments up front so you are not paying and chasing them down.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you.
I do want to change to a different topic, Mr. Ritchie,
because of recent events. Like my colleagues who have spoken
already about this, I am outraged at the humanitarian crisis
that President Trump has created on our Southern Border.
Pediatricians, psychologists, and health professionals have
been raising the alarm about the irreparable harm, including
brain development and long-term behavioral health issues, that
forcibly separating children from their parents can cause. We
must strengthen border security, but we have to do that in a
way remaining true to our American values. And I think we all
agree here that this is not about politics. It is about our
moral obligation to stand up and act in the face of clear and
absolute injustice.
The President created this crisis, and, unfortunately, his
Executive Order (EO) seems to have created even more confusion
at HHS and other agencies scrambling to implement it. And then,
frankly, Secretary Azar yesterday further confused things by
testifying that in order for children to be reunited with
parents who have asylum claims, the parents have to give up the
asylum claims, which is a violation of so many fundamental
American values that it is just hard to grasp.
So, Mr. Ritchie, I am participating in formal requests to
your office to review the Office of Refugee Resettlement's
(ORR) response to the Administration's practice of separating
children and parents. I know this is not your specific area,
but as a representative of your office, do you know whether you
plan to investigate the response to this issue of family
separation?
Mr. Ritchie. Yes, so you are correct, it is not my area.
But I do know a bit about this. I know it is a high priority
within our office, and I did--knowing, obviously, that this is
such a high priority there and that I was coming here today, I
asked the people that were doing it a little bit about it, so I
can tell you what I do know. We obviously have some past work
on the ORR. Since 2006, OIG has provided oversight of the
unaccompanied alien children (UAC) program operated by the
Office of Refugee Resettlement. And what we have ongoing right
now and planned, we are planning nationwide work that is going
to focus on the health and safety of the children in the
facilities. It is underway so the plan is in place. In fact, we
had sort of boots-on-the-ground investigators and auditors last
week at four facilities, and they are back now in the office
planning the work. We could certainly set up a briefing for you
or anyone else that is interested as soon as that work is
ready, because we are concerned and want to have the oversight
of that and see how things are going.
We also are wrapping up some work at 11 facilities and
looking at the health and safety controls that were in place.
That actually is prior to 2018, but it is going to serve as the
launching point for new work but the data is prior to 2018, so
it may not reflect the current condition, but it will reflect
some of the current work that we will be doing.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you for the response, and thank
you for thinking ahead to this hearing and anticipating that we
may be interested in it and asking about it. What I would ask
is that you bring a message back to Mr. Levinson and the rest
of the IG's office. This issue, what is happening to these
children today, now, every minute, every hour, every day, every
week, month that they are separated from their parents is doing
them irreparable harm, and I would hope and expect that the
Department reprioritize as necessary to get not only boots on
the ground to find out what is happening, but also to develop a
policy that is consistent and reflects the urgency and the
priority that the American people place on reuniting these
children.
Certainly the government of the United States of America
can reunite 2,000 children--and it is a little bit over 2,000
children if Secretary Azar's testimony yesterday was correct.
Certainly the U.S. Government can find a way to reunite these
children, even if it means reorganizing and reprioritizing
resources. So I hope you will take that message back. I thank
you for your testimony today.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Heitkamp.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HEITKAMP
Senator Heitkamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I apologize
I was not here during your testimony, but I can only imagine it
did not escape your notice that CMS, who is not here today even
though they have been invited, actually issued a couple press
releases yesterday with some ideas on how they could better
facilitate stopping fraud, waste, and abuse. It is really
unfortunate that they are not here to have that conversation.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Heitkamp, let me just clarify. I
did speak with Administrator Verma, and she is happy to come
in, whenever we do a follow up hearing on this. So she is more
than willing to testify. So I just want to put that on the
record. She offered to do that, and we will certainly----
Senator Heitkamp. Well, is there a reason why she is not
here today?
Chairman Johnson. I just do not think she was prepared.
Senator Heitkamp. That is even more frightening than she is
not here today.
Chairman Johnson. From my standpoint, I was happy to first
hear the testimony from GAO and the IG, and then we will follow
up on it. Again, it was a press release. I said it was a
letter. It was a press release and there is a fact sheet, and
this is going to be ongoing oversight.
Senator Heitkamp. Well, time is wasting. --
Senator McCaskill. I think we need to be clear. She was
invited and declined to come and, instead of coming, issued a
press release. I think that is fair, and that is what the facts
are, and I think it is important to put those facts out there.
Chairman Johnson. I understand, but also the fact is she is
willing to come and testify in the future, and it will be the
reasonably near future.
Senator Heitkamp. I get it, and I voted for her, and I
think that she is competent. But the bottom line is if she was
not prepared to testify in front of us, she should not have
been prepared to send out a press release.
And so if I can just ask, have you had a chance, Mr. Dodaro
or Mr. Ritchie, to review her statements?
Mr. Dodaro. My staff has, and they briefed me on it.
Senator Heitkamp. And do you believe that this is a good
start, a finished product, or needs some work and collaboration
to try and create a network and a consistent amount of
accountability for trillions of Federal dollars and State
dollars that are being spent so that we can avoid fraud, waste,
and abuse no matter who is committing it?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, we think it is a step in the right
direction, but much more neededs to be done. There are details
that are not in there that I would have expected to be
included, some milestones. There are some areas not covered,
like supplemental payments and demonstrations that I would have
expected to be covered. We have, as I mentioned, 83
recommendations that we have made to them. They have
implemented 25 so far. And the plan does not address all of our
recommendations.
So much more needs to be done. I think there needs to be
more aggressive and urgent oversight.
Senator Heitkamp. I think that my point that I am getting
at is that when we look at this, we need a structure because if
we just deal with taking care of the waste, fraud, and abuse of
today, there are going to be other opportunities for waste,
fraud, and abuse, and we need to know who is accountable and
how we are going to hold people accountable for making payments
that are inappropriate, putting people on Medicaid rolls or
Medicare rolls that is not appropriate. We have to get a handle
on this.
I do not disagree with the looming problem, and the low-
hanging fruit in taking care of our health care costs on the
Federal Government is stopping waste, fraud, and abuse. And, I
can tell you, when I was the Attorney General (AG), there was
this collaborative process with State Attorneys General. Where
did that go? What do we know about a structure that is in
place, working with the State, auditors with the State
Inspectors General, to try and get an overall plan so that we
can have meaningful accountability?
The frustration that I have is that we come here and we are
picking around the edges and getting distracted without really
thinking about the overall structure of oversight. And, it is
not acceptable that the recommendations from GAO have not been
responded to. This is a big-ticket item, behind national
defense and is probably going to loom bigger than national
defense. We have to get ahead of this. And to me, the
frustration that the American people have is that they are
willing to give people some help. They are willing to recognize
that providers needs to pay the bills. But they do not want
this money wasted.
And so, when you look at structure, Mr. Dodaro, and you
think, OK, we have these State agencies, they have
responsibility as well. Fifty percent in North Dakota of this
money that is spent on Medicaid is State-based money. Where
have been historically the gaps? Who have you seen on the State
side do an excellent job in holding people accountable? And has
the Federal Government learned from State audit programs on
what we could do more effectively?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, well, one of the biggest gaps has been
that the State auditors have not been involved on a regular
basis. This is one of the points that I have made. In fact, I
have brokered meetings between State auditors and CMS in order
to make sure that they are brought into the program. A lot has
been focused on the Attorneys General and the fraud units in
the States, but not the State auditors. The State auditors need
to be involved much more in this program. They are willing to
do it, but they need to be brought into the structure. They
need to be compensated. They can have a big effect on this
issue.
Senator Heitkamp. And another place where we share revenue
in Minerals Management Service, we have an audit program that
is pretty robust to try and make sure that people are paying
the appropriate royalty, there is a great example of Federal-
State collaboration where you know who has the lines of
authority and who has oversight over those lines of authority.
So it is not like we are without examples on how we could do
this better.
Mr. Dodaro. Right.
Senator Heitkamp. The problem that you have with AGs is
that assumes automatically all fraud, waste, and abuse is
criminal or that you are going to take it criminal.
Mr. Dodaro. Right.
Senator Heitkamp. Do you think there is appropriate civil
penalties for fraud, waste, and abuse to provide a substantial
deterrent?
Mr. Dodaro. I do not know offhand to be able to answer that
right now. I could provide something for the record.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The information submitted by Mr. Dodaro appears in the Appendix
on page 170.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Senator Heitkamp. Maybe, Mr. Ritchie, you know if instead
of just having to go the very aggressive action of filing an
indictment and prosecuting people versus, no, do not do that,
repay the money, is there an effective system of civil
penalties?
Mr. Ritchie. That is not my area of expertise. I do know
our office works with the MFCUs who can pursue cases, and I
know our office has civil remedies, civil monetary penalties
and exclusions and things like that available. So I believe
they can do some of that, but I could get you a better answer
and consult with my colleagues and get back to you.
Senator Heitkamp. I think it is important that we not
ignore some additional legislative tools, whether it is
additional incentives to work with the States, additional
incentives, and then putting together with the recommendations
at HHS a robust and very clear line of authority on audit
responsibility so that we are not picking around the edges
here, that we are actually creating a program that will
solidify the frustration that the American public has and the
frustration that we have, that we are not getting at waste,
fraud, and abuse as effectively as what we should.
Mr. Dodaro. I agree. I think the other biggest gap in this
whole area--and I mentioned this in my opening statement--is
the managed care portion of Medicaid. The managed care
contractors have not been audited on a regular basis. There is
rule out to start auditing them, but that is half of Medicaid
spending. So the known overpayments right now are mostly in the
fee-for-service area, and the beneficiary eligibility audits
have been frozen since 2014. So there are huge gaps in
knowledge about the extent of the program integrity issues in
the Medicaid program, and much more needs to be done.
I agree with you, they need an overall plan, and they need
to be held accountable for it. And there are more resources
that need to be available, including the State auditors.
Senator Heitkamp. And if I can just make one final comment,
when you do not do those audits, you do not see the patterns in
behavior that either could be deterred or they could be, in
fact, prosecuted and deterred. And so that is why it is really
important that these audits be current, that these audits see
trend lines, and that we actually take the appropriate action
to do prevention, whether it is on the benefit side, whether it
is on the provider side. This is incredibly frustrating to me
because it should be the most robust audit program in the
Congress and in the Administration, and it seems to me it is
not.
Mr. Dodaro. Well, that is why it has been on our High-Risk
List since 2003. It is also why I am here today instead of
sending another GAO witness because I am personally concerned
about the program integrity issues of Medicaid and its expected
continued growth of 5.7 percent a year. As I mentioned earlier,
by 2025 the estimated total government spending, Federal and
State, on this is knocking on the door of $1 trillion a year.
And it is a very important program. I agree it is a critical
service that needs to be delivered. But we need to get a better
handle on the integrity of the program to make sure that we are
not wasting money that could be better used to provide
legitimate health care services.
Senator Heitkamp. I appreciate so much what the IGs do and
what you do, Mr. Dodaro. You guys are doing work. We hope you
are just not hollering into the empty well, that someone is
actually listening to you and taking your advice, and that is
why we are here.
Chairman Johnson. Let me clarify because I do not want to
be putting words into Administrator Verma's mouth. She was not
available. OK? About a month ago, she had to go to her child's
graduation. My assumption is that when I say ``not prepared,''
not far enough along in the process to really have the
testimony be all that particularly valuable at this point.
Now, trust me, I wish years ago, whoever the CMS Director
or Administrator was further along in the process. So from my
standpoint, this is progress. She has agreed to testify in the
future. We are holding this hearing to define the problem, to
put pressure on CMS to come up with--OK, we got the fact sheet.
We have a little bit of a game plan. We are going to want to
see more meat on the bones of that fact sheet.
So this is why we do this. We do put hopefully cooperative
pressure on the agency to finally start doing this, and it has
not been done since 2003.
Senator Heitkamp. Mr. Chairman, if I can just say, I would
be more sympathetic if she had not conveniently released a
press release yesterday. I would be more sympathetic. I would
say, ``Fine, she is taking this seriously. She wants to come up
with a robust plan.'' Instead, it seems to me that what
happened here was, ``Oh, this is going to get talked about, so
I need to have some talking points about this,'' instead of
actually sitting down with us. She inherited this mess. I get
that. But this has to be a priority. I talked to her about this
as a priority. And so my frustration is then do not issue a
press release.
Chairman Johnson. Again, I appreciate the heat you are
putting on CMS. I am putting on the same heat, OK? And so this
is good. This is exactly what we should be doing. We are
providing oversight, and it will be interesting when she does
come to testify, and it will be a matter of do we want it in a
month, do we want it in 2 months. We will work together with
you on that.
Senator Heitkamp. I want a plan.
Chairman Johnson. So do I.
Senator Heitkamp. And I want it sooner rather than later.
Chairman Johnson. Right. I want a lot of meat on the bones
of that plan. I think our witnesses do as well. Senator Jones.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR JONES
Senator Jones. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to
both the witnesses for being here. I apologize for having to
attend another hearing on health care costs in the Health,
Education Labor and Pension (HELP) Committee.
I want to just follow up a couple of things. One, I want to
echo what Senator Hassan said about what is going on at the
border and families. I do not need to repeat all of that. I
share every concern that she expressed. I really appreciate
that she did that. And, Mr. Ritchie, I appreciate, as she said,
your anticipating some of these questions.
My one quick question to you on that is: Will any of your
follow up work on that issue with what is going on down there,
will that also be looking to see whether or not the
Administration is complying with the injunction that was issued
yesterday concerning the time limits given to bring these
families back together?
Mr. Ritchie. That I am not sure because, again, they were
just out last week looking, and they are developing the plan
now. They are probably meeting back in the office as we speak.
So, again, they can provide a briefing in the very near future,
as they do it, but the plan is being developed, so we can
certainly take that into consideration as they go. I know they
want to do as thorough of an approach as they can. It is a plan
in development, because the work that they have completed is
based on prior to 2018. And the other thing that I did not
mention before is we do have reports that come in from ORR--we
have been getting them since 2014--of serious incidents of
abuse and neglect that occur, and we meet with ORR leadership
on an as-needed basis on those. But, some of that could factor
into it, too.
But, again, I am sorry, not my area. I am not part of the
planning, and so I am not well informed enough to answer that.
But the plan is being developed as we speak.
Senator Jones. All right. Mr. Dodaro?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, Senator Jones, Senator Hassan, we have
been asked at GAO as well to look at the process for tracking
these children in custody. We got the request this week. We
immediately are starting the work in that area. So we will be
happy as that work proceeds to follow up with you as well.
Senator Jones. All right. Great. I appreciate that from
both of you and urge you to do that. I think that that is one
of the top priorities that we ought to have as a country, and
the Administration and Congress ought to both have there.
I want to then just briefly follow up from Senator
Heitkamp's speeches, because I share those same concerns. I am
a former prosecutor in Alabama. I have also had to defend cases
of fraud and abuse. And so the whole issue of fraud and abuse
is an important one.
Mr. Dodaro, you said, in response to the letter that CMS
issued yesterday, that you would have liked to have seen more
details, that you would have expected to see more detail. You
also mentioned something about aggressive oversight, and I
would like for you, if you could, for the record today just
expand on that a little bit, of what you would have expected to
see in that letter, the details, and I know you have a lot of
recommendations, you cannot go through them all. And then also
kind of expand on your comments about aggressive oversight.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. First, there is a section in the plan that
talks about improving the quality of information--accuracy and
completeness of information. I would expect to see more on how
they are planning to make sure that it is comparable across the
States, how they are going to use it for oversight and some
milestones for when these things will occur over a period of
time. As I mentioned earlier, and Brian has mentioned several
times, the lack of complete and accurate information is an
impediment to oversight. So it is important that it be done on
an aggressive schedule going forward.
I would have expected to see more in the plan about the
supplemental payments which are payments, made for
uncompensated care and other things, to respond to our
recommendations about making sure they are economical and
efficient payments based on good data from the States. And,
that the money is actually going to the right people as it is
demonstrated within the area.
I would have expected to see more on the demonstration
projects that we have said have not been budget neutral, and
the evaluations have not been thorough. We are not learning a
lot from the demonstrations, even though they are costing more
Federal money than they were supposed to in those areas.
I would have expected to see more on use of State auditors.
I have had this discussion. They have had some discussions with
the State auditors, but there is no plan to use the State
auditors. In some of the States, as I am sure you are well
aware of, Medicaid is over a third of the total spending for
the States. The State auditors should be involved on a robust
basis, and it is in the Federal Government's interest to
encourage them to do that and provide some resources for them.
I think it will be a great return on investment.
One other thing is beneficiary eligibility determinations,
which they have had on hold. By the time they start it, it will
be 5 years since they have really done any audits of
beneficiary eligibility determinations. They are planning to do
it over a 3-year cycle. There is no reason that this cannot be
done on a faster basis if they apply additional resources. I
think waiting until 2021 to finish all the States is too long,
given the fact that Medicaid spending during that period of
time is going to grow 15, 20 percent, and still be on the rise.
So these are the things that I mean about being more
aggressive, and with the actions that they have said, including
other actions and moving faster.
Senator Jones. OK. Well, thank you very much for that. My
time is winding down. Mr. Chairman, I may have some other
questions for the record. I would like to just make two points.
One--and I continue to do this every time I get a chance--
my State did not expand Medicaid. We left a lot of money on the
table, and I have people in my State--we have a very poor
State. We have a very unhealthy State. We have a lot of people
in my State, 200,000 or so by every estimate, that could have
benefited from the expansion of Medicaid, not to mention the
economic value that would have been brought by bringing those
dollars in and expanding those health care deliveries in the
areas of my State that need it so badly. We are losing health
care providers in my rural Alabama left and right.
The last thing--and, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the charts
here. Those are always very helpful. You are very good at that,
by the way. I would note an interesting comment from the
hearing that is going on in the HELP
Committee on the same issue about driving down health care,
that these charts and all at the end of the day on who pays, it
is the American taxpayer. That is why it is so important. That
is why Senator Heitkamp was so animated about the fraud and
abuse and the way we do this and why we should be involved,
because at the end of the day, whether it is government,
whether it is insurance or out-of-pocket, it is our
constituents who are paying for the health care and everything
we are doing.
So, with that, I will yield the remaining 27 seconds.
Actually, I am over.
Chairman Johnson. Trust me, I understand we all pay it. It
is just the form of payment. That first chart was really
talking about what you pay directly to the provider.
By the way, I actually should have brought our more
extensive report on just health care spending where we have a
lot more charts. So we will make sure you have that in your
office. Senator Daines.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR DAINES
Senator Daines. Chairman Johnson, thank you, and Ranking
Member McCaskill for having this hearing and compiling this
very important report. I am very appreciative of the dedication
of the Committee to uncover these areas for improvement in the
Administration of Medicaid, which, as we know, is experiencing
skyrocketing costs.
Mr. Chairman, this chart here, this reminds me of a steep
ski jump in Montana, looking at not only where we are at but
where we are going to be in the next 10 years.
Chairman Johnson. One I would not want to go down.
Senator Daines. This would be one that my boys would be
excited about in a terrain park. I can tell you that.
Taken by itself, the waste and fraud of the Medicaid
program nearly exceeds the entire budgets of the Department of
Agriculture (USDA), the Department of Commerce, and the
Department of Interior (DOI) combined. I think about how we
battle here for, for example, the full funding of Land and
Water Conservation Fund (LWCF) with some $37 billion of
overpayments. So the interest on that alone could fund LWCF
fully. I hope we could make some progress on addressing
Medicaid's soaring expenses so that we can protect taxpayers
and safeguard the program, this important safety net for those
who truly need it the most.
Mr. Ritchie, Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
Committee (HSGAC's) oversight report pointed to structural
incentives in Obamacare and Medicaid expansion for States to
enroll as many people on the program as possible. The report
cites the ACA State reimbursement formula, which is driven by
the number of enrollees, and Medicaid's 100 percent cost
coverage in the first 3 years.
Do you agree with the report's assessment that these
financial incentives may result in States adding people to
Medicaid who do not truly meet eligibility requirements?
Mr. Ritchie. We have not done anything looking at the
incentive, but I would say we have done the recent eligibility
reports that we mentioned in our testimony and that I mentioned
earlier, and with those eligibility reports, we found that
people were certainly enrolled that were not eligible. So there
is a concern there.
Also, with the increased 100 percent Federal Medical
Assistance Percentages (FMAP), or Federal matching funds we
have done, this is not the first time that Medicaid has been
set up where they have paid at one level for a service versus
another level, and we have a history of work where we have
looked to see if the payments have been appropriate. We have
seen where they have offered those increased payments, there
have been inappropriate payments where things have been
submitted at the higher level versus the other level. So
certainly the past has shown work where an increased Federal
participation has led to improper payments. So from our
perspective, we follow a risk assessment. We see that there is
certainly risk there. And from an eligibility perspective,
regardless of the policy decision of whether it is 100 percent
of Federal poverty level or 138 percent, we think the rules
need to be followed, that the right beneficiaries need to be
enrolled, and that is clearly not happening right now.
Senator Daines. Well, I mean, just look at it. If you are a
State and you are held accountable, like most States are for
balancing their budget, which we are not held accountable for
here, I just testified in front of the Select Committee on
Budget Reform that needs to be done. It just continues to
baffle me that Washington, DC., is not held accountable for a
balanced budget but the States are. And because the States are,
if you give an incentive to the State where they can offload
for that FMAP, in Montana, 67 percent FMAP, take either that
number covered by the Federal Government or move to 100
percent, what is the incentive? Do you think that could maybe
factor into a State's decision to move more folks in Medicaid
expansion because it is not costing the State any money for a
period of time, at least for 3 years? And then it is 90 percent
after that.
Mr. Ritchie. Right. But, again, I mean, we do not look at
the political decision of doing that, but we do look at the
criteria, and----
Senator Daines. And I am not saying it is a political
decision. It is just, if you are looking at the math----
Mr. Ritchie. Right, but there is different criteria for
each category, so people that--like when we did our eligibility
determination reviews, we found cases where people would have
qualified for the standard Medicaid, but they were determined
to be in the higher Medicaid, so that was an issue. We did not
find it was outright fraud. We found it was system and human
data entry errors that led to it. But our audit also was not
designed to do that. But if they meet that 138 percent and they
qualify for one category, the 100 percent, they meet the other
category.
Senator Daines. Mr. Ritchie, for fiscal year (FY) 2017 GAO
found that Medicaid overpayments were $36.4 billion. If
Medicaid grows at its current expected pace to $900 billion by
2025, overpayments, kind of using the rough percentages there,
it could be as high as $55 billion. I applaud CMS for yesterday
announcing initiatives designed to improve the Medicaid program
integrity by taking a more active role in auditing the program.
As Administrator Verma's Medicaid Integrity Initiative
begins, Mr. Ritchie, what do you believe are the keys to its
success?
Mr. Ritchie. Well, I agree with GAO that I think it is a
step in a positive direction. I have not had a lot of time to
sort of go through, and it did not have a lot of the details
there, but I know in working with CMS it is reflecting some of
the work that we have done and that we have recommended. I
think they are taking positive steps there. I think a lot more
needs to happen and more details need to be there. But, again,
our key issues and the key things they need to do, the most
important is prevent, is up front making sure that the
fraudulent providers, providers that should not be in the
program are prevented from getting in, and then you have
prevented improper payments up front, making sure along the
lines of the prior question that eligible beneficiaries are in
and the dollars are being spent on the people that need to and
deserve to be in the program. And then data has been a big
theme of our discussion today and what I brought up, having
improved data is it allows everyone that is providing program
oversight to actually identify and detect the issues of fraud,
waste, and abuse quickly; and then once you find them, enforce
it, deal with it quickly, recover the money, and put added
safeguards in place to prevent additional future payments.
Senator Daines. Thank you.
I want to ask a question of Mr. Dodaro here before I run
out of time. In fiscal year 2013, Federal and State Medicaid
cost taxpayers about $287 billion, just a little less than
that. But the program double its expenses to $596 billion.
Are you concerned that there has been an increased
overpayment and fraud following the States' expansion of
Medicaid?
Mr. Dodaro. I am concerned that the full extent of program
risks in the Medicaid program have not been adequately
determined, and by that I mean that part of the growth has been
in the managed care portion of the program, and there have been
no audits of the managed care providers except a few that the
State auditors have done and some other ones, and the IG. The
beneficiary eligibility determination rate, improper payment
rate, has been frozen at 3.1 percent since 2004. So there is no
real good information about whether or not the beneficiaries'
determinations have been done properly under the expansion
program, because that program has been suspended. So I am
concerned about this. That is why I am here today urging
greater attention to this very important issue. And the growth
in Medicaid is expected, by the CMS Actuary, to be 5.7 percent
a year. And as you mentioned and we have in our report, by 2025
it will be knocking, total costs, on the door of about $1
trillion.
So there must be greater attention to this program to
ensure the integrity of it and its sustainability over a long
period of time.
Senator Daines. Thank you, Mr. Dodaro, and thank you for
remaining concerned, and I ask that you continue to remain
concerned. I appreciate it.
Mr. Dodaro. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. I want to pick up on two lines of Senator
Daines' questioning, first of all, the beneficiary eligibility.
I think, General Dodaro, you said something, we have really not
looked at it. Isn't it basically true one of the reasons we
have not really dug into the eligibility is because that match
with the States, we pretty well relied on the States having the
incentive to police that themselves because they are spending
money as well. Is that kind of one of the dynamics? And then,
of course, when you expand Medicaid and it is a 100 percent
match, now you literally have given them a great incentive to
sign up people that necessarily are not eligible, which is why
in the IG report and we have highlighted in our report, for
example, in California, about $1 billion worth of Medicaid
funds for 445,000 ineligible--isn't that kind of dynamic going
on here? In the past we just really relied on the States
spending money. They are not going to want to spend money on
ineligible individuals because they are having to pick up about
40 percent of the tab. But now with Medicaid expansion, they
have every incentive to sign as many people up as possible. Do
you want to comment on that?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. The Affordable Care Act required greater
screening of both providers and there were new eligibility
determinations for beneficiaries as well.
Now, from my perspective, when you introduce new
requirements, there is every reason to believe that there needs
to be a greater oversight during that period, not less. CMS
took the approach that basically the States need time to adjust
to these new requirements over time, so CMS was not going to go
in and take a look until States have had time to adjust. I do
not agree with that. I do not think that was the right
approach. When you make changes, you should be looking more at
the internal controls that are in place to make sure that those
new changes are implemented properly so you can take timely
action. But that is water under the bridge at this point. And
so this is why I am saying that when they startin 2019 they are
going to take one-third of the States over a 3-year period
until they cover all the States.
My belief is we should do more, have a more aggressive
strategy. During that 3-year or 4-year period, by the time
everything is done costs are going to increase over the period
of time.
So that is the reason that we are where we are at this
point, from what I understand.
Chairman Johnson. When I talked to Administrator Verma, I
had asked her who is going to be doing the auditing, and my
bias would be engage private sector auditors. There are plenty
of them there in every State and in every community. So she
said they were going to do that. Let us hope so. And if they
are doing that, they can cover all 50 States immediately.
Mr. Dodaro. They should use the State auditors. I mean, you
are sitting next to a former State auditor over here, and----
Senator McCaskill. And it would not be that hard to put
into the single audit protocol.
Mr. Dodaro. Right. They are already auditing it and the
State auditors know this program better than anybody.
Senator McCaskill. Yes.
Mr. Dodaro. And I have dealt with the State auditors for
Louisian, Mississippi, and Massachusetts. They have started on
their own, because I have been encouraging them to get more
involved. But if they are given proper support and resources,
you could help prevent a lot of these program integrity
problems. And I would encourage the Congress to----
Chairman Johnson. But the bottom line, there is no reason
to do a third, a third, a third. There is really no reason to
wait. Let us do now and do all 50 States.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, well, they are doing it based upon their
own resources, not figuring how you could deploy resources and
expertise that is already there resident in each State. And
each State's program is different.
Chairman Johnson. So clarify the managed care point. You
are saying we are frozen. Describe what you are talking about.
What is frozen at 3.1 percent?
Mr. Dodaro. The beneficiary eligibility determination is
frozen; there are three components of the improper payment
rate. There is a fee-for-service component, and I think the
latest is about 12.9 percent error rate. And that is where most
of the $36 billion in overpayments come from.
Chairman Johnson. That is what you can measure?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. The second part has been in place for a
number of years.
The second component is managed care. The managed care
component of this is set at 0.3 percent, which is what they
figure, because nobody is really auditing the managed care
providers on how they are providing services. They just have
been looking at whether or not the States are providing the
money to the managed care providers, the organizations, but not
the actual provision--delivery of services, whether the
services were medically necessary, whether they are following
all the right rules or procedures. So no one knows.
Chairman Johnson. So, again, what set--I mean, describe
what is the set point. What does that that do?
Mr. Dodaro. The set point is in the beneficiary eligibility
at 3.1 percent. The managed care rate they do every year, but
they are not measuring everything that needs to be measured.
That is the difference between the two. They froze the
beneficiary eligibility determination at 3.1, which is what it
was in 2013, I believe, or 2014. For the medicare managed care
portion, they do an estimate every year, but it does not
measure everything that needs to be measured for half of the
program expenditures.
Chairman Johnson. So another thing I wanted to clarify--and
I am going to dig into that further. You talked about
demonstration spending, not budget neutral. It is about a third
of spending. From 2016 to 2018, you said there was a carryover
of $100 billion. Just again make me understand that.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, because they are not going to allow them
to carry over the expenditures. When they approve a
demonstration, they agree in a State of what the spending limit
could be. So if the State, let us say, just for theoretical
purposes, sets the limit at $20 billion, but they really only
spend $18 billion, they get to carry over the $2 billion into
the next year. Now they are not going to allow them to
accumulate all that and you cannot carry over all of it, and so
they are limiting it. As we said that that it is raising the
costs of the program to the Federal Government without a good
basis. So they have stopped this practice.
Chairman Johnson. So it really is use it or lose it, which
creates its own incentives. But that is better than having this
simply not being able to spend the money and then just banking
it in the future.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, particularly if the spending limit that
they set was based in some cases on hypothetical services and
hypothetical costs that was not the actual costs that they had
before.
Chairman Johnson. OK. I do want to get into State gimmicks
before we close out this hearing, but I will turn it over to
Senator McCaskill.
Senator McCaskill. I would like to first briefly talk about
the fact that we are not doing screening and enrollments, even
though we passed a law requiring it. It began to be a
requirement in 2011, and the States are supposed to be
screening and looking at enrollment requirements for the
providers.
Comptroller, your colleagues previously testified in the
House that the requirement for screening and enrollment for
Medicaid providers prevents improper payment and reduces fraud.
Your colleague Ms. Yocom stated, ``If you can screen and enroll
and ensure your providers act in good faith, you have managed
most of the fraud. A beneficiary alone trying to commit fraud
needs a complicit provider. So focusing attention on ensuring
good screening and enrollment process is critical.''
Do you agree with her statement? And what we can be doing,
what can CMS be doing to require these States to do a better
job on screening and enrollment of various providers that are
looking to be able to collect Medicaid dollars?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, first of all, I agree with Ms. Yocom. She
is sitting right behind me.
Senator McCaskill. Thank you, Ms. Yocom.
Mr. Dodaro. She is my best adviser on this issue and is
very knowledgeable of the program. She is absolutely right. We
have made many recommendations to CMS to make more databases
available to the States.
Now, one novel thing that is in the plan CMS--or the press
release from yesterday is the offer for them to do some
screening for the States on the providers as well, and I think
that could be helpful if implemented properly as well, because
they can access more databases. So we have been trying to make
sure that they give more databases to the States for screening
purposes.
For example, on Medicare, there are some of the same
providers in both programs, and you can use the experience with
the Medicare screening to help Medicaid as well. So that has
been one of our recommendations: to improve the accuracy of the
databases. We have been trying for a while to get better, more
accurate Death Master File (DMF) information to the States as
well. And it is particularly important that CMS help because
beneficiaries may move from State to States.
Senator McCaskill. Correct.
Mr. Dodaro. So those are some of our recommendations. I can
provide a detailed list for the record.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The information submitted by Mr. Dodaro appears in the Appendix
on page 171.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Senator McCaskill. That would be terrific.
And since you spoke of Medicare, it is my understanding
that the improper payment percentage is higher in the Medicare
program than it is in the Medicaid program.
Mr. Dodaro. That is because they have better measurement
techniques. I think the Medicare program has good
methodologies. They do regular reviews. They check on whether
or not the service was medically necessary and take samples.
They take national samples every year. So they have a much more
robust program than the Medicaid program, and it is a little
easier because it is a national program as opposed to each
State having its own different design for the Medicaid program.
So to be fair, it is more complicated to do it in Medicaid,
but Medicare has a very good program. In fact, what we did, we
looked at the TRICARE program at the Department of Defense
(DOD) and compared what they were doing to measure their
improper payment rate to Medicare and found that DOD was not
doing anywhere close to what Medicare is doing, so we
recommended they improve their methodology.
Senator McCaskill. Well, the fact that the States all have
different programs and that we have the high improper payment
number that we have and it is growing, it certainly would be
one point that you would want to make if we were going to be
block-granting the money, because if we block-grant the money,
then we lose all controls, not just dealing with perhaps
different scenarios or provider taxes based on the State but,
rather, a situation where we would just send the money out and
trust them.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, it depends on how you design it. If you
capped it and said, OK, this is all the money that you are
going to get, then there is an incentive--part of the issue
here has been an incentive issue because of the Federal match.
Senator McCaskill. Right.
Mr. Dodaro. Senator Daines pointed this out, and he is
exactly right.
Senator McCaskill. Right.
Mr. Dodaro. The incentives have not all been aligned
properly, and I think a lot of the State attention to this has
increased, particularly in the expansion States, as they see it
is rapidly growing, being a bigger portion of the budget, the
Federal match is going to start tapering off from 100 percent--
--
Senator McCaskill. To 90, though. It never goes below 90.
Mr. Dodaro. Right.
Senator McCaskill. Assuming the law does not change.
Mr. Dodaro. Right, but they still see that they need to do
more in this area. That is why the State auditors are beginning
to step up.
Senator McCaskill. That would be great.
I want to turn to a report you did back in 2011, and what
you did at the GAO in 2011 is you looked at application and
coverage denials in the individual health and insurance market.
And I have gone back and looked at that because we now have
this Administration going to court along with the Attorney
General of my State asking the courts to do away with the
preexisting condition protection along with many of the
others--capped payments and the ability to charge women more
for insurance just because they are women. There is a variety
of protections that we have in there for consumers that this
Administration is now actively, along with these Attorneys
General, trying to get rid of and make sure that they
completely go away.
I would like you to talk about the sources of information
you used for your 2011 report, if you could give us that. What
data did you use to determine the level of coverage denial in
the years before, immediately before we put the ACA protections
in?
Mr. Dodaro. As I recall, and I will provide the details for
the record,\1\ but we used data that HHS had been collecting.
We also went to a few States to see if they had better
information since they have delegated responsibility for a lot
of insurance issues. And then we also had information from the
American health insurance industry as well. So we had those
three sort of data sources.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The information submitted by Mr. Dodaro appears in the Appendix
on page 179.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Senator McCaskill. And your review found there were two
kinds of denials. There is an application denial.
Mr. Dodaro. Right.
Senator McCaskill. And I put into the record and I would
ask it be put into the record in this hearing also Humana's
document\2\ that listed 400 diseases that required application
denial, along with a number of occupations, including air
traffic controller, steelworker.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The Humana document referenced by Senator McCaskill appears in
the Appendix on page 127.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
So there is an application denial and then there is a
policy they were writing that allowed them to do a coverage
denial. So if you had, for example, a heart condition, they
might insure you, but you would have to pay out of your own
pocket for anything having to do with your heart condition--in
other words, completely incomplete insurance, and that was
called ``coverage denial.''
So on the application denial, do you recall what the denial
rate was on average for people who were trying to get
insurance?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, the national figure we had was 19 percent,
but it varied among insurers.
Senator McCaskill. OK. So some insurers it was higher,
some----
Mr. Dodaro. Some of it was up to 40 percent or more. Others
were 0 to 15 percent. So there was a lot of variation, but the
overall national average I believe was 19 percent denial.
Senator McCaskill. So one in five people that tried to get
insurance were denied the opportunity to get insurance because
they had been sick before. Is that an accurate finding of your
report prior to the ACA protections?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, that is, with certain limitations. I mean,
we do not know whether or not they applied somewhere else and
got coverage or whether they actually ended up getting coverage
but had a higher premium rate. So there was not a lot of good
data available. We had what was available, and it is
appropriately caveated in the report. But that is what we said.
Senator McCaskill. And what about the denial of coverage?
What did you find as it related to the denial of coverage?
Mr. Dodaro. That was very detailed, very specific. I do not
have a good answer for that at an aggregate level as well. But
what I recall on the application denial side, the 19 percent,
it was not really clear why they denied it. So the only other
data that was available at that point was from the America's
Health Insurance Plans and what they said was that the denial
rate was much higher for medical reasons than non-medical
reasons, for example, you were not in the right geographic
area. So that was abouyt 1 percent. About 13 percent of the
denials were because of medical conditions and their
underwriting status.
I can give you for the record the coverage denial detail
from that report.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The information submitted by Mr. Dodaro appears in the Appendix
on page 180.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Senator McCaskill. I just wanted to bring it out because I
think people forget--I mean, there was not an effort to pass
the ACA because all of us were trying to make people's lives
miserable. The effort was to try to give consumers some
protections from some gross abuses that had grown up in the
industry, and people were really searching for coverage and
could not find it, could not get it. So I think it is important
that we remember that in context and that we not throw out the
preexisting condition protection unless and until we can come
up with something that will replace it with the same level of
protection.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. And we will enter that Humana report in
the record.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The Humana report appears in the Appendix on page 127.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Senator McCaskill. Yes.
Chairman Johnson. Not a problem.
I have only really got one more line of questioning here.
It really does have to do with what sometimes is referred to as
``State gimmicks.'' We refer to it in our report. I am talking
about, for example--perfectly legal but it ends up costing the
Federal Government more money and certainly increased the
percentage of the Federal Government's match to the States. I
am talking about, for example, State sales taxes or loans the
State makes to cities that they claim--they get reimbursement
at their match rate, and then they pay the loan back to the
State.
Do you have a sense of how much those and other, I would
call them, ``gimmicks'' really cost in terms of additional
Federal spending?
Mr. Dodaro. We have had some examples that we did in
reports over the years, but no one really knows because CMS
does not really collect the type of information necessary to
make those determinations. That is part of our recommendations,
is to have more information about what the sources of those
funds are every year. There are supposed to be limits on how
much they need to raise from local governments. For example,
the State share is supposed to only gather up to 60 percent of
their fair share from local providers or other sources, and no
one knows whether that limit is really met on a regular basis.
And that is one of our recommendations.
I know Brian has done some work in that area, too. I am
sure he has something to add.
Mr. Ritchie. Again, we do not have it quantified either, I
think for the same reasons. We have reports out on a few
States. Recently we have some ongoing work looking at the safe
harbor and it is mentioned in your report. But I think the same
issues, that it is just not being tracked, that we see this,
and that the safe harbor may be met, but then that still allows
the general process of the shifting of funds. And back to a
point I made earlier, I think just for us the general intent is
the dollars are spent. We just think--asked the question: Is
this leading to better care for beneficiaries or is this
leading to a shift in resources? And it is hard as an IG
because it is not necessarily violating rules. The rule in
place right now is it is up to the 6 percent. But if you look
at it we are able to track it from an audit standpoint look and
see a provider paid taxes, then the Federal share came in, and
when the additional resources were sent, the supplemental
payments went back; and the net effect is the Federal
Government paid and the State really did not sort of come out
any worse. It was sort of a net zero effect.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, the other thing----
Chairman Johnson. The States actually come out quite a bit
better.
Mr. Dodaro. Oh, yes.
Chairman Johnson. Yes. So is it measurable?
Mr. Dodaro. If you have the data, you could measure it. And
they should have the information to check.
Chairman Johnson. So is that something if I wrote either
one of your gentlemen or both of you a letter, would you commit
to doing a study on that to try and quantify it?
Mr. Dodaro. We could see----
Chairman Johnson. Who wants to volunteer?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, we could see if it is feasible to do.
Chairman Johnson. OK.
Mr. Dodaro. We can go back in and look at a sample of
States, for example, and try to measure it that way. But it
will take a while to do it because the data is not readily
available, and you would have to go in and take a look at it.
But I think we could do a study, but we have also got open
recommendations that you could support, have CMS collect this
information, because unless they collect it and do something
with it, our study is really not going to change the outcome of
this situation.
Chairman Johnson. I was struck in your answer on other
audits in comparison to--again, CMS runs both Medicare and
Medicaid, correct?
Mr. Dodaro. Right.
Chairman Johnson. And I am really giving them praise in
terms of how they are managing Medicare and doing the audits,
that type of thing. The fact they are not dog it on Medicaid,
with some caveats, do you almost get the sense that it is
willful ignorance?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, there has always been a deference to
States, and that can go too far in terms of balancing the
Federal interest versus States' flexibility. That has been an
issue historically in our intergovernmental system. You see it
in many different programs over time. Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families (TANF) is another example. But, this program, as
it started out, according to your chart really did not have
much in expenditures, and letting the States have flexibility
made sense. But now the stakes are higher, and the costs are
not sustainable over the long term, and CMS need to change
their paradigm. And they have been slow to do that.
Chairman Johnson. But, also, when both parties have skin in
the game, there literally is an incentive to try and keep down
the cost. But as one partner has more skin and the other
partner does not--and that is exactly what Medicaid expansion
does--it is what these State gimmicks do. It reduces the amount
of skin in the game the States have, and it now starts shifting
the incentive to, for example, sign up people that are
ineligible because you get more Federal money.
The bottom line is oversight is critical, auditing this is
critical. Designing the program so you actually have the
incentives--and I would say the block grant would give every
incentive to the State for efficient spending because they are
going to have--according to Graham-Cassidy-Heller-Johnson, it
would be money block-granted on the basic number of people in
your State, the poverty rates, those types of things. That is
not incentivizing you to sign more people up. You are going to
get a set amount, and you better spend that as efficiently and
as flexible as possible and do the best for your citizens. So
to me that completely puts the incentive back where it belongs,
at the State level where it will be a little more efficient, a
little more effective, hopefully more accountable versus this
one-size-fits-all model, which a $37 billion improper payment
amount shows it is not being done very efficiently and
effectively.
Anyway, so you will expect that letter just in terms of the
feasibility of that study. I think we might be shocked at how
much money that actually costs us.
Again, I want to thank both the witnesses for your great
testimony and for taking the time. General Dodaro, you realize
we are never going to let you retire. [Laughter.]
Mr. Dodaro. Well, I have 7\1/2\ years left on my term, and
then we can negotiate.
Chairman Johnson. I am amazed at--we are talking about--
Senator McCaskill was asking about a study from 2011, and you
have that at the tip of your fingers. I am always amazed at
your ability to recall these things and provide detailed
testimony off the top of your head.
And, Mr. Ritchie, again, thank you for all of your work.
This Committee depends on the good work of Inspectors General
and the Government Accountability Office. So thank you both for
your testimony.
The hearing record will remain open for 15 days until July
12th at 5 p.m. for the submission of statements and questions
for the record.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:07 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]