- ENGAGING ENERGY: SMALL BUSINESS RESOURCES AT THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
ENGAGING ENERGY: SMALL BUSINESS RESOURCES AT THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ENERGY, AND TRADE
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
JANUARY 18, 2018
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Small Business Committee Document Number 115-052
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
28-252
WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ROD BLUM, Iowa
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto Rico
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
JOHN CURTIS, Utah
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
STEPHANIE MURPHY, Florida
AL LAWSON, JR., Florida
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
VACANT
Kevin Fitzpatrick, Majority Staff Director
Jan Oliver, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Adam Minehardt, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Hon. Rod Blum....................................................
1
Hon. Brad Schneider..............................................
2
WITNESS
Mr. Charles R. Smith, Director, Office of Small and Disadvantaged
Business Utilization, United States Department of Energy,
Washington, DC.................................................
3
APPENDIX
Prepared Statement:
Mr. Charles R. Smith, Director, Office of Small and
Disadvantaged Business Utilization, United States
Department of Energy, Washington, DC.......................
16
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
None.
ENGAGING ENERGY: SMALL BUSINESS
RESOURCES AT THE DEPARTMENT OF
ENERGY
----------
THURSDAY, JANUARY 18, 2018
House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Agriculture, Energy, And Trade,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Rod Blum
[chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Blum, Comer, Schneider,
and Lawson.
Chairman BLUM. Good morning. I call this hearing to order.
Thank you for joining us at today's Subcommittee on
Agriculture, Energy, and Trade hearing.
The Department of Energy, or DOE, is tasked with ensuring
America's security and prosperity by addressing its energy,
environmental, and nuclear challenges through transformative
science and technology solutions. This mission extends beyond
solely the work of the Department to both the energy industry
and the multitude of businesses that work with the DOE to
fulfill this task.
Small businesses are integral to the success of the DOE
mission and the energy industry. However, the high costs and
high technology required in the energy field often leave small
businesses struggling to compete with large corporations.
The issue is of key importance to me since the energy
industry is booming in Iowa. My home State excels in production
of renewable energy such as ethanol and wind-based renewables.
Iowa's energy production accounted for roughly 54,000 jobs and
added $5 billion to the State's GDP in 2016. As a small
business owner myself, I understand the challenges that small
firms working in a competitive and expensive field face, and I
know these small businesses can make an astounding impact on
energy if given the opportunity.
Today's hearing will address the ways in which the
Department of Energy is working to minimize the barriers that
often exclude small businesses from succeeding in the energy
field and highlight the resources the agency offers to small
businesses looking to participate in the Federal contracting
process. We will hear from the Department of Energy's Office of
Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization--that is a
mouthful--or OSDBU, about the various programs and
opportunities the agency offers in an effort to provide small
businesses with the resources they need to compete and succeed
in the energy industry. I look forward to hearing from our
witness today and having a productive conversation on this
issue.
I yield to the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on
Agriculture, Energy, and Trade, Mr. Schneider, for his opening
statement.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Mr. Smith,
welcome to the Committee.
Since the Arab oil embargo in the 1970s, U.S. energy policy
has been aimed at assuring a secure supply of energy, keeping
energy costs low enough to meet the needs of a growing economy
and protecting the environment while producing and consuming
that energy. Technological advances, consumption changes in the
modern economy, and continued interest in renewable energy have
driven changes in energy investment. This investment serves as
a catalyst to the Federal marketplace, giving small businesses
more opportunities to compete through Department of Energy
solicitations to help create a cleaner, renewable future.
Each year the Federal Government procures more than $400
billion in goods and services from businesses around the
country. Through the vehicle of government contracts, in order
to ensure that small businesses receive their fair share of
Federal contracting opportunities, the Small Business Act sets
forth a governmentwide 23 percent goal of Federal contracts
that should be awarded to small businesses.
In order to help increase the participation of small
businesses in the Federal procurement marketplace, Offices of
Small Business and Disadvantaged Business Utilization, or
OSDBUs, have been created throughout the Federal Government. It
should be noted that the DOE did not meet its 10.2 percent
prime small business goal for fiscal year 2016 and has
struggled in the past to provide optimal contracting dollars to
small businesses. Needless to say, a concerted effort is
critical to DOE fully participating in the Federal policy to
engage and hire small businesses. I look forward to hearing
more from Director Smith on his plans to reverse this trend
permanently given his optimistic written testimony.
OSDBUs promote small business inclusion within an
individual agency's mandate, and also ensure that small firms
are treated fairly and equitably in the contracting process. In
this capacity, OSDBUs serve as one of the primary advocates for
small firms and offer them information and guidance on
contracting opportunities, both prime and subcontracting.
Additionally, they work with the Small Business Administration
and other agency officials to determine the small business
goals for their agency.
As evident by their unique positioning, OSDBUs enhance the
ability of small businesses to compete more successfully for
Federal Government contracts and serve a vital role in the
procurement process. Within the recent growth and Federal
contract spending, small firms should be receiving
opportunities commensurate with this increase.
The DOE OSDBU goal is to provide maximum practicable
opportunities in the Department's acquisition to all small
business concerns. It is the known policy of the DOE to provide
timely information to the public regarding DOE's forecast of
future prime contracting opportunities and subcontracting
opportunities which are available via the Department's major
site and facilities management contractors.
The OSDBU creates its annual Small Business Forum and Expo
to connect small businesses with various DOE offices and
programs to enhance DOE's overall mission of ensuring America's
security and prosperity. As an additional resource, the Energy
Department runs a mentor-protege program designed to encourage
DOE prime contractors to assist small disadvantaged businesses
certified by the Small Business Administration. Through mentor-
protege programs, small businesses are able to receive a broad
array of business development assistance through various
methods, including training, obtaining certificates, and in
some cases receiving loans or noncompetitive subcontract
awards. These benefits not only help protege firms contract
with the government, but also assist them in building up their
capacity. Doing so enables them to successfully compete in the
marketplace at the conclusion of the mentor-protege agreement.
It is vital that the DOE participate in the Federal marketplace
to the maximum extent practicable so they have access to those
individuals who are able to combat the dangers of climate
change that are before us already.
Today's hearing will provide the background and ideas
needed to understand the current state of our investment in
small businesses participating in the energy economy and
determine whether additional investments are needed to
safeguard our aging infrastructure while at the same time
bolster small businesses.
I again thank Director Smith for being here and look
forward to gaining more insight as to how we can make Energy
Department offices more effective in meeting the mission to
provide small businesses with acquisition opportunities.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman BLUM. Thank you, Mr. Schneider.
If Committee members have an opening statement prepared, I
would ask that they be submitted for the record.
I would like to take a moment to explain the timing lights
for you. You will have 5 minutes to deliver your testimony. The
light starts out as green. When you have 1 minute remaining the
light turns to yellow, and at the end of the 5 minutes, guess
what? It turns to red. And we ask that you try to adhere to
that time limit.
Our first and only witness today is Mr. Charlie Smith. Mr.
Smith serves as the director of the Office of Small and
Disadvantaged Business Utilization at the United States
Department of Energy. Before his time with the DOE, Director
Smith worked in various public and private sector roles,
including as the director of New Jersey Department of Labor and
Workforce Development and the executive director at JPMorgan
Chase. Additionally, Director Smith served 5 years as an
officer in the United States Navy, and we thank you for that
service, both then and now, and for joining us today, Director
Smith. The floor is yours.
STATEMENT OF CHARLES R. SMITH, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF SMALL AND
DISADVANTAGED BUSINESS UTILIZATION
Mr. SMITH. Chairman Blum, Ranking Member Schneider, and
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify here today on behalf of the Department of Energy on
DOE's small business initiatives. I am the Director of the
Department of Energy's Office of Small and Disadvantaged
Business Utilization, more succinctly referred to as the DOE
OSDBU. I began work in this role in September 2017, and have
since been working to improve the agency's small business goal
achievement through collaboration with the Small Business
Administration and DOE's contracting activities.
The Department of Energy awards billions of dollars to
small businesses annually, and has met the prime and
subcontracting small business goals established by the SBA
since 2015. Moving forward my focus will be to continue meeting
DOE's small business prime and subcontracting goals while
improving the agency's engagement and performance in the four
established socioeconomic subcategories.
My brief testimony today will touch upon three topics.
First, an overview of the DOE Management and Operating, M&O,
business model. Second, current DOE OSDBU initiatives promoting
small business engagement. And finally, examples of other DOE
programs that aid small businesses.
The Department of Energy Organization Act of 1977 created
the Department of Energy, and continued the management and
operating laboratory structure created for the Manhattan
Project. This business model, unique in the Federal Government,
continues today, utilizing the private sector through a network
of independently managed laboratories to meet the agency's
missions. DOE's unique laboratory structure created the need
for a new small business-goaling approach because the small
business administration relies on the Federal Procurement Data
System, FPDS, to assess prime small business activity. However,
since M&O's subcontracting accounts for 85 percent of agency
spend, the FPDS calculations alone have historically
underrepresented DOE's engagement with small businesses. To
address this underrepresentation, the Consolidated
Appropriations Act of 2014 authorized DOE to count first-tier
M&O subcontracts awarded to small businesses towards its small
business prime goals. These subcontracts were reported to the
Small Business Administration through a data collection process
named Management and Operating Subcontract Reporting
Capability, MOSRC. For fiscal year 2017, MOSRC combined with
FPDS, shows that DOE contributed over $3 billion to small
businesses.
The DOE OSDBU provides a broad range of resources to small
businesses, such as posting an updated forecast of contracting
opportunities. This posting is commonly referred to as the
Headquarters Acquisition Forecast, and serves as a business
development tool to help small businesses respond to agency
needs. Small businesses seeking the full range of DOE needs are
guided to research both the Headquarters Acquisition Forecast
and the DOE M&O contractors' additional separate acquisition
forecasts, which lists upcoming requirements unique to the
respective facilities.
The Department of Energy also hosts an annual Small
Business Forum and Expo where small businesses can connect with
DOE buyers, receive business development counseling, exchange
best practices, and be introduced to various DOE small business
initiatives. This year, the 3-day event will be in Houston from
May 22nd through the 24th, and is expected to draw over a
thousand attendees.
In 2017, in an effort to improve service-disabled veteran-
owned small business subcategory performance, DOE hosted its
first outreach event specifically targeted to veteran-owned
small businesses and SDVOSBs. Over 200 attendees attended in a
full day of training and matchmaking with DOE program elements.
In fiscal year 2018, DOE OSDBU is planning additional
forums to specifically advocate for HUBZone small businesses.
These events will be held in HUBZones near DOE sites, and will
provide businesses with business development training and
matchmaking sessions to connect new businesses with DOE buyers.
The Department's OSDBU office also has a Mentor-Protege
Program for prime contractors to provide business development
opportunities to small businesses. DOE OSDBU has a concerted
effort underway to double the agency's 28 mentor-protege
agreements by the end of fiscal year 2019.
The Department's OSDBU office actively seeks to participate
in other outreach events to grow our network of small business
partners. In fiscal year 2017, the DOE OSDBU office
participated in 32 outreach events for over 10,000 total
attendees, spanning all small business socio economic
categories.
Other agency small business initiatives include the Small
Business Vouchers program, which enables small businesses to
tap into national laboratory intellectual and technical assets
to overcome various commercialization challenges. Since March
2016, the Department's Small Business voucher program has
awarded vouchers to 114 businesses in 31 States, worth a total
of $22 million.
DOE's Gateway for Accelerated Innovation in Nuclear is
another voucher program that provides vouchers to small
businesses involved in the application to advance nuclear
technologies. Additionally, the agency's small business
innovation research and small business technology transfer
programs spur technological innovation through DOE grants to
small businesses. In fiscal year 2017, the programs awarded
$242 million to small businesses.
In conclusion, I share and appreciate the Committee's
effort to ensure Federal Government engagement with small
businesses. I welcome any questions and look forward to working
with you, Mr. Chairman, and the Subcommittee to further any
efforts towards that goal.
Chairman BLUM. Thank you, Mr. Smith.
I would now like to recognize the gentleman from Kentucky,
Mr. Comer, for 5 minutes of questioning. And before you start,
I would also like to recognize the Chairman of our Committee as
a whole, Chairman Chabot. Thank you for being here today.
Mr. Comer, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. COMER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to the
Committee.
My first question, you mentioned in your testimony that 85
percent of Department spending is done through the management
and operating or M&O contractors to the DOE laboratories. Do
the prime contractors offered to these DOE M&O contractors in
any way differ from those offered directly from the agency?
Mr. SMITH. I appreciate the question. You were asking if
the contracts the agency has with the M&O operators differ from
our headquarters?
Mr. COMER. Yes.
Mr. SMITH. I would not feel comfortable answering that.
Mr. COMER. Okay.
Mr. SMITH. I do not know the answer is what I should tell
you.
Mr. COMER. Okay. The next question. Many small businesses
are hindered by excessive regulation, obviously. What does the
process look like for small businesses to apply for an
exemption to the Energy Conservation Standards program?
Mr. SMITH. It is my understanding, Congressman, that to
apply for that exemption a small business would contact the
Department's Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, EERE,
office, which administers those exemptions. The OSDBU office,
in our mission to advocate on behalf of all small businesses
that want to engage with the Department would be to refer any
such inquiry to EERE.
Mr. COMER. Okay. In the event a small business reaches out
to your office with concerns about undue restrictions on
contracting competition, how does the Office of Small and
Disadvantaged Business Utilization advocate on behalf of the
small business? What does the process look like?
Mr. SMITH. I thank you for that question, Congressman. As
you are likely aware, I am sure you are aware, that is section
15(k)(17) of the Small Business Act. A recent GAO audit noted
that was a deficiency in an audit they conducted prior to my
arrival at the agency. We have worked hard over the past few
months to correct that deficiency, and now there is a process
in place. And if I could briefly describe that for you, it
involves, we have placed on our site a mailbox that allows a
small business to make a direct inquiry. That mailbox is
monitored daily. Upon receiving such a notification, it is our
office's job to communicate to the contracting officer, let
them be aware of the situation and ask them for a response to
the notice, and to also notify the competition advocate. We
then communicate that to the small business, and also
communicate that there are other avenues for them to pursue
that. It is a written policy that is now in place. We have the
mailbox available and these are things that we did not have
before. And, I would just like to add, it was convenient that
at the time we instituted this at the end of last year, we
received such a complaint and I was pleased to say that the
contracting officer and the competition advocate amended a
request for proposal to the satisfaction of the contracting
officer and the small business concern.
Mr. COMER. I have a major DOE site in my district in
Paducah, Kentucky, the Gaseous Diffusion Plant, and I get asked
this question a lot, what is DOE's definition of a small
business? What classifies as a small business versus a big
business?
Mr. SMITH. Well, it depends. It is the Small Business
Administration and various NAICS codes will determine which is
a small business. But I would certainly encourage any business
that has that question to reach out to the office.
Mr. COMER. And I believe, Mr. Chairman, it is somewhere
around $30 million. Does that sound right, $30 million in
sales? Would that be? But regardless, one of the complaints
that I get from my small business vendors and contractors is
once you get a dollar past the minimum definition, then you are
competing against multibillion dollar publicly traded
companies. So a lot of small businesses that contract with not
just the DOE but the entire Federal Government suggest that
maybe we should look at having different, you know, a second
level. Because once you get past that first level, you are
suddenly competing against multinational global companies that
are hard to compete with if you are still between a small and a
midsize business.
So that is just one of the things that I think maybe we
should look at in the Committee, Mr. Chairman in the future.
But thank you for your testimony and I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman BLUM. Thank you, Mr. Comer.
Ranking Member Schneider is now recognized for as long as
he would like.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Thank you. And again, Mr. Smith, thank you
for your testimony this morning.
I will start my questions. The mission statement for the
Department of Energy talks about protecting our security and
prosperity around energy, environment, and nuclear challenges,
but concludes through transformative science and technology
solutions. And small businesses at the cutting edge of
innovation and entrepreneurship are often critical to that.
So my first question is you are relatively new to this
position. Have you found at all, could you describe the culture
within DOE and how it values or emphasizes entrepreneurship and
innovation?
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Congressman. And yes, I am new. I
have been in the position 5-1/2 months. And your question was
my question upon arriving there, and I will say that the
Department is very aware that its small businesses are on the
cutting edge of technology and innovation. And I would point to
the SBIR/STTR programs that are prominent premier programs in
the Department, as an example of the agency's efforts to seek
out and assist small businesses on the cutting edge of research
and development.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. So one of the things I looked at, to promote
opportunities the agency is required to assign small business
technical advisers. My understanding is that has been a
challenge. Two questions around that. The second question
actually is how are you trying to expand that and address the
challenge? But given that constraint, how have the Expos
provided an opportunity to reach out and attract small
businesses?
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Congressman. I will address the SBTA
issue. It has been a challenge, but it has been a challenge
primarily because we have taken it seriously. There are a
number of requirements for an SBTA, namely that I, as the OSDBU
director, would have supervisory authority, that the SBTA would
be located in the contracting office, and that their primary
responsibility would be to assist the Small Business
Administration's Procurement Center representative. And general
counsel, the OSDBU office, our Office of Acquisition
Management, and Human Capital have worked in concert to finally
put this together. It was in December that I signed the letters
of assignment to our two non-NNSA SBTAs. The two NNSA SBTAs,
small business technical advisers, they had been assigned in, I
believe, November, and the position descriptions for those
SBTAs are being finalized this week, actually. So, it has been
a challenge, but I believe it has been worked out in a most
thorough fashion, and I look forward to getting a review from
either the SBA or GAO to confirm that for me and for the
agency.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Okay, I do not want to give up on the Expos,
but, again, I think the two pieces. In a culture that promotes
and celebrates entrepreneurship, the SBTAs should be a champion
of that and hopefully a desirable position that people are
seeking. But absent that, you do the annual Expo. How many
companies will typically come? You said over a thousand?
Mr. SMITH. A thousand attendees. At last year's Expo we
had, I believe, 741 business representatives, I should say,
maybe less businesses than that. There might have been multiple
members from a business. The others are internal stakeholders,
our program managers from the various sites. So last year the
total attendance was in the neighborhood of the high 800s.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Okay. And typically, this year is Houston.
Where has it been in past years?
Mr. SMITH. Last year it was in Kansas City. It has been in
Atlanta. I believe it was in Phoenix one of these recent----
Mr. SCHNEIDER. So it moves around the country quite a bit.
How do you measure the success, the outcome, the ability of
these Expos to generate--what we want is more contracts for
small businesses, more small businesses saying this is an area
I want to come into, more innovation that will give us the
solutions we need for our future.
Mr. SMITH. We measure that to a degree. I am not confident
we measure it maybe as well as we can. We do have post-Expo
Forum and Expo surveys to those who participated. We do ask if
they have been introduced to acquisition opportunities. But as
you can imagine, a survey that comes out 6 months after a Forum
and Expo may be too short a time period; that maybe there needs
to be a later reconnect. But there has been an effort to some
degree to determine the efficacy of the event and the utility
of the event.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Well, obviously, on this Committee, the
Small Business Committee, we all have an interest in promoting
small business growth and development. As Americans, we have a
profound interest in our energy future, energy security, and
having that entrepreneurship, having those small companies,
startup companies find a way to develop new ideas and take
those new ideas from concept to commercialization is crucial.
Having access to these markets obviously is important to them.
And I think if I can emphasize the point about a $30
million company, a startup is different than a $10 million
company; $10 million is different than $30; $30 is different
than $100. The more we can do to help these companies grow,
create American jobs, the better it is, I think, for our
economy and our future.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman BLUM. Thank you, Mr. Schneider.
Mr. Smith, you are new to this position. I think you said
5-1/2 months, is that correct?
Mr. SMITH. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BLUM. Can you give me just briefly your
background?
Mr. SMITH. Sure. When I left the Navy after college--I
spent 5 years in the Navy--from there I went and served in New
Jersey government and political positions. I was a deputy
commissioner of banking and insurance. I was a director of
intergovernmental affairs for Governor Christie Whitman. I most
recently served in Governor Christie's administration as a
director at the Department of Labor. In between that last
position I served 13 years in the investment banking business.
Small business is where it started out. For a couple years we
formed a joint venture with Bear Stearns. Bear Stearns, as we
all know, was subsequently----
Chairman BLUM. You were working focused on small businesses
then?
Mr. SMITH. At that time I was focused on actually securing
business from city and county governments, most specifically in
the purchase of delinquent property taxes for the investment
bank. There was a lot of headline risk associated with that
type of business. And consequently, JPMorgan shut the business
down. So that was----
Chairman BLUM. How big is your department right now? How
many people?
Mr. SMITH. Eleven full-time employees including myself.
Chairman BLUM. And you report to who?
Mr. SMITH. I report to the deputy secretary.
Chairman BLUM. Okay. And do you know how many employees are
in DOE total?
Mr. SMITH. We have about 105,000. I believe there are
12,000 government employees and 90,000 contracted employees.
Chairman BLUM. Wow. It takes my breath away. You have 11
employees. Do you feel you have an effective voice? I know 5-1/
2 months is not a long time. I mean, are you being heard or
have they got you in an office down next to the furnace in the
basement, so to speak?
Mr. SMITH. No. No, Mr. Chairman. We are being heard,
certainly. There is a strong commitment to small business,
because I think DOE has recognized, through its M&O business
model, the great innovation in energy, no pun intended, that
small businesses bring to our endeavors. Our budget, our office
budget is $3 million, but for 11 full-time employees, we have
90 small business program managers that, while they do not
answer to me directly, we work closely with. They are all
committed to expanding the engagement with small businesses.
They are all extraordinarily knowledgeable in their respective
areas of expertise at these labs and at these sites.
Chairman BLUM. How many deputy secretaries are there in
DOE?
Mr. SMITH. There is one deputy secretary, sir.
Chairman BLUM. And you report to that person, correct?
Mr. SMITH. Yes.
Chairman BLUM. Okay. Thanks for giving me your background.
I still have a small company and I have owned small
companies my entire business career. There are companies out
there that charge six figures to small companies to help them
navigate the maze that is the Federal Government and the
bidding process, and the approval process is beyond belief, at
least it was. And our company, a software development company,
was trying to get involved in international trade. We wanted to
sell more outside the United States. Now, I, as a small
business owner, should spend $100,000 or more to become
approved by the Federal Government to be an approved vendor to
maybe get involved in a bid or letting? To me that is a barrier
to entry. And very few small businesses, and I mean small
businesses, less than $30 million, $50 million, they are going
to shell out 100 grand for a maybe. Why should it be that way?
Why should this be so difficult?
And I get it. DOE and other agencies are like, well, you do
not want to deal with a company that is here today, gone
tomorrow. You have to do some checking. I understand that. But
really, I should have to spend $100,000 where I could be hiring
more employees, investing in my company, to navigate this? I
mean, would you agree with that statement? Or just comment on
that, would you please? And then what are you going to do to
try to make that go away for the DOE?
Mr. SMITH. Well, I appreciate that concern, Chairman. And I
would agree that it is not right that a company would need to
spend such an extraordinary amount of money in order to do
business with the Federal Government. I will say this, that our
office, our Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization
Office, and the other 24 Federal offices of Small and
Disadvantaged Business Utilization, we offer a lot of the
counseling, the direction, the instruction in how to interact
or best interact with the Small Business Administration. I
think between the OSDBU offices and the Small Business
Administration, and maybe we need to make small businesses more
aware of the services we provide, but----
Chairman BLUM. The small businesses that do business with
DOE or are trying to do business, do they have to be approved?
An approved vendor? Is there an approval process? I am not
talking about submitting a bid or trying to get a piece of the
business. I am talking about I know on the trade side back when
we did this 10 years ago, it was like you had to be approved
first, which I understand part of that. Do you have to be
approved to do business with the DOE? And if you do, how
lengthy is that process? How complicated is that process? How
many inches of pages is that process?
Mr. SMITH. Mr. Chairman, approved, per se, I do not believe
there is an approval process. I believe there may be
requirements.
Chairman BLUM. Could you check that if you are not sure,
and you are new so I will give you a pass on that, but could--
--
Mr. SMITH. I would be happy to check that, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BLUM.--you check that and get that back to me
personally?
Mr. SMITH. Yes, sir.
Chairman BLUM. If you have to be approved and what that
process is?
Mr. SMITH. Yes, sir. Will do.
Chairman BLUM. You are not aware of it, though?
Mr. SMITH. I am not aware of that. I am willing to gather
that specific projects will have specific requirements
necessary for businesses to compete in them, but as far as an
agency-wide approval, I am not aware.
Chairman BLUM. I will reserve the balance of my time. And I
will now yield to--I call him coach, but will yield to Mr.
Lawson for 5 minutes.
Mr. LAWSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Mr. Smith,
sometimes when you come in a little tardy you might have asked
the question. So I had a question for you and you can just tell
me, you know, whereas if you have said something about it.
One provision under the Small Business Act includes a
requirement to respond to notifications and solicitations
unduly restrict the ability of small businesses to compete for
contracts. And so what I was concerned about, the initiatives
that you have begun to help mitigate, any restricted contract
practices in agents. And I think you referred to some of it a
few minutes ago, but it would give you another chance to
respond to it so I would have a little bit better knowledge.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Congressman. I said earlier that the
GAO report had noted as a deficiency the agency's 15(k)(17)
undue restriction facilitating those for small business
concerns. I believe we have adequately addressed that. It is
what I consider an accomplishment in my short tenure, so far,
at the agency. But, as of a couple months ago, we now have on
our website a dedicated mailbox for small businesses to
communicate directly with us regarding any concerns they have
that a contracting opportunity may be unduly restrictive. We
monitor that mailbox daily.
We did receive an undue restriction notice that was
submitted to us by a small business concern. We forwarded that
small business concern to the contracting officer and to the
competition advocate, and within 48 hours they had amended the
request for proposal both to their satisfaction, because it
became a better request for proposal, and to the small
business' concerns satisfaction that they had been heard and
responded to in an manner that they deemed helpful.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay. And this is always the $10 million
question. What can Congress do to support small business and
DOE in helping DOE carry out the small business contracting
goal?
Mr. SMITH. In DOE, where we have been successful has been
at the top line. We have been successful at hitting the overall
small business prime and subcontracting goals. Where we have
struggled, and many agencies have struggled, has been in the
socioeconomic subcategories, specifically HUBZones and service-
disabled veteran-owned small businesses. The HUBZone
frustration amongst my colleagues, as I have come to realize in
other agencies, has been kind of the movement of the zones; the
fact that when a business becomes successful in a HUBZone and
people begin to receive greater compensation and move out of
the HUBZone, and some of the difficulties in maintaining kind
of an accurate business community that we can identify with and
engage with that satisfies Congress' desire to assist these
underutilized businesses and our desire to engage them. I think
if we could find some stability in finding a way to make that,
one, serve the purpose of the legislation, and two, maintain
some stability, that would be extraordinarily helpful.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay. And before my time runs out here, how
does DOE define small disadvantaged businesses?
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Congressman. DOE, these businesses
are defined for us by the Small Business Administration, and
the four socioeconomic categories of women-owned small
businesses; service-disabled veteran-owned small businesses;
historically underutilized businesses, HUBZones; and the 8(a),
the disadvantaged businesses. And those are the definitions
that we use in the Department of Energy.
Mr. LAWSON. Mr. Chairman, if I may for one second, are
those businesses given preferential treatment?
Mr. SMITH. Could you elaborate, Congressman?
Mr. LAWSON. What I mean by that, once you have them in the
system, do your staff take those businesses and say we kind of
need to work with these businesses because they are now in the
system that we have? Should we try to make sure that we do some
contracting work with them because of the category that they
are in?
Mr. SMITH. The short answer to that is yes, we do. We work
to advocate set-asides for those categories. In fact, there is
an initiative that I intend to undertake here in the short
term, in the form of a sample letter to our 90 or so small
business program managers to ask that their program elements
pledge to do two set-asides for HUBZones and service-disabled
veterans and women-owned small businesses in order to retain
their focus, if you will, on providing that preference.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman BLUM. Thank you, Mr. Lawson. That is a good line
of questioning. And toward that end, the subcategories, you
know, service-disabled and women-owned businesses and minority-
owned businesses, is there a plan in place? You said we are
missing the numbers. We are hitting at the top line for small
business, but we are missing the numbers in the subcategories.
Is there a plan in place or not today?
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have established
three priorities for fiscal year 2017, and they are in order,
one, improve socioeconomic subcategory performance; two, make
it easier for small businesses to do business with our agency;
and three, to improve our office's relationship, working
relationship with our internal stakeholders, our small business
program offices, and our contracting offices.
And directly to the plan of socioeconomic improvement, the
initiatives underneath that would be the set-aside, the request
for two set-asides in the socioeconomic subcategories to each
of our program elements, an initiative where I mentioned in the
testimony, last year we had our first annual Service-Disabled
Veteran-Owned Small Business Day. It was specifically dedicated
to service-disabled veteran-owned small businesses, so that we
could give them a day to interact with our program elements who
were there to offer them opportunities and matchmaking
sessions.
What we are going to do with the HUBZones, our intention is
to visit three HUBZones this year. At the moment we are looking
at one near--we are seeking one near--I am going to say it
wrong, excuse me--we are seeking one between Morgantown and
Pittsburgh, where we have a lab and we have a facility.
Chairman BLUM. So there is----
Mr. SMITH. There is a plan.
Chairman BLUM. There is a plan for the subcategories----
Mr. SMITH. Yes.
Chairman BLUM.--Mr. Lawson was asking about? Can you
provide that plan to this Committee?
Mr. SMITH. Yes, sir.
Chairman BLUM. And it already exists you are saying?
Mr. SMITH. Yes, sir.
Chairman BLUM. Okay. So in the next 60 days you can provide
us that plan and I will distribute it to the Ranking Member and
Mr. Lawson and the other members, as well as you are going to
provide us do companies have to be approved to even bid on
business, and what is that approval process. And I am a little
bit disappointed you do not know that after 5-1/2 months, if
they have to be approved and what the process is, because I
think that is a real barrier to entry, having to go through
that process. At least what our small company had to do, it was
onerous. It was unbelievable. And expensive. And most companies
say, no, I cannot afford it. You have to get lawyers involved.
Come on. They should not be, especially when we are talking
about small business. I think you would agree.
Mr. SMITH. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate and agree with that,
and I apologize to the Committee for not having an answer for
you on that.
Chairman BLUM. Another question is small business, I know
there are games that can be played out there and I have heard
them throughout the years with small businesses and getting
categorized certain ways by doing certain funny things. I
assume a small business cannot be a subsidiary of a big
business. You know, they set up this new small business and
they go, hey, we are now a small business and we are going to
go out and get a chunk of dough in addition to the other chunk
of dough we are getting from the Department of Energy because
now we are a small business, but they are not really because
the ownership mirrors the ownership of the big corporation. I
know you are new in the job. Are you aware of that game and,
hopefully, that cannot be played at DOE? Do you know?
Mr. SMITH. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I am new at the job and, yes,
I am aware of that game. And I am not aware specifically, but I
do know this concern is investigated to address specifically
that type of situation you described. I would be happy to get
back to you with the particulars on how that is done.
Chairman BLUM. Women-owned business, minority-owned
business, service-disabled businesses, these are great goals.
And I hope your plan does not say we are going to do these
things. I hope it says here is a number we want to hit. Here is
how we measure this. I am a business guy, so far too often in
government we do not measure things. And we just say, well, we
are going to do X, Y, and Z. And as Einstein said, if X, Y, and
Z is what we did today and we are going to do X, Y, and Z
tomorrow and expect different results, that is insane. So I
like to measure. You know, what is it today? Mr. Lawson's
questions were good on that point. What are we at today? And I
hope your plan says, and here is the goal. Now, granted, you
may not hit it. We get that. Nobody is perfect, but it is nice
to say here is where we are at today; here is how we are
measuring this, especially on these subcategories. Any thoughts
there?
Mr. SMITH. Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And having spent
many years in the investment banking world, I understand the
need for measurement of performance. And in this initial period
of my time at DOE, I am looking for baseline numbers. So the
short answer to your question is yes, but there is some
research that needs to be involved to see if we are indeed
moving more businesses, the numbers as far as how much does the
Forum and Expo contribute ultimately to the number of small
businesses that are being engaged by the Department, et cetera.
But we do have initiatives in place. There are some metrics,
but I will be candid with you. There has not been a well-enough
established baseline to give definitive metrics.
Chairman BLUM. Well, I am happy to hear, and thank you for
your candid answer. Candid is good. I am happy you are from the
private sector, and I think the incentives in government, and
you probably would agree with this, to me as a private sector
guy, sometimes seem upside down totally. And so I think if you
can bring some private sector thinking into your job that would
be a good thing overall.
And please let this Committee know if you feel like you are
not being paid attention to sufficiently in the Department. I
think it was Mr. Lawson asked about, what can we do as a
government to help you out? It is our job to make sure they
listen to you. So I am serious. If you get some great ideas and
you feel like they are not being listened to, let us know, let
me know, and we will go to bat for you.
Do any of the members have any further questions?
Mr. LAWSON. Mr. Chairman, I do not have a question, but I
just want to say there is a big push I know since I have been
here, and I am new, to really do something about getting
veterans not only into the agricultural business, but into
business in general that are coming out of the military. And so
that is going to be a significant push by all members, you
know, especially in our areas. And so I know that even though
they are very disciplined, but there are some areas where they
might fall down a little bit when you talk to the staff because
they have never been into this before. They spent 4 years in
the military or something of this nature, but I just wanted to
bring it out that there is going to probably be a lot more
concern about are we really working with our vets simply
because, I mean, all over America they are saying we have got
to do some more for our veterans.
Chairman BLUM. Would you like to comment on that?
Mr. SMITH. Well, I would like to say, Congressman, I could
not agree with you more. I have been heartened in my short time
to notice the Small Business Administration's focus, or at
least attention, to this very issue. And I am confident with
your eye on this, I think we will address what I agree is an
appropriate concern. As a former Service member myself, I full
well knew the feeling when I left, how do I do this? What do I
do now? And there is extraordinary talent in that group of
people. So I appreciate your concern on it.
Chairman BLUM. Seeing no further questions, I would like to
thank our witness, Director Smith, for being here today. I
appreciate and acknowledge, I think we all do, 5 months on the
job you are not going to have every answer. It is not easy. We
appreciate your testimony and we also appreciate the Office of
Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization's continued
efforts to provide small businesses in the energy sector the
resources they need to compete. Hopefully, through continued
efforts on behalf of the Department and the OSDBU, the
processes and programs in place to assist small businesses will
continue to become more effective and truly allow small
businesses the opportunity to grow and scale in such a very
important sector of the United States economy. As chairman of
the Subcommittee on Agriculture, Energy, and Trade, I look
forward to continuing to work with you and the Department of
Energy to achieve this goal.
Now, I ask the unanimous consent that members have 5
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
We are now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:34 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
Prepared Testimony and Statement for the Record of
Charles R. Smith, Director, Department of Energy,
Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization
Before the
United States House of Representatives
Small Business Committee Subcommittee on Agriculture, Energy
and Trade
January 18, 2018
Chairman Blum, my name is Charlie Smith and I am the
Director of the Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Small and
Disadvantaged Business Utilization (OSDBU) appointed in
September 2017. I also serve as a council member to the Office
of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization Council and
committee member with the Small Business Procurement Advisory
Committee. I have been working in this capacity with a focus on
small businesses to move the needle on this Department's goal
achievement through collaboration with the Small Business
Administration (SBA) and DOE's contracting activities.
DOE awards billions of dollars to small businesses every
year and has successfully met the prime small business goals
established by SBA since 2015. My focus during my time with
this Department is to not only continue to meet our prime
contracting and subcontracting goals, but also the subcategory
goals like Woman-owned, HUBZone, Service Disabled Veteran and
8(a) disadvantaged owned businesses.
In my testimony, I will provide DOE resources available to
small businesses as well as outline our business model and
discuss the multi-lab focus on small busine4ss engagement. I
will cover these topics in the following order:
First, an understanding of our business
model
Second, how that business model plays into
the labs that are foundational to the function of this
Department
Finally, what resources those labs and the
Department as a whole provide to small businesses to
help them contract with our Department
Department of Energy Business Model
The Department of Energy Organization Act of 1977 created
the cabinet-level US Department of Energy, combining defense
responsibilities that included the design, construction, and
testing of nuclear weapons dating from the Manhattan Project
effort to build the atomic bomb; and a loosely-knit
amalgamation of energy-related programs previously scattered
throughout the Federal government. Neither the scientific
expertise responsible for the physics underlying the
development of the weapons nor the manufacturing and
engineering expertise that produced the weapons had existed
within the Federal government. The government thus acted as
federal project manager, relying on scientists from academia
and the engineering and construction skills of industry.
This approach, unique in the federal government, has
continued at the Department, effectively tapping into private
sector expertise through the network of independent government-
owned, contractor-operated (GOCO) laboratories that meet the
Department's evolving missions through the benefit of America's
innovative and responsive business sector.
These laboratories are run by management and operating
contracts (M&O), a term used to describe the contracts that are
central to the DOE's business model.
DOE relies upon the M&O contractors for the performance of
the substantial part of the Department's mission--approximately
85 percent of DOE's obligations flow to the M&O contractors.
That reliance on the private sector's expertise allows DOE's
federal staffing to be a fraction of what would otherwise be
necessary to conduct its diverse missions.
M&O contracts have received special regulatory treatment in
the Government. Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR), at
Subpart 17.6, recognizes and codifies the special identity that
M&O contracts have with an authorizing Department. The FAR
coverage recognizes and authorizes Department acquisition
regulations that deal with the special nature of M&O contracts.
As of December 30, 2017 DOE has achieved 8.64% of the 10.2%
prime small business goal target. In the subcategories, we have
achieved 3.08% of the 5.0% goal for Small Disadvantaged; 2.07%
of the 5.0% goal for Woman Owned Small Businesses; 0.38% of the
3.0% goal for Service Disabled Veteran Owned Small Businesses;
and .34% of the 3.0% goal for HUBZone. DOE is projected to meet
the 10.2% goaling achievement but unclear of the grade we will
achieve due to the new scoring process being implemented by the
Small Business Administration.
The DOE Labs and Small Business
Most of the Department labs are operated by M&O
contractors. These contracts are reported through a data
collection process called Management and Operating Subcontract
Reporting Capability (MOSRC). The awards the M&Os make are
considered subcontracting, however, because they are treated as
an extension of DOE, their awards are counted as primes. The
data collection of these subcontract awards being counted as
prime awards is tracked through MOSRC.
The core objective of having established MOSRC is to
collect and provide the data in a manner acceptable to SBA that
would enable DOE to receive full credit toward achievement of
DOE small business prime contracting goals for its 1st-Tier M&O
subcontracts.
In measuring the engagement of federal agencies with small
businesses, SBA relies on the Federal Procurement Data System-
Next Generation (FPDS-NG) to record all federal obligations
flowing into prime contracts. As DOE's procurement model is
that of a subcontracting Department, DOE believes the FPDS-NG
calculations alone under-represents the Department's engagement
with small businesses through their M&O's subcontractors, which
account for approximately 85 percent of Department spending.
This data-gathering approach enables DOE to more accurately
portray the Department's ongoing commitment to working with
small businesses. This capability is essential in achieving
recognition for DOE's unique business model that leverages the
resources of our M&O contractors to accomplish DOE's mission,
creating the largest flow, upwards of $2 billion annually, of
appropriated funds to small businesses of all the civilian
agencies.
To this end, the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2014,
Title III, Section 318 authorized DOE to count 1st-Tier
subcontracts awarded by its M&O contractors to small businesses
toward accomplishment of its annual small business goals. DOE's
M&O contractors have independent, diverse business systems that
they use to manage subcontracting activities. Managed by the
external resource of DOE OSDBU, MOSRC centrally collects and
reports the 1st-Tier small business activity of DOE's M&O
contractors to SBA and the general public.
DOE resources and regulatory support for small businesses
There are several resources and regulatory support
functions provided to small businesses. Some have been
established for a while and some are new. We listen to the
customer and continue to expand resources based on the
communication and demand for process improvement.
We ``advertise'' small manufacturer's exemption in each
applicable consumer products energy conservation standards
rule. Under the energy conservation standards program, the
Secretary may determine via an exemption application if a small
manufacturer (businesses with less than $8M in annual revenue)
may be exempt from all or part of any energy conservation
standard for up to two years. Although there have been a few
exemption applications recently, we believe this exemption is
important to highlight as a resource for small businesses
constrained from entering a certain covered product market.
We point out any small business impacts to SBA Office of
Advocacy during the EO 12866 interagency review process. OSDBU
works with the SBA Office of Advocacy to share proposed or
final regulatory language with small businesses for their
input.
We recurrently post an updated forecast of contracting
opportunities. Making forecasts available to identify upcoming
Department requirements was established by Public Law 100-656,
the Business Opportunity Development Reform Act of 1988,
amending the Small Business Act to emphasize acquisition
planning. The law requires agencies to compile and make
available projections of contracting opportunities that small,
minority, veteran-owned, and women-owned businesses may be able
to perform. These rosters of planned service and supply
requirements of the Department serve as a business development
tool, guiding small businesses to adjust their capabilities to
better meet evolving needs of the Department. Acquisition
forecasts also serve small businesses in their use as an
internal acquisition planning resource--as requirements are
initially posted, stakeholders can contact the Department's
Small Business Program Managers, to discuss their capabilities
to perform the listed need. This engagement, in the early
stages of acquisition planning helps procurement personnel
shape the acquisition into a more small business friendly
format. DOE has its legislated Headquarters Acquisition
Forecast publically available, updated on a recurring basis.
Small businesses seeking the full range of Department needs are
also guided to research the 17 DOE M&O contractors' additional,
separate acquisitions forecasts, which list upcoming
requirements unique to their respective facilities.
We provide business forms on our website, email, phone
access so that companies can let us know when they feel that
there has been an undue restriction on competition. When small
businesses seek redress for alleged action or inaction of the
Department, DOE OSDBU is charged with fielding such concerns. A
challenge to the direct intervention and resolution of such
issues is steered by the privity of contract held between the
contracting officer and the contractor. As advocate for the
small business in this case, DOE OSDBU guides and recommends,
but does not direct a contractual action to take place, on
behalf of the impacted small business.
Our organization hosts an annual Small Business Forum &
Expo. Each year, OSDBU hosts DOE's Small Business Forum & Expo,
a multi-day conference that connects small business attendees
with DOE offices, power administrations, prime contractors and
subcontractors. The Forum & Expo offers a comprehensive roster
of educational workshops, where attendees can learn about
subjects such as how to respond to a sources sought notice, how
to obtain grant funding, and more. Attendees have the option to
participate in matchmaking exercises, in which small businesses
are allotted one-on-one time with a DOE specialist to ask
questions most pertinent to them.
In 2017 we hosted our first Veterans Conference to
emphasize the Department's commitment to Veteran-Owned Small
Businesses (VOSBs) and Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small
Businesses (SDVOSBs). OSDBU is dedicated to assisting veterans
who are interested in partnering with DOE. Over 200 business
representatives and DOE acquisition staff participated in a
full day of business development training, counseling, and
matchmaking. OSDBU looks forward to future iterations of this
annual event. To ensure DOE's ongoing support of VOSBs and
SDVOSBs, I have assigned a veteran on my staff to serve as
Veterans Liaison.
Over the last few years we have co-sponsored the
ChallengeHER Forum. This event emphasizes the Department's
commitment to Women-Owned Small Businesses (WOSBs). OSDBU is
co-hosting this year's event in partnership with Women
Impacting Public Policy, a nationally active WOSB advocacy
organization. The event will take place in Miami, FL and
promote DOE contracting opportunities for women.
In FY18 we are planning a HUBZone Forum to target this
small business category. The road trip across the country will
provide business development training, further advertise
upcoming contracting opportunities, and connect new businesses
with DOE buyers at our network of laboratories.
We also have an established Mentor-Protege Program (MPP) to
encourage seasoned contractors to provide business development
and sub-contracting opportunities to small businesses
interested in partnering with the Department. It is distinct
from SBA's MPP, by being an agreement, not a contract-based
business arrangement, enabling more flexibility of
participation by small businesses. OSDU has a concerted effort
underway to increase the Department's 28 MPP agreements in
FY18. In FY17 DOE OSDBU had 28 participants in the program
accomplishing about $10M in subcontracting.
Our office actively seeks to participate in outreach events
to continuously grow DOE's network of capable small businesses.
We not only host and attend events but specifically partner
with other OSDBU offices and share our resources for the
benefit of the government as a whole. In FY17, OSDBU attended
32 events, spanning all small business socio-economic
categories. Over 10,000 total attendees were present at these
events.
The Department is very involved in engaging small
businesses, and we look forward to including additional
obligations to small businesses that are not currently included
in SBA's goaling process and utilizing future goaling processes
through our enhanced partnership with the SBA. Some of these
include:
The Small Business Vouchers program (SBV) is in DOE's
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE). This
program is leveraging the world-class resources of the national
labs with the SBV program. Through the program, eligible small
businesses can tap into the reserve of national laboratory
intellectual and technical assets to overcome critical
technology and commercialization challenges. The program
fosters a strong partnership between the labs and clean tech
small businesses, benefiting both. While small businesses
receive access to state-of-the-art facilities and experts, the
national labs broaden their service to private-sector
technological development, supporting small business
development, job creation and American competitiveness. Since
March, 2016, the SBV program has awarded vouchers to 114
businesses worth a total of $22 million.
The Small Business Innovation Research and Small Business
Technology Transfer programs (SBIR/STTR) are operated through
DOE's Office of Science, spurring technological innovation by
investing in capable American small businesses. SBIR/STTR
encourages participation by socially and economically
disadvantaged small businesses, mirroring the Department's
overall goal to involve these firms in DOE's missions. In FY16,
SBIR/STTR awarded $216 million to small businesses to explore
technological innovation and to perform R&D. In FY17, the
programs awarded $242 million for those same purposes.
The Federal Energy Management Program (FEMP) is operated by
DOE's EERE office. FEMP helps federal agencies meet energy-
related goals by facilitating streamlined partnerships with
small energy service companies. FEMP also hosts an annual in-
person training event titled Energy Exchange, which provides
professional skill-building, training, and networking
opportunities. In addition, FEMP offers small businesses a
robust online training program free of charge.
The Gateway for Accelerated Innovation in Nuclear (GAIN)
program is operated by DOE's Office of Nuclear Energy to
provide the nuclear community with access to technical,
regulatory, and financial support. GAIN hosts workshops
discussing regulatory review processes, licensing processes,
industry consensus standards and Quality Assurance Program
development. As part of its mission, GAIN looks to involve the
American small business community in the innovation and
application of advanced nuclear technologies. To achieve this
goal, GAIN has implemented a small business vouchers program.
In FY16, eight small businesses received vouchers totaling $2
million.
In conclusion, I would like to state that our organization
is sensitive to the need for oversight of fair business
practices that open doors for small businesses to access
Federal contracting. I am personally focused, as a veteran
myself, to help service disabled veterans re-engage the
workforce through our Department's search for entrepreneurs, as
they bring knowledge, skills, dedication and a strong work
ethic to the agency. I appreciate Congress supporting the 25
federal OSDBU offices that help our Federal contracting
workforce assist capable small and disadvantaged businesses in
performing these contracts. I welcome any questions and look
forward to working with you, Mr. Chairman and this
Subcommittee, to further any efforts that aim toward that goal.
[all]