[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
,
[H.A.S.C. No. 115-83]
SPACE WARFIGHTING READINESS:
POLICIES, AUTHORITIES, AND CAPABILITIES
__________
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
MARCH 14, 2018
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
29-461
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Fifteenth Congress
WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, Texas, Chairman
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina
ADAM SMITH, Washington
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey
SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
ROB BISHOP, Utah
JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio
RICK LARSEN, Washington
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama
JIM COOPER, Tennessee
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania
MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas
JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
JOHN GARAMENDI, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California
JACKIE SPEIER, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
MO BROOKS, Alabama
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
PAUL COOK, California
RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio
COLLEEN HANABUSA, Hawaii
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama
CAROL SHEA-PORTER, New Hampshire
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma
STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
RO KHANNA, California
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
JIMMY PANETTA, California
MATT GAETZ, Florida
DON BACON, Nebraska
JIM BANKS, Indiana
LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming
JODY B. HICE, Georgia
Jen Stewart, Staff Director
Sarah Mineiro, Professional Staff Member
Leonor Tomero, Counsel
Michael Gancio, Clerk
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
Davis, Hon. Susan, a Representative from California, Committee on
Armed Services.................................................
2
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac,'' a Representative from Texas,
Chairman, Committee on Armed Services..........................
1
WITNESSES
Harrison, Todd, Director of Aerospace Security Project, Center
for Strategic and International Studies........................
6
Kehler, Gen C. Robert, USAF (Ret.), Former Commander, U.S.
Strategic Command..............................................
2
Loverro, Doug, Former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Space Policy, Department of Defense............................
4
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Harrison, Todd...............................................
79
Kehler, Gen C. Robert........................................
46
Loverro, Doug................................................
58
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services........................
44
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac''..........................
43
Documents Submitted for the Record:
[There were no Documents submitted.]
Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:
[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]
Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:
Mr. Banks....................................................
92
Mr. Larsen...................................................
91
Mr. Rogers...................................................
91
Mr. Turner...................................................
91
.
SPACE WARFIGHTING READINESS: POLICIES, AUTHORITIES, AND CAPABILITIES
----------
House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, March 14, 2018.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. William M. ``Mac''
Thornberry (chairman of the committee) presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM TEXAS, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED
SERVICES
The Chairman. The committee will come to order.
Last month, when Secretary Mattis testified on the new
National Defense Strategy, he said, quote, ``Our competitive
edge has eroded in every domain of warfare: air, land, sea,
space, and cyber,'' end quote.
That statement has two relevant points to today's hearing.
First, space is a domain of warfare, not just an enabler.
Second, we are falling behind where we should be when it comes
to space. Today's hearing will discuss how we catch up.
As we refocus our defense efforts on strategic rivals, it
is clear that they are putting significant effort into space. I
believe the American people still do not fully realize how
dependent our country is on space, not just for military and
intelligence purposes, but in our everyday lives as well. That
dependence creates a vulnerability, which, like in the other
domains, we must count on the American military to protect.
This committee is focused a lot on readiness and rebuilding
our military. When it comes to space, there are a number of
questions that need answers. For example, where should we be
making our investments? Are we attracting and developing the
right kind of space warfighters? Perhaps most crucially to me,
are we putting the appropriate intellectual effort into space
as a warfighting domain? We look forward to the insights that
our witnesses today can give us.
Finally, I would point out that this committee has been
very active in trying to prepare the military and the Nation
for the challenges of space. We have streamlined Air Force
acquisition authorities, eliminated red tape, empowered a
single accountable organization for space forces within the Air
Force, and empowered the Deputy Secretary of Defense to oversee
Air Force space reform efforts among other things. But we will
not relax our efforts. This topic is just too important.
I would yield to Mrs. Davis as the acting ranking member.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thornberry can be found in
the Appendix on page 43.]
STATEMENT OF HON. SUSAN DAVIS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General Kehler, Mr.
Loverro, and Mr. Harrison, we all welcome you, and we thank you
for being here. We look forward to your insights on adapting
space's contested domain and how we can protect our assets and
deter a war in space.
I ask unanimous consent to submit Mr. Smith's remarks for
the record.
The Chairman. Without objection.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith can be found in the
Appendix on page 44.]
Mrs. Davis. Thank you.
The Chairman. We appreciate each of you being here. We are
joined by General Robert Kehler, former Commander, U.S.
Strategic Command; Mr. Doug Loverro, former Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Space Policy; and Mr. Todd Harrison,
Director of the Aerospace Security Project for the Center for
Strategic and International Studies. Obviously, more complete
bios are in the materials on each of these gentlemen. Without
objection, each of your full written statements will be made
part of the record. And we look forward to your comments as
well as your answers to our questions.
General Kehler, the floor is yours.
STATEMENT OF GEN C. ROBERT KEHLER, USAF (RET.), FORMER
COMMANDER, U.S. STRATEGIC COMMAND
General Kehler. Thank you, and good morning, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Davis, distinguished members of the committee. I
am honored to be here with you today to present my views on
space warfighting readiness. I am especially pleased to be here
with my two long-time colleagues, and I want to thank the
members of the committee for your leadership on these important
matters. As a reminder, Mr. Chairman, the views I express today
are mine. I am not here representing the Department of Defense
or Strategic Command or the United States Air Force.
Mr. Chairman, the United States is perilously close to
losing the significant advantages that come from being the
world's leading spacefaring Nation, and time is not on our
side. Decades of dedicated investment in space have yielded
important warfighting and intelligence collection benefits for
the United States and our allies and partners. But our
adversaries and our potential adversaries have noted these
significant benefits and have moved aggressively to field
forces that can challenge our space capabilities from the
ground, through cyberspace, and in space.
As always, deterrence is the preferred outcome, and our
ability to deter a conflict that begins in or extends to space
is based on our readiness to fight such a conflict. I believe
classic deterrence theory applies to space. Adversaries will be
deterred if they believe they cannot achieve their objectives,
will suffer unacceptable consequences if they try, or both.
This is not the first time the U.S. has had to consider
challenges to our space capabilities, but today's problem is
potentially far greater in impact.
Given our dependence and that of our allies and partners on
space, the loss of critical assets today could prove decisive
to our ability to successfully prosecute a military campaign.
As a result, the United States has to be prepared to plan and
conduct complex operations in space that involve joint
interagency and combined, or allied, capabilities and forces in
the context of broader commercial, nongovernmental, and
international actors and interests. Space operations must
integrate seamlessly into multidomain operations. We should not
be preparing to fight (and deter) an isolated ``space war'' as
some headlines would suggest. Space is an integral component of
our warfighting structure, and challenges to our space
capabilities must be addressed within the context of that
structure.
As you pointed out, Mr. Chairman, there is a lot of work
underway to address the shortfalls, much of it stimulated by
your interest and that of Chairman Rogers and his subcommittee.
So let me take just a moment to highlight a few areas that I
believe deserve special attention.
First, national leadership has to align on a comprehensive
plan of action as well as the ends, ways, and means to
implement such an action plan. The national security space
enterprise exists within the overall national space enterprise,
and its success is linked to the viability and vitality of that
enterprise. The current National Security Strategy recognizes
that unimpeded access to and use of space is a vital national
interest and notes that the United States will respond to
threats to our vital national interests in space ``at a time,
place, manner, and domain of our choosing.'' To effectively
deal with a conflict that begins or extends into space, this
general policy has to be implemented in a manner that is
helpful to commanders and operational planning and execution.
Second, given the multiplicity of actors involved in
today's military operations, including space, it is important
to clarify the relationships and responsibilities among the
commander of U.S. Strategic Command, other U.S. Government
space operators, and other actors, like commercial space
operators, to ensure that we have unity of effort. Regarding
acquisition authorities, I think it is important to align
authorities with service responsibilities and delegate those
authorities to the lowest feasible level.
Third, countering an adversary's efforts to deny our space
capabilities begins with an operational concept, or CONOPS
[concept of operations]. Bringing the ongoing space CONOPS work
to conclusion and updating joint force CONOPS to account for
degraded or denied space capabilities are complementary and
high-priority activities.
Next, in my view, today's joint warfighting structure is
both appropriate and adequate to prepare for and fight a space-
related conflict. The commander of U.S. Strategic Command has
the necessary responsibility and authority to organize his
command for warfighting effectiveness, and, by the way, those
changes are underway, to develop plans to conduct exercises to
establish relationships over which he doesn't have command
authorities, and, basically, to do the things necessary to make
sure that we are prepared. This is the same process we use for
the other domains and the other commands, and if we use that
same process, that is going to help us ensure integration of
space with other efforts.
Finally, space and other forces have to be equipped and
trained to fulfill their mission responsibilities in the face
of determined adversary action against space assets. Capability
architectures, not just space architectures, but capability
architectures have to become more resilient and defendable, and
all forces have to be prepared and equipped to operate in an
environment that assumes space assets will be degraded. Rapid
acquisition, aggressively leveraging commercial capabilities,
better integration with allies and coalition partners, and
realistic training all play a role in addressing these issues.
Mr. Chairman, you asked for my perspective on the current
readiness of U.S. forces to succeed and successfully operate in
a conflict that begins in or extends to the space domain. In
summary, we are not yet where we need to be, but I am
encouraged by the focus, commitment, and sense of urgency I see
from all parties. Fortunately, we are not starting from
scratch. The young men and women that make up our space forces
and their leaders provide the solid foundation we need to meet
the challenge.
Following Desert Storm, the United States Air Force and
others made great progress in bringing space support to
national leaders and the warfighters. Now it is time to shift
from a mindset that presumes space superiority to a mindset
prepared to gain and maintain space superiority as a first
condition of providing that support. From acquisition to
operational execution, the U.S. needs to field a force that is
ready for space conflict.
Thanks again for inviting me, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of General Kehler can be found in
the Appendix on page 46.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Loverro.
STATEMENT OF DOUG LOVERRO, FORMER DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR SPACE POLICY, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Mr. Loverro. Chairman Thornberry, Mrs. Davis, members of
the subcommittee, I am pleased to be here today to join General
Kehler and Mr. Harrison to talk to you about an issue that is
critical for the Department of Defense [DOD] and for our Nation
and, as you have already said, DOD space warfighting readiness.
Space is vital to our national security. It underpins DOD
capabilities worldwide at every level, from the engagement in
humanitarian assistance, to conventional conflict, and up to
and including nuclear war. As importantly, space provides a
lifeblood to U.S. economic vitality empowering the lives of our
citizens worldwide, and it increasingly represents one of those
rare industrial sectors in which the U.S. continues to hold and
expand its unqualified advantage.
In all three space sectors, national security, civil, and
commercial, the U.S. leads the world. Let's make no mistake
about that. But while our leadership in both civil and
commercial space remain secure, our leadership and our
capabilities in national security sector are being actively and
aggressively challenged just as General Kehler has stated.
Our adversaries know that the U.S. military relies on space
to empower its operations and to wield an overwhelming military
advantage, and they don't like it. That understanding was
succinctly stated by Chinese strategist Wang Hucheng two
decades ago, when he wrote that ``for countries that can never
win a war with the United States by using the methods of tanks
and planes, attacking U.S. space system may be an irresistible
and most tempting choice.'' His observation was not just idle
speculation. It became the basis for Chinese and Russian
strategy, which they have been working on ever since, and which
they will soon bring to fruition.
Understanding all this, the question posed by the hearing
today, are U.S. space warfighting forces ready, becomes
particularly pertinent to understand. Unfortunately, my answer
is not that different from General Kehler's answer. No, we are
not ready. Or more properly, I don't believe we are on the firm
path to be ready. Before we discuss why, let me make two things
emphatically clear. First and most critically, this is
absolutely not an indictment of the incredible members of our
military armed services and intelligence community charged with
this responsibility. They stand ready to maintain U.S. space
capabilities in every way humanly possible, given the tools at
their disposal. It is the tools that are not up to the task.
Second, no adversary should mistake that statement as an
invitation to attack. The fact is that U.S. space forces are
robust. And faced with any attack that could be mounted today,
I am fully confident they will continue to provide the U.S.
with the warfighting edge to assure an adversary's defeat. But
the harsh reality is that our current ability to withstand an
adversary attack is based not on our warfighting readiness but,
rather, their lack of a fully developed and operationalized
threat. If that threat did exist, then I feel the answer would
be quite different.
In your invitation to appear here today, you cited several
elements that must be assessed to gauge our warfighting
readiness. Those elements included policies, current and future
capabilities, allied and commercial integration, and our
organizational structure. In my written statement, I have
addressed each one, and I would ask that those all be included
in the record.
Finally, before I close, let me add two more thoughts.
First, to echo General Hyten and General Kehler have stated
over and over again, deterrence and war do not occur in
isolated domains, rather it is at the sum of our capabilities
and actions across all domains that leads to deterrence during
peace and victory during war. But the role that space plays in
this equation is paramount, because losing space degrades not
only our space capability, but degrades our capability in the
three other terrestrial domains as well. Assuring space forces
survive assures the ability of those terrestrial forces to
succeed, and that leads to the deterrence we seek.
Simultaneously, we must accept that no capable adversary
will hesitate to exercise their sovereign ambition to eliminate
the U.S. space advantage. Regardless of how ready our space
forces are, that readiness will not deter a determined attack.
Therefore, we must make certain that our space forces can
withstand such an onslaught.
Second, while the question of space warfighting readiness
is made up of many elements, I want to elevate one of them
above all others. That is, the human capital element, or, more
specifically, the people. In my testimony, I have pointed to
several areas where we need to reassess our plans, our budget,
and our strategy. And I know that if we want to, we can reshape
those plans and our budget and close the short-term readiness
gap.
But in the long term, we must face the fact that to remain
ahead over the next half century, we are going to need to grow
the kind of space leaders that can think doctrinally,
technically, and operationally for space in the same way we
grew those leaders in the 1930s and 1940s for air. We could
have not done it for air from within the constraints of the
pre-World War II Army personnel system. Likewise, we would not
be able to do it for space from within the constraints of our
first pre-war Air Force personnel system.
In 1937, General Frank Andrews, for whom Andrews Air Force
base is named, wrote, ``I don't believe any balanced plan to
provide the Nation with an adequate, effective Air Force can be
obtained without providing an organization individual to the
needs of such an Air Force.'' The creation of the United States
Air Force propelled changes in air power that moved our Air
Force from the equal of its contemporary counterparts to a
modern force that is, hands down, the best in the world.
The same will be true for space. If we are to assure U.S.
space warfighting readiness far into the future against the
rising threats we see today and those that we will face
tomorrow, we must establish, either within or outside the Air
Force, an organization individual to those space needs.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Loverro can be found in the
Appendix on page 58.]
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Harrison.
STATEMENT OF TODD HARRISON, DIRECTOR OF AEROSPACE SECURITY
PROJECT, CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL STUDIES
Mr. Harrison. Chairman Thornberry, Representative Davis,
and members of the committee, I want to begin by thanking you
for the opportunity to testify today on this important and
timely topic. I also want to thank my CSIS [Center for
Strategic and International Studies] colleagues who have
contributed to our work in this area, especially Zack Cooper,
Kaitlyn Johnson, and Thomas Roberts. While the thoughts I am
sharing today draw from the work our team has done, the
opinions I express are not intended to represent those of my
colleagues or CSIS.
The United States is critically dependent on space across
the full spectrum of conflict from counterterrorism operations
to high-end combat against a near-peer adversary. This
dependence on space creates a vulnerability because our space
systems are not protected across the full spectrum of threats.
Conflict that begins or extends into space, particularly if it
becomes kinetic, will not end well for anyone. Our primary
focus should therefore be on deterring conflict in space, and I
believe there are three main areas where we can do more to
improve our deterrence posture and the readiness of our space
forces.
First, we need a clearer understanding and articulation of
the thresholds for escalation in space, especially at the lower
end of the spectrum of conflict. Ambiguous escalation
thresholds can invite grey zone aggression in space as we are
seeing occur in other domains today. Adversaries are probing at
the seams and finding ways to advance their own ambitions
without triggering direct, overt conflict with the United
States. What is different about the space domain is that we
have little history to draw upon or widely accepted norms of
conduct to serve as reference points. It is, therefore, in our
interest to work with international and commercial partners to
establish sensible norms of conduct and to abide by them.
Another complicating factor is that adversaries can use
methods of attack against our space systems that are difficult
to detect and attribute and may have reversible effects, such
as jamming, lasing, and cyberattacks. It is nearly impossible
to deter an attack if you cannot attribute the source of the
attack, or know with confidence that the effects being
experienced are, in fact, malicious. We cannot establish clear
and credible thresholds without the ability to detect and
attribute threats to our space systems in a timely manner.
A second area where we should be focusing more effort is
the development of innovative space capabilities. We are in the
midst of a renaissance in commercial space, but it is difficult
for the military to stay attuned to these advances if
acquisition officers are rotating into space programs with
little, if any, prior space experience. One potential remedy is
for the Air Force to create a dedicated cadre of space
acquisition professionals, both civilian and uniformed
military, that are managed separately from the rest of the Air
Force acquisition workforce. This would allow for more specific
training, a deeper level of technical knowledge, and more
relevant career experiences.
The slow pace of the budgeting process is also a major
roadblock to improving capabilities. Under the normal budget
process, it takes about 2 years to move from having an idea to
having funding to pursue that idea. Given the pace of
innovation, especially in software and electronics, that is
simply too long. One potential solution is to create something
like a working capital fund for space innovation with greater
flexibility and authorities. This would be particularly helpful
for smaller prototyping and rapid response programs.
A third and final area I believe needs more attention is
the problem of communicating our thresholds and capabilities.
While certain aspects of our national security space systems
must remain secret to be effective, too often the U.S. military
and intelligence community default to over-classification.
Secrecy invites suspicion among our allies and partners and
does little to deter our adversaries. The over-classification
of information inhibits our ability to work with international
partners and commercial firms, both of which can play an
important role in improving the resilience of our space
systems. And just as important, over-classification is
effectively an overhead tax on all our space activities, adding
complexity and time to everything we do.
Another way to improve the communication of thresholds is
to be more explicit with commercial space operators about how
attacks on their systems will be treated. Without such clarity,
commercial space operators may not be willing to accept the
risk of doing business with the government in the event of a
crisis. One approach to consider is an indemnification program
for commercial satellite operators that will cover losses
incurred due to a conflict in exchange for commitment by these
firms to prioritize U.S. Government customers in a crisis.
In conclusion, much remains to be done to improve the
readiness of our national security space forces for the wide
range of threats we face today. I commend the committee for
focusing attention on these issues and holding the Department
of Defense accountable for strengthening our deterrence posture
in space.
I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Harrison can be found in the
Appendix on page 79.]
The Chairman. Thank you all.
Mr. Loverro's statement really got my attention where he
says not only are we not ready, we are not on the path to be
ready. Now, this committee deals with lots of issues that we
are not going to solve all of a sudden. But I think a lot of
times, the question for us is are we on the right path? Are we
getting there? Now, we may have differences sometimes about the
sense of urgency, how quickly and so forth. But if we are not
on the path to be ready, I think that is a pretty significant
thing that should require us to rethink our path.
General Kehler, do you agree that we are not on the path to
be ready?
General Kehler. I think it depends on what he means. I
don't quite understand--so I am not going to speculate. I will
just say, I am not aware of--I don't think I am aware, as an
outsider now, of everything that is going on. What I am aware
of, though, I think, is significant. And if we break this down
and say are we doing the warfighting things that are necessary,
plans, courses of action, establishing command relationships,
all of those things, I believe those steps are underway. That
is because we fight with combatant commanders, and we have a
combatant commander focused on this. And so, A, I think the
warfighting steps that are necessary are underway in order for
us to have better plans and exercises and all the things that
go with that.
In terms of organizing, training, and equipping, I think
that the--again, from what I have seen, I think that some
significant decisions have been made in terms of architectures,
et cetera. I am not clear that the acquisition has caught up
with that, and I would question whether our acquisition
processes are sufficient to do what needs to be done in the
near term.
Beyond that, I would not blanket say that we are not on the
right pathway. But I respect Doug Loverro's views on this, and
I would be interested in hearing more about why he thinks that.
I might agree with him. But as a blanket statement, I don't.
The Chairman. Okay. Mr. Harrison, do you have an opinion if
we are on a path to be appropriately ready for warfighting in
space?
Mr. Harrison. I would have to lean more towards Mr. Loverro
on this one. I would say that--to what General Kehler said, in
terms of operations and our operational readiness today, I
think we are making good progress, as far as I can tell as an
outside observer. I think when it comes to long-term readiness,
though, which depends much more on the space architectures that
we are building and how we are thinking about operations in the
future and how we are moving out towards acquiring the
capabilities that we need, I don't think we are on the right
track there. I think we have been stalled for several years
now. For almost a decade, we have been stalled in transitioning
to more resilient space architectures. And so in that sense, I
think that we are not on a good path. We could do much better.
The Chairman. Okay. Mr. Loverro, do you want to add to your
statement?
Mr. Loverro. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would be pleased to.
So, first of all, let me echo what both General Kehler and
Mr. Harrison have said. We are working the warfighting plans.
We are integrating space into those warfighting plans. That is
active, ongoing. It began, really, under General Kehler, under
his leadership, and has continued ever since. And, again, with
the tools we have at hand, our warfighters and our war planners
are doing the best they have.
The problem we have is that, while we have an excellent
vision for what we do need, and, in fact, General Hyten, who
appeared before this committee earlier, last week, created what
he called the space enterprise vision. And that vision is
excellent and comprehensive. We can argue whether or not it is
perfect, but it is a very good vision.
But the plan that the Department of Defense submitted to
this Congress, which is called the budget, doesn't reflect that
vision. It does not reflect the elements necessary to make that
vision happen. And I will point to three specific areas that
are missing.
Number one, the space enterprise vision includes extensive
cooperation with allied and commercial, as both General Kehler
and Mr. Harrison have said. And yet, there is zero investment
in that commitment in the budget.
Second, everybody in space understands that in order to
operate in space effectively and to learn how to operate in
space, you are going to need to exercise and exercise
extensively. That requires test assets. That requires test
infrastructures.
In my written testimony, I speak to the Red Flag exercises
that occur at Nellis Air Force Base. The Air Force spends a lot
of money practicing operational tactics and doctrine. We do not
have an investment that represents that in space.
And lastly, the things that are in the budget represent
more old school space architectures that are fundamentally
almost impossible to assure the new space architectures that
would lead towards assurance, and they are 10 years late. We
have a SATCOM [satellite communications] jamming threat today.
Today, if we went to war in the Pacific, our PACOM [U.S.
Pacific Command] commander would be hard-pressed to
communicate, and yet we have nothing on the books until about
2027 to solve that problem for him. And by that time, the
adversary will have gone through two or three generations of
his capability. That is what I mean by not being on the path.
The Chairman. Okay. I think there is a lot to follow up on,
and I know members will want to.
Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to all
of you. In many ways, I think you just addressed part of that,
Mr. Loverro, of, you know, where are the gaps. I mean, what is
it specifically? And, Mr. Harrison, if you could, perhaps, pick
up on that, whether it is the way the Pentagon is organized on
some levels. We have talked about refining even what kind of
unified or sub-command there is. What--are there authorities
that are missing? Is it culture? Often it is. We know that
there is a slow pace sometimes to move ahead in a risk-adverse
culture.
Can you help us define a little bit more of what is slowing
that down and what, at this point, if, in fact, you are
suggesting that we really haven't planned that for the budget,
what is it that specifically could be done with some of those
authorities?
Mr. Harrison. Well, first, I think a lot of it is culture,
that you have got a space community that many of the people
grew up in an environment where space was considered to be more
benign. I would argue it was never benign. There are always
threats. The difference, though, was that we were more
confident in our ability to deter threats in the past, and so
we were willing to assume sanctuary. We had that posture for so
long, I think we forgot that it was an assumption. And now, we
are facing proliferation of threats, not just, you know, with
adversaries like Russia and China that have pretty
sophisticated space programs themselves, but all the way down
to the level of nonstate actors that can use jamming equipment.
They can acquire it. They can build it. They can operate it.
And I think we have been very slow because of the culture they
built up over time to respond to that.
Part of it also is the acquisition culture. And, you know,
I worked in this as a contractor, and I can tell you that, you
know, we have built up institutions within the Air Force and
the other services as well, to a lesser extent, though. We have
built up institutions within our military, within our FFRDCs
[federally funded research and development centers] that
support the military, and even within our defense industry. And
those institutions are centered around the types of
capabilities that we needed in the past when deterrence was
more assured.
They are very slow to adjust. Those institutions are very
slow to adjust to the threats that we are facing today. And so,
I think that is where we need to light a fire under people.
Mrs. Davis. Could you be just a little more specific about
that?
Mr. Harrison. So, for example, we got into a mindset of
building highly aggregated, very expensive satellites in small
numbers. And it has proven incredibly difficult over the past
decade to get the Air Force and the specific program offices to
break out of that mind set, that maybe we cannot be building
these exquisite Battlestar Galactica satellites where we
aggregate as many things on them as possible. There were good
reasons to do that in the past. Those reasons don't exist
anymore, and that is actually a vulnerability. We need to
figure out how to build more resilient, more dispersed
architectures. And I think people are just slow to make that
transition because they grew up in an environment where it was
all about aggregation.
Mrs. Davis. Is there an alternative to that? Anybody want
to--in that domain that you would suggest?
General Kehler. Well, there are. First of all, I agree with
what is being said. I think we are where we are not because
people have slapped their forehead and said we don't know this,
but for lots of reasons. Part of it has been priorities. When
our priorities are elsewhere, and we see that not only in
space, but we see that in the nuclear forces, we see that in
other parts of the Department of Defense where our priorities
have been elsewhere. I do think there are cultural issues. I do
think there are other things that contribute to this. Resources
and how many resources we have put to these issues, et cetera.
I do think there is a cultural issue. I do think that we
have the pieces in place to address those cultural issues. I
think that we have been slow to try to address some of those. I
would like to see us pull those pieces together, and I would
like to see us give some of the current leadership more
authority to move faster. And I think we must deal with our
acquisition issues.
Mrs. Davis. Yeah. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Wilson is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I very much--and
thank each of you for being here. I very much appreciate the
focus that the Department of Defense is putting forth on this
space area of responsibility, and I am particularly grateful
for the leadership of the domain of space by Chairman Mike
Rogers and Ranking Member Jim Cooper and their very visionary
sponsorship of legislation in this field now has been adopted
by President Donald Trump. So they are very effective
individuals.
As we continue to advance our own technologies, we have to
understand and be prepared for the expansion of capabilities of
our adversaries across all four orbits of outer space. And in
particular, can you identify, the best you can, the
capabilities and challenges that other nations have identified
for their activities in space, beginning with General Kehler?
General Kehler. Sir, I think that--at least what I have
observed, both in uniform and now subsequent to that, is that
our near-peer competitors--if you single out Russia and China
in particular, they have developed strategies that are
specifically intended to diminish our ability to project power,
diminish our ability to have global awareness, to fracture us
from our allies. All of the things that we see them doing at
the strategic level have a space component to them. And they
have been aggressively pursuing capabilities that allow them to
execute that kind of a strategy. It is part of what we would
talk with the Chinese about--talk about the Chinese in terms of
anti-access/area denial strategies. With the Russians, we talk
about their interest to dominate in the near abroad. They have
escalation strategies that they believe involve space, et
cetera.
And so, I think we need to make sure we understand their
strategic approach and how space fits into that in order to be
able to counter it.
Mr. Loverro. Congressman Wilson, let me add to what General
Kehler said. And I agree exactly with what he said. Let me
change the discussion less from the strategic side and more to
the material side, if I might. And if you will permit me, I
would like to just correct something that you mentioned,
because it is a misconception almost everybody has.
You talked about the four orbits that we have. Kepler
defined an infinite number of orbits. We choose to use four.
That is a foolish choice. Back in the 1960s, we launched
satellites that today sit halfway between the Earth and the
moon to observe nuclear tests on the face of the Earth. We knew
how to do that in the 1960s. We understood that they were safer
and more resilient that far away, and we could still conduct
our mission.
The adversary has seen how we operate in the four orbits
that you talked about. They are ready to target every one of
them, and they will target them in such a way that it will be
very difficult for us to defend our capabilities. We are not
constrained by gravity or physics to those placements. And yet
culturally, we have a hard time moving away from them. And it
is a very important strategic concept to understand. It is one
of those blind spots that we don't allow our people to think
about, because being in geosynchronous orbit for communications
is convenient. But the Army doesn't march on the sides of ridge
rather than in the valley because it is convenient. They march
on the sides of ridge rather than the valley because it is more
protected.
For military capability, we may be convenient to be in
geosynchronous orbit, but it is not militarily wise to be in
geosynchronous orbit. And we can launch satellites in other
orbits that are far harder for an adversary to attack, much
more easily to attribute the attack once the attack occurs, and
much more easy to go ahead and have a proliferated
constellation of capability.
Mr. Harrison. Thank you for the great question.
You know, I think we are seeing our adversaries do several
things. So first of all, they see the great advantage space
provides us. And in some cases, they are trying to copy us and
build similar space systems for themselves. We also see many of
our adversaries trying to counter us and to blunt our advantage
in space by developing counterspace weapons.
And, you know, to build on what Mr. Loverro said, we
shouldn't just think about counterspace weapons as kinetic ASAT
[anti-satellite] weapons, missiles that go up, blow up a
satellite, create a bunch of debris. Those are troubling, but
we can attribute those very quickly. We know where they come
from. And it is an overt act of war if someone does that.
So I think we are better able to deter those types of
threats and respond to them. What I am concerned about are the
non-kinetic types of threats that we face in space.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, and I look forward to
identifying who nonstate actors are, too.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I don't think anyone on the panel would say our space
policy is a disaster and we don't know what we are doing, and
so on. But it seems like we are at an inflection point a little
bit where we need to move faster than we are to change. Sort of
like the guy on The Ed Sullivan Show. He is spinning 17 plates
at the same time trying to keep them all up and unable to
prioritize, because you can't. You have to keep all of them up
instead of running around trying to do this. And I feel that we
are kind of at that inflection point in space policy, like we
are moving around from plate to plate to keep them all up in
order to move to that next step.
And so I don't know how timely my question is, because I
think one of the plates that is getting spun here has to do
with the workforce side of it and what kind of workforce do we
need in the future. But if we don't have an idea of policy,
then we don't know what kind of workforce we need in space and
what kind of warfighter we need for space.
But having said that, maybe you can help answer some of
those questions, like the kind of capabilities and
qualifications that are needed now, and whether it is test
pilots or space acquisition professionals or satellite
communications specialists. Who do we need in our military and
civilian side of the world and the Pentagon to implement
whatever we are moving towards?
General, have you given some thought to that over the last
4 years and--3 years in retirement or----
General Kehler. It might surprise you to know that, yes, I
have. And especially the last couple of days, before coming
here.
And, by the way, all the way back to 2001, when then the
Space Commission reported out that developing what they called
the space cadre was going to be one of the critical things that
needed to happen as we went forward. So if we were looking at
the kind of space talent that we need in the future, I would
say it is mixed. We are going to need people in uniforms who
understand the basics and fundamentals of joint warfighting,
while at the same time having expertise in the space domain and
the technical requirements that go along with it. Think about
submariners and submarines and the underwater environment here
as a model for what we need. Those are warfighters, but they
operate in a unique domain with unique platforms that can do
things by themselves as well as operate with task forces, et
cetera, et cetera. I think it is a good model for us to think
about.
We need civilians who work in the Department of Defense and
come to work every day with the deeper technical expertise and
savvy in order to be thinking about how do we bring commercial
opportunity in as well as do government development. We need
good researchers and development kind of people. We need that
as an instrument as well. And we need an industry that can
support what is needed in the future, and we need to leverage
the talents and skills and entrepreneurial spirit that we find
in the commercial world.
So it is a blend of all those things, sir. I think that
uniform people have a specific job to do here, and a skill set
that is required that is a little different than those others,
because they are the ones that actually have to go employ
forces in combat. But it is a broader set of questions, and we
need a team that covers this skill set. By the way, cyberspace
is a huge part of all of this, and so we need people that are
very smart there as well.
Mr. Larsen. Mr. Loverro.
Mr. Loverro. Yes. Thank you.
So I want to echo again what General Kehler said and expand
it.
So what he described--when I listen to what he described,
that describes a space-smart force for the Nation, a force made
of civilians and military and the industrial base that supports
it. Let me not talk about the industrial base as much as the
folks that are inside the DOD.
Space is a different kind of domain than air in the same
way that undersea is a different domain than surface
combatants. The Navy actually allows its three fundamental
mission areas to grow separately. The career path for a
submariner is different than the career path for a surface
warrior is different than the career path for a naval aviator,
as it should be. Those domains are different. They require
different skills, different training, different experience.
The same is true for space. Space is a different kind of
domain than air. We don't need to move it out of the Air Force
in order to go ahead and create the space-smart civilian and
military force that we need. But we need to allow it to grow
differently than the way we would grow air officers, because
those are different skill sets, different domain experiences,
different technical requirements, and different operational and
tactical problems.
Mr. Larsen. Yeah. Thank you.
I will send a few more questions for the record.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really appreciate
you all being here. Talking about this is very important, raise
awareness of the concerns that we have, the threats that we
face. It is unfortunate, as Mr. Harrison talked about, that we
have over-classification of a lot of this information. The
American people need to know it, the Congress needs to know,
which is why I am glad you are here, about these threats, our
vulnerabilities, and how we have to get after this.
I was also pleased to see on social media a few minutes ago
that Secretary Wilson, Heather Wilson, is testifying before the
House Appropriations Defense Subcommittee this morning. The
first question that Chairman Granger gave her was about
President Trump's call for a space force. She politely said,
``We look forward to the conversation.''
But I do look forward to this conversation. We are in my
wheelhouse right now, and I appreciate all of you-all. You are
all very sharp people.
General Hyten at STRATCOM [U.S. Strategic Command] and
General Harris at PACOM have told us that in just a relatively
short period of time, both China and Russia have become our
peers, not our near peers, our peers in space and, moreover,
are on a trajectory to surpass our capabilities soon, because
they are putting a larger percentage of their defense assets
against this capability. And they have organizationally
restructured.
Do you share that opinion? Is that your view as well, that
unless we do something dramatically different, that we are
going to be surpassed by China and Russia in that domain?
General Kehler. Yes.
Mr. Rogers. Mr. Loverro.
Mr. Loverro. Sir, I would hate to ever disagree with
General Hyten; he is a good friend and I have known him a long
time. I disagree that they are our peers. I do agree with him
that they are on a path to surpass us if we don't go ahead and
get our act together.
Mr. Rogers. Mr. Harrison.
Mr. Harrison. I think that Russia and China, we have to
view them as differently, because they have different
histories, so they are coming from different trajectories.
Russia was a great space superpower back in the day under the
Soviets. They degraded significantly after the fall of the
Berlin Wall. But in recent years they have made a lot of
efforts to regain a lot of their space capabilities, and they
can still draw on that technical heritage that they had in the
past, especially in terms of counterspace weapons that they had
developed during the Cold War. They have that know-how. They
have that expertise. It is not that difficult for them to field
it again, and understand how to use it operationally.
China is a different situation. They were not a great space
power in the past. They are catching up. But I would agree with
the sentiment that if they are not a peer today, they will be
in the near future if both countries continue on the trajectory
they are now.
Mr. Rogers. And will surpass us if we don't make some
changes.
Mr. Harrison. If we don't make some changes, it would not
be hard at all for them to surpass us.
Mr. Rogers. And would you agree that we have become heavily
dependent on space to fight and win wars?
Mr. Harrison. Absolutely. As I said in my oral and written
testimony, we are heavily dependent on space across the full
spectrum of combat. It is not just, you know, nuclear war. It
is not just high-end combat. It is--even peacetime presence
activities, we would not be able to operate as effectively as
we do today without space.
Mr. Rogers. So, again, leading questions. So would you
agree that not making dramatic changes to get after this is not
an option?
Mr. Harrison. I would agree it is not an option. We
desperately need to make a change in course, and where we are
headed today.
Mr. Rogers. When you look at the Air Force budget in the
last decade for space programs, would you say it represents, or
reflects, that the Air Force views space as a priority?
Mr. Harrison.
Mr. Harrison. I think it reflects that we have stalled in
our thinking. We have gotten frozen with fear, and we have not
been able to make up our mind as an Air Force and as a nation
on how we are going to move out to address these threats. So I
think it has been stalled.
Mr. Rogers. Mr. Loverro, same question. Does their budget
reflect space being a priority?
Mr. Loverro. I don't think so, sir. The DOD budget this
last year went up by 16 percent. The space budget went up by 7
percent.
Mr. Rogers. Same question, General Kehler.
General Kehler. So I was part of that. And what I would
tell you is you have to be careful here, because the Air Force
went through a time where almost every single space asset was
recapitalized, from missile warning to GPS [Global Positioning
System] to communications to the infrastructure that supports
it. And so there was an investment time in the Air Force where
that consumed a significant part of the Air Force's budget.
Since then, no. And, again, I think acquisition problems,
saving the programs of record has been a real problem. And, by
the way, I would agree, to just put a finer point on it, yes,
if we don't act, there will be consequences for us in the
future with Russia and China. But I also agree that--or I do
not agree that they are necessarily our peers right now.
Mr. Rogers. Okay.
The Chairman. Mr. Cooper.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I will not let you off as easily as Chairman Rogers did. I
would like each of you to answer two questions. Number one,
what did the President mean yesterday when he said space force?
And, number two, what should he have meant in his remarks?
General Kehler. I notice my good colleagues were looking in
my direction, sir.
Well, I don't know what he meant, sir, to be honest with
you. I am not an insider, and so I don't have the benefit of
knowing sort of what conversations have been held with the
Commander in Chief on this. So I really don't know.
What should he have meant is really another question about
what we should do. And I would tell you that while I think
steps are necessary beyond what has been taken to date, to me,
this is a matter of degree. If you are going to do something
dramatic, then I think there is more than one model you could
follow. And I would be urging that you carefully consider
those, because there are pros and cons to each one of those
models.
When I commanded Air Force Space Command before I commanded
U.S. Strategic Command, I thought I was commanding most of the
Nation's military space forces. And so I think you have choices
you can make here about what needs to happen next, and I would
just urge you to be sensitive and thoughtful to what those are
and what the pros and cons are of each.
Mr. Loverro. So, first of all, I don't know what the
President meant, although many people have blamed me for making
him say it, so--but that is not the case.
Let me tell you what I think he should have meant. We have
a military service whose sole mission it is to prepare this
Nation to go ahead and win in the sea. We have a military
service whose sole purpose is to prepare this Nation to win on
land. We have a military service in this Nation whose sole
purpose is to win in the air, and to protect our interests in
the air. And we now have at least a unified command whose sole
purpose is to make sure we stay ahead and win in cyberspace. We
lack that focus for space, one of our major five warfighting
domains. And I may be biased, but I think one of the most
important.
That focus is necessary to create the long-term dynamic to
keep us in the lead. And so when I think about a space force, I
think about not just what is in Air Force Space Command today.
I think about what is in the Missile Defense Agency. I think
about the Army Space and Missile Defense Center. I think about
the Naval Research Laboratory. I think about all of the
components that create the ability to protect U.S. interests
in, from, and through space. That should be our focus. What is
the right organizational structure to create a service whose
sole responsibility is to protect U.S. interests in, from, and
through space. And I don't believe we have that today.
Mr. Harrison. You know, as my fellow panelists here said, I
am not sure exactly what he meant. I saw the video, as I am
sure you did as well. It appeared that he was thinking kind of
off the cuff, and he had not looked into the history. I would
not presume that the President had read things like the Allard
Commission Report, or the Rumsfeld Commission Report, that
looked at these issues in the past.
This is something that has been an ongoing discussion for
at least two decades. I think what he should have meant, and
there is some hints of this in his remarks, is that given the
increased emphasis we are placing on space, and the investments
that are going into space, that we need to look at reorganizing
our military around this domain, so we can operate more
effectively in this domain.
And, you know, as I was sitting here thinking about this, I
looked right here in front of us is a little plaque with
Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution. And as you read that,
you know, it gives Congress the power to, you know, raise an
Army and to maintain a Navy. It doesn't mention air. Of course,
there was no air domain at that time. And, you know, that is
just proof that we have to evolve our organizations. We have to
evolve our thinking over time. And I think that we have reached
that point now with space as a fourth physical domain. And then
thinking of cyber as well as a fifth virtual domain, and that
it is time that we rethink some of our major organizational
structures around that.
So I think that is what he should have meant and, you know,
should then lead to deeper discussion about how do we do that
and how do we make this transition.
The Chairman. That plaque also reminds us what our job is
in this, and sometimes it is easy for us to just look to the
Pentagon to give us the answers. But that is not what the
Constitution says.
Mr. Conaway.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you. As China and Russia get close to
where we are now and/or exceed us, at what point is an
opportunity for a Geneva Convention-like agreement as to how we
would conduct ourselves in a fight like this, and then should
that go forward, who starts it and how does that work? And then
how would we try to leak in nonstate actors who could also have
access to certain things that could be disruptive.
So is there a Geneva Convention codicil in the works
somewhere?
Mr. Loverro. Sir, I think the need for that is absolutely
clear. Let me point back to January 2007 when the Chinese shot
their own satellite and created thousands of pieces of debris
in space. We all remember that date.
When that happened, the entire world said that is
unacceptable. Creating that much debris in space is
unacceptable. And even the Chinese admitted it was
unacceptable, because they have never done it again.
I believe that we should be negotiating with our
adversaries, that there is some kind of space weapons, just
like chemical weapons on the land, or just like bombardment
from the air. You know, these kind of weapons are not
acceptable. We know you are going to attack our space stuff.
Fine. Go for it. But let's not go ahead and create
indiscriminate harm to other actors and to the environment
while we do it.
I actually believe we could get that agreement with China,
probably with Russia after China, and then with the
international community. I think that that would be something
that is in our national interest and their national interest to
do.
General Kehler. And, sir, I agree that it is in our
national interest, I think, to agree, in the international
community, on some kind of, what we called for a long time,
rules of the road. I think if you take other steps beyond that
and start talking about formal arms control agreements and that
sort of thing, those are very difficult. For a long time, we
have struggled with just the concept of what constitutes a
weapon in space. You can take almost anything that is in space
today and use it as a weapon against something else that is in
space if you have enough fuel to do it.
So I think there are--it would certainly benefit. It would
help our commanders and our policy makers understand things
like what constitutes hostile intent? What constitutes a
hostile act? How do you know if someone is threatening you or
not? I think this is going to be even harder when commercial
interests go to orbit to do close-proximity servicing, for
example. Those are going to be difficult challenges for us, and
there needs to be some structure around how we operate in
space.
Mr. Conaway. Mr. Harrison.
Mr. Harrison. I would just echo those comments, but also
add that, you know, in the long-term, we do need something
through United Nations, Geneva Convention. The things we need
to, you know, get clarified are what is considered a combatant
versus a noncombatant in space, when these are all, for
military purposes, are unmanned platforms. What is a
proportionate response to an attack in space? You know, we
reserve the right to respond at the time, place, and domain of
our choosing. If someone does something against a critical U.S.
satellite, is it proportionate to do something on the ground
that causes the direct loss of life. You know, I think those
are questions we need to search through.
In the near term, though, I think what we can do is have
discussions with our allies and our partners about norms of
conduct. You know, what are the rules of the road? What are the
right ways to act? And if we set those and start following them
ourselves, which I don't think would be hard to do, and get our
allies and partners on board as well, even if adversaries do
not want to follow those, we at least have some basis of
comparison to look at their actions. And it is complicated in
space because of orbital mechanics. But, you know, simple
things like how close of an approach to another uncooperating
satellite is too close. It can get very complicated. But I
think we need to work down through those questions and try to
come to some sort of a consensus, at least within the United
States.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you.
General, real quickly. The uniformed space corps, uniformed
space fighter, warfighter, is that group big enough to provide
career longevity, career advancement, career challenges that
would allow that to not be a dead-end career path?
General Kehler. I don't think so. I think that developing
the uniformed piece of this is an important question as we go
forward. I think that, you know, the services across the board
have said they need to be bigger for lots of reasons. I think
space falls into that category. I think that there are more
uniformed people that are needed. And I think that, you know,
the points here earlier about making sure that there is a
career progression, I think that there are models out there
that we can use and we can follow. And again, a lot of the
pieces are in place; we just need to go do it.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you.
The Chairman. Ms. Bordallo.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. General
Kehler and Mr. Loverro and Mr. Harrison, thank you all for
being here.
General, the United States Strategic Command has identified
an urgent need to rapidly reconstitute and replenish critical
space capabilities to preserve continuity of operational
capability. So can you please speak to some of the investments
in low-cost responsive launch options that you would recommend
the Department pursue to fulfill this need?
General Kehler. I would say, first of all, that, in general
terms, the Department hasn't invested enough in the entire
concept of operationally responsive space. How much should be
invested in each of the parts, I think, is getting a pretty
thorough review right now. What encourages me the most now is
the launch developments that have occurred in the commercial
world, because I think that the commercial activity here
promises to be a game changer and in many ways has been a game
changer to this point.
So I would be looking to leverage commercial opportunities
and low-cost commercial opportunities, first, before I went
down the pathway of investing a lot more government money in
government-sponsored kind of new launch capabilities, small
launch capabilities. So that would be part one.
Part two, what is done in operationally responsive space
concepts needs to fit in with what my colleagues were talking
about earlier with the new architecture approach to what we do
on orbit. Things that are being talked about now inside the
Department, inside the Air Force, inside U.S. Strategic
Command, different architectural approaches, whether those are
smaller payloads that are replenished sooner, whether it is
ridesharing, whether it is leveraging commercial, all of those
things that need to go into an overall architecture approach
that I think then helps define where we need to invest, what we
need to invest in.
In my experience in the past, one of the issues has been
you can deploy and buy small satellites; it is what you put on
them that turns out to be the long pole in the tent, the
payloads that go on them. So I think there is investment that
is required. I don't know exactly where we should invest, but I
would be careful about investing in small launch vehicles
because I think commercial is going to get us there and in many
cases has taken us there now.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you. My second question is, today,
nearly all U.S. national security satellites are launched from
fixed coastal U.S. launch sites that could easily be disrupted.
So these fixed sites also provide predictable locations from
which adversaries could glean clues to discern U.S.
capabilities and other gaps. DOE [Department of Energy]
developed more diverse launch sites using new commercial
capabilities to address these weaknesses and support rapid,
responsive, and resilient polar launch capability.
General Kehler. There have been alternative launch sites in
existence for quite some time. For lots of reasons, they
haven't really taken hold. I think this is another opportunity
where I would like to see commercial enterprise take us there.
But I agree with you, we ought to be more diversified in
getting to orbit, whether that is leveraging allied activities
as well or making sure that we are leveraging where commercial
is going, to include alternative means of launching, maybe
taking things aloft on aircraft, et cetera. And a lot of those
are underway right now in various commercial settings.
Ms. Bordallo. Yes. Well, General, I represent Guam, and
there have been interested individuals out there trying to
launch--doing their launch operations and have visited our Air
Force and also our commercial airport--our international Guam
airport.
General Kehler. SpaceX was on Kwajalein for a little while
as well. And, you know, we have done launches from other
places. I think it is a matter of--I would like to see
commercial take us there, and my colleagues have views on this
as well, I know.
Ms. Bordallo. Would anyone like to add to that?
Mr. Loverro. Let me go ahead and add to that, if I could,
ma'am. So first of all, I absolutely agree we need more
diversity in launch, although I always try to remind us that
launch is part of getting the mission started, not the mission
in and of itself.
I am very excited by what I see in the commercial world in
terms of small launch, whether that is Rocket Lab launching
from New Zealand, Virgin Orbit with their plane that can launch
from anywhere in the world, Stratolaunch trying to do the same
kind of thing. These are commercial capabilities that we don't
need to invest in, but we need to embrace.
Ms. Bordallo. Right.
Mr. Loverro. And that is the key that we have to
understand. There is never going to be a time where we have the
luxury of unlimited resources. We need to embrace these
commercial and allied capabilities so that we can invest in the
pointy end of the spear, not on the back end of the spear.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank all of you
for the service that you give to our country in various ways. I
sure appreciate it. I think we all do.
Mr. Loverro, you said in your written testimony, quote, ``a
key element of any future space strategy is the ability to
operationally test that strategy under real life conditions,''
end quote. And you use an example that after losses in Vietnam,
the Air Force created Red Flag, and that helped staunch the
flow of losses. And we were talking about this yesterday.
Could you follow on that? And because Representative
Bordallo has mentioned her district, I will mention my
district. We have had some Space Flag exercises in Colorado
Springs, and I think that is a good precedent here for this
kind of testing that we need to do. Could you elaborate on
that, please?
Mr. Loverro. Absolutely, sir, I would be pleased to. So,
you know, when we talk about testing and training environments
within the DOD, we can mean anything from what is called the
tabletop exercise, where nothing is actually happening other
than written pieces of paper going back and forth, to full Red
Flag exercises where we have people who are simulating
aggressor tactics and aggressor-like aircraft against our own
forces and actually trying to win the fight. And everywhere in
between: simulators, computer-driven exercises.
In the air world, in the sea world, in the land world, we
cover that entire gamut because we understand to actually
become an expert in that kind of warfighting, you must cover
that entire gamut.
In space, we are limited to computer simulations and
tabletop exercises. Those are important, but insufficient. We
need an investment in on-orbit assets that our warfighters can
use to simulate tactics in space, try out the plans they have
developed. Did that work? Were we able to observe the adversary
movement in the timeliness and thoroughness that we thought we
would be able to? You can't know that from a computer.
The computer will always tell you, yes, you observed it,
because it is programmed to do that. You have to try that in
space with real assets. That is a critical investment area, we
know it is a critical investment area, but we are not investing
there because it is, quite frankly, expensive and we are
spending money elsewhere. As Mr. Harrison has suggested and I
suggested and I think General Kehler would agree, we can allow
the commercial world to pay for a lot of the things that we are
investing in ourselves so we can invest in things that the
commercial world won't invest in, like test assets that we are
going to fight in space. Those are a peculiar military need
that we should be focused on.
Mr. Lamborn. General Kehler or Mr. Harrison, can you add
anything about the need for more space warfighting training?
General Kehler. You need to take a page from every other
domain, every other military service. If you want to have an
effective warfighting force, you have to train, educate,
exercise, test, simulate, do all those things. And for lots--
again, for lots of reasons, over the years, we have
shortchanged space on many of those things.
I will tell you that space is part of Red Flag. If you were
to go to Red Flag, space is part of Red Flag. It is different
to hold a space Red Flag. It is a little bit different focus.
We have done one of those, I am told, here fairly recently. The
mechanisms are in place to do these things. I think it is a
matter of focus and attention, and at some level, it is a
matter of resources. If you want to have simulators and
training and test assets and those kind of things, it costs
money.
Mr. Harrison. I would add that one thing that we should try
to do differently in space and do better than we do in the
other domains is how we measure readiness. And, you know, our
traditional approach to readiness is not serving us well
because many of our measures are based on the inputs. Do we
have enough people? Do we have enough people of the right
training level? You know, how much training did we do in the
past year? And it is more of a checkbox approach to get your
swords ratings, then go into the readiness system, that then
get aggregated and presented to Congress. That is not
sufficient in the other domains; it is certainly not sufficient
in space.
If you want an adequate picture of readiness, you need to
do these exercises, you need to do these tests, and you need to
measure performance. So, for example, as I said in my
testimony, the ability to quickly detect and attribute
different types of attack is important. Let's test that. Let's
use whatever resources we have. Let's have a simulated attack.
Let's see how long it takes to detect it and to attribute it to
the right source. Let's measure those things and let's report
those as measures of readiness, not did we do the training or
not or did we have, you know, the certain number of people.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, let's all move forward together on
better and more advanced space warfighting training.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Carbajal.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you all for being
here today.
The Department of Defense is conducting a study known as
analysis of alternatives [AOA] on how to best meet the
exponentially increasing demand for satellite communications
connectivity for military and government users. Even if the DOD
completes its study on time, the timeline for providing
increased satellite capacity would be no earlier than the late
2020s, resulting in a gap of time where military demand for
connectivity could exceed supply. This means our military could
face diminished communications capability while they are
executing critical missions if the DOD does not procure
additional space craft or capability.
The current threat calls for more anti-jam capable
satellites to provide assured communications for the warfighter
in contested space. How should the Air Force plan to meet this
need now, to all three of you?
General Kehler. Sir, the very best architecture studies and
the very best pathway to the future will continue to run
headlong into an acquisition process that doesn't allow you to
get there before the late 2020s or the early 2030s, unless we
add some rapid acquisition capabilities to space, which I think
is an urgent need to have happen.
There needs to be an architecture that--an updated
architecture was mentioned here by the panel before, that talks
about communications that involves high-end protected
communications that the government will need to do for itself,
followed by the commercial communications that can be leveraged
for government use, of which there are a lot of options out
there and more coming every day. And then we need to change the
model for how we go buy it.
Your point about an analysis of alternatives that takes
years to complete and posits answers way in the future is not
going to be acceptable. It is going to put us way behind. And I
think it is one of the urgent issues that needs to get
addressed in terms of what have we got to do to help ourselves
out of this problem we have with space.
Mr. Loverro. So let me add two thoughts to what General
Kehler said, and one that may surprise members of this
committee. I actually, quite frankly, recoil when I hear the
fact that the problem is the acquisition problem. I think that
is a shorthand for saying the real problem is the decision
process of which the acquisition process is part.
We have to decide what to buy. Now, don't get me wrong, we
are slow at buying things using normal defense planning, and we
should be faster at that. But we canceled the TSAT
[Transformational Satellite Communications System] program, the
anti-jam capable system that we intended to build in the early
part of this century. We canceled it in 2009. We have yet to
decide what to replace it with, much less begin the program.
That is not an acquisition problem; that is a decision problem.
And that decision problem exists because there are too many
people who can have an opinion in that debate.
Regardless of AOAs, regardless of all the thinking, the Air
Force doesn't get to make that decision themselves. I think if
they did, the Air Force would have decided. I can't tell you if
they would have decided right or wrong, but I can tell you they
would have decided, a program would be underway. We would all
be worried about how long the program was taking, but the
program would already be there. We have a decision process
within DOD because we have not centralized thinking about space
in the same way we centralize thinking about air, land, and
sea.
So the second question, how do we get there faster? You
know, we have--there are 450 commercial communication
satellites in the geosynchronous belt. There are going to be,
in the next 10 years, upwards of 4,000 to 5,000 communication
satellites in the Earth's orbit belt. We should be actively
investing in those capabilities today.
In fact, the official Air Force plan is to not buy another
communication satellite like the wideband global satellite but
rather to invest in those commercial companies to have them
field the capabilities we need in terms of anti-jam. And yet,
that program has not been funded adequately since the Air Force
first presented it over 7 years ago. That program would have
already yielded significant capability in space and we wouldn't
need an AOA to come to the conclusion that knowledgeable people
already have that that is the best way to get that.
We should be investing today in cyber hardening of all of
these LEO [low Earth orbit] constellations so that we can use
them for our warfighters, because they are going to be up there
in 4 or 5 years and our warfighters will not be able to depend
upon them because their ground systems will not have the cyber
protections necessary that we could pay for by pennies on the
dollar as these systems are developed. Those kind of decisions
are decision problems--I don't like to call them acquisition
problems, because they are a decision to act. They will be an
acquisition problem beyond that. Let's decide to act first, and
that is where we have really fallen down is in deciding to act.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Mr. Harrison, is there something briefly you
want to add to this question?
Mr. Harrison. I would briefly add to that, that part of it
is that we have built up institutions around certain mission
areas and doing missions in a certain way. You know, we have a
wide--we have had a wideband program office, the Space and
Missile Systems Center. Their job has historically been to
acquire wideband satellites. Now we are looking at an era where
we don't need to acquire them; we can buy it as a service.
Well, buying SATCOM as a service has been the responsibility of
DISA [Defense Information Systems Agency], an entirely
different organization, an entirely different chain of command,
and an entirely different budget.
When your organization is fractured like that, it is hard
to make a good decision and be able to make adequate tradeoffs.
And so that is why I think we see the military struggling with
this analysis of alternatives. It is just the institutions that
we built aren't fit for the needs that we have today.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. And thank you, Mr. Chair, for the
additional time.
The Chairman. Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Gentlemen, thank you
for being here.
And, Mr. Loverro, I listened closely to what you said about
canceling a mission that they were--or a platform they were
about to purchase in 2009, and here they are, they still
haven't decided what they are going to use to replace the
mission. The JSTARS [Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar
System] mission comes to mind as I listen to that. And as I
look at us becoming more and more dependent on space, it seems
to me that the acquisition process, the decision, if you will,
becomes more complex and perhaps takes longer to actually field
the items that we need than an airplane or a tank or something
along those lines.
But to read directly from your remarks, make no mistake in
all three U.S.-based sectors, national security, civil, and
commercial, the U.S. continues to lead the world. It talks
about others catching us, but--so you say that we lead the
world, but yet we are totally dependent upon the acquisition of
Russian rockets to launch our space-based capabilities. And
those two things seem to be in conflict with each other.
How is it that we dominate, but we don't have the ability
to launch our own capabilities? And if you were sitting in the
Russians' shoes, wouldn't you simply take away that ability
from the U.S. if you saw that they were about to launch a great
system?
Mr. Loverro. Sir, that is a very difficult question you
have posed for me there. Number one, I don't think we should be
dependent upon Russian rockets, and we could have made
decisions way in the past to change that.
Mr. Scott. Absolutely.
Mr. Loverro. In fact, there was direction from three
successive acquisition chiefs in the Pentagon to make that not
happen and it was ignored, unfortunately, every time, starting
as far back as 2004. That is a reliance that we should not have
and we should correct that. And we are on the path to correct
it, but we should have corrected it long ago.
Number two, will the Russians go ahead and eliminate their
provisions of those engines for strategic reasons? I don't know
what is in their mind. I find it hard to understand----
Mr. Scott. Do you agree that they could?
Mr. Loverro. They could. And that is a vulnerability we
can't stand.
Mr. Scott. Sure.
Mr. Loverro. We know how to build rocket engines in the
United States of America. We built the most powerful rocket
engines ever developed in the world in the United States of
America. And we have, not only through NASA [National
Aeronautics and Space Administration] and through the Air
Force, but also through commercial world we have the most
robust launch infrastructure of any nation in any time in
history today. I really do want to salute the DOD for changing
their tune on things like SpaceX, and I want to salute ULA
[United Launch Alliance] for making the changes they have made.
Mr. Scott. I am down to about 2 minutes. If I may, one of
the things that has been talked about is the difficulty of
defending our space-based capabilities, the jamming of
equipment that is available, which is of serious concern to me,
and the ability to break our communications if we become too
dependent on space and don't have redundant communication
systems. Where does that leave us? And how vulnerable do we
become by becoming dependent with no redundant system to
communicate without it?
And it brings me to a question for you, General Kehler. If
our space-based capabilities are attacked, can you speak to the
ability to reconstitute those capabilities along with the
anticipated timeline and what this would mean operationally for
continued warfighting, assuming we have no redundancies?
General Kehler. Yes. Well, you nailed it, I think. This is
an architectural question. We can't be in a position where our
forces can't operate without space. And by the way, I don't
think we would be. What happens, though, is that it is like a
time machine: The more space you take away, the farther back in
time our forces go in terms of how they would operate. So I
think we have some significant issues about connectivity for
nuclear command and control and other things that rely very
heavily on space. So we can't find ourselves in that position.
Mr. Scott. As a general, if you are in a battle and you
lose your space-based communications and you have no redundancy
and you had to repair the space-based communications----
General Kehler. We do not have the wherewithal today to
quickly replenish in a significant way what we could lose in
terms of a determined adversary attack on space.
Mr. Scott. All right. My concern is that the battle would
be over, and potentially the war, before we could ever get--I
am out of time, Mr. Harrison.
Mr. Chairman, I think he had a comment.
The Chairman. Do you have something you want to add? I get
more flexible as time goes on.
Mr. Harrison. I will take advantage of that then.
I would just add that we may not want to focus too much on
rapid reconstitution. That is one way to improve mission
assurance. But it is really--you know, if you think through it
in a war crisis type exercise, it is only good for a limited
set of circumstances. So depending on the type of attack, you
may not want to reconstitute right away, because you would just
be launching another billion dollar satellite that will just
get destroyed again. Also, if it is--you know, you may have
created a lot of debris, you might not want to launch into that
orbit. But also, if it is a nonkinetic attack, particularly a
reversible attack, like jamming, they are just going to jam
that one as well.
So I think what we really ought to be looking at, first and
foremost, is how to avoid getting in that situation where we
would need to reconstitute. How do we develop systems that
degrade more gracefully? How do we develop systems that are
just harder to attack, so that someone, instead of attacking in
space, they will choose to attack in another domain, through
another vector?
The Chairman. Mr. Norcross.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Actually, I just want to expand on some of the discussion
you just had. Over the last few years, our NATO [North Atlantic
Treaty Organization] agreement started to address the cyber. It
is not as clear; when soldier come at you, you know who it is.
In space, you talked about the jamming issue.
Let's talk about kinetic strikes. What is our ability to
track where that attack came from, A, from the physical
standpoint, and then who is controlling what happened? Oh, I am
sorry, General.
General Kehler. Sir, if I understand your question
correctly, you are asking----
Mr. Norcross. If there was an attack, physical attack in
space on one of our assets.
General Kehler. Right. Well, it is not nearly what it needs
to be. We are very good at tracking rockets and missiles of
certain classes and sizes that get launched from the face of
the Earth. We are very good at that. Once things are on orbit,
though, we have significant deficiencies in how quickly we can
detect if something has maneuvered, how quickly we can detect
that something might be approaching an asset of high value, and
the list goes on.
Mr. Norcross. In terms of tracking debris or satellites.
General Kehler. Yep. And it is true across the board with
debris or hostile actors or other satellites that happen to be
up there. And this is why the--certainly, the military has been
arguing for quite some time that we need to invest more in what
they call space situational awareness. We need to get from a
time where they are basically maintaining a catalog of what is
up there and checking it periodically to see what changes, to
real-time situational awareness like we would have in the air
if we were in a conflict.
Mr. Norcross. Funny you should mention that. We have an
off-the-shelf piece that we have been discussing for a number
of years. But that will show you where the asset is versus the
other asset in terms of an actual attack.
General Kehler. Right.
Mr. Norcross. How do you track that?
General Kehler. And then there is being able to track in
sort of close proximity to one another and there is deciphering
what actually happened to you, whether what happened is a
technical problem or some hostile act. Those are all things
that need to be worked, because we aren't nearly where we need
to be in all of those areas.
Mr. Norcross. In terms of debris. Debris is a relative
term. Some accidental, some very deliberate. If there was an
intentional--and this is under the guise that we are going to
have a very bad day, but debris is probably one of the easiest
things to put up there to disrupt us. Maneuverability is short
term for our assets to get out of the way. How would you rate
our ability to do that today?
Mr. Loverro. Sir, I am going to--let me address the
question in two ways. First of all, if you want to attack
something in a military effective way, debris isn't a
particularly good way to do it. Debris is a long-term problem,
but not a short-term preferred method of attacking, because
space--we don't understand how big space really is. So we could
move out of the way of debris, we do it all the time. The space
station does it all the time. Air Force Space Command tracks
the debris and the space station maneuvers if it believes it is
going to be too close. And we can do that for most of our
satellites that are in a debris area, which are our low Earth
satellites. Some of our older satellites, no, but most of our
satellites that have been launched in the last 20 years could
do that.
The big problem is we--what might look like debris may
actually be a deliberate attack. That is the harder problem to
deal with. And some CubeSat that has minimal propulsion could
easily go ahead and impact into a multibillion dollar satellite
and destroy it, and that might just--and it would be very
difficult for us to detect that movement and very difficult for
us to attribute who caused that to occur.
Mr. Harrison. I would add to that that part of the problem
with debris is it has indiscriminate long-term effects, right?
And so it is going to affect anyone in a similar orbital
regime. You know, in terms of maneuverability, the real
question is, you know, how feasible is it to maneuver out of
the way of a homing warhead of some kind. So something that is
not an unguided piece of debris, but something that is trying
actively to steer its way into you. That is a very tough
problem in physics because that warhead is small, the amount of
propellant it needs to maneuver is exponentially smaller
because of the weight. And it is willing to expend 100 percent
of its propellant to hit you, whereas your satellite, you are
large, you are lumbering, you are slow moving, you have limited
propellant reserves on board and you do not want to expend much
of that propellant because that will ultimately shorten the
life of your system. So maneuverability in many cases is just
not a feasible option against any kind of homing warhead.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you. I will yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Coffman.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
To all the panelists, in fiscal year 2018, Congress
authorized advanced procurement for SBIRS [Space-Based Infrared
System], space vehicle 7 and 8. However, the Air Force is no
longer interested in procuring SV 7 and 8. Instead, the Air
Force would like to disaggregate strategic and tactical
payloads from one another. However, the Air Force is still
planning to use the same spacecraft buses, the same, quote/
unquote, big, juicy targets, as General Hyten calls it.
Does this approach initiate risk by cutting short the
program of record, especially before it has reached full
operational capability? Please explain why or why not.
General, let's start with you.
General Kehler. So, Congressman, here is where I would
agree with them. I would agree that we should not continue to
do business as usual. The alternative, though, I am not clear
yet on whether the alternative is substantially a different
approach. If it is, then I would support it. If it isn't, then
I would continue to have the same question that General Hyten
has.
And so I would listen very carefully to kind of where the
combatant commander comes out on this to assess whether he
thinks his warfighting capabilities are being materially
improved by an action that the service is taking. So they
should be in lockstep on this, and I don't know if there is
some issues about having to transition some way or I don't know
what the other factors are that they considered. But I do agree
that business as usual is not the way to go forward on that and
other constellations as well, and they need to come up with
alternative ways to make themselves more resilient and
defensible.
Mr. Coffman. Mr. Loverro.
Mr. Loverro. Yes, sir. I agree wholeheartedly with General
Kehler. First of all, I don't think we should build any more
SBIRS. We have enough SBIRS and DSP [Defense Support Program]
satellites to last us well to the end of the next decade. What
we need to do is build a more resilient missile warning
architecture than we have today. And as best I can tell from
the budget documents, what has been specified is not any more
resilient than what we have today. It may be new, but it is not
more resilient because it is using the same bus, as you already
stated. It still remains the big, juicy target that is going to
still take 8 to 10 years to develop. That is unacceptable.
We have alternatives today--they have been proven, they
have been flown, they have been shown to be effective--that we
could easily launch within 3 years, 5 years at the outside,
given the budget process. And yet we sure have chosen not to do
that because, as Mr. Harrison has said, culturally we don't
think about the problem that way and they would be far more
resilient than what we have today.
Mr. Coffman. Mr. Harrison.
Mr. Harrison. I would agree that I am not sold on the new
path forward on SBIRS. I think disaggregating the strategic and
tactical missions onto different satellites that are basically
the same as what we have today, I don't think that that
improves resilience or deterrence against an adversary because
are they really going to believe what is on what satellite.
I think we need to break up that mission, break it open,
and look at it more broadly. And I think that there is a good
case to be made for our tactical missile warning needs, that
they could be better met in low Earth orbit with a large
constellation of smaller satellites in low Earth orbit that are
used not just for detection of a launch, but for tracking and
target discrimination in midcourse.
If you talk to folks in Missile Defense Agency, they will
tell you that the single most important thing we could do to
improve the effectiveness of our theater and national missile
defense systems is better tracking and target discrimination in
midcourse. That is what they need. We can do that with a
constellation in low Earth orbit.
Mr. Coffman. Would it be more prudent and responsible to
incorporate a new start after seven and eight, to include the
option of augmenting capabilities through a payload? I don't
have a lot of time, but, General?
General Kehler. It depends, I think, on how quickly and
whether it is affordable and whether we have enough agility to
actually make a big transition now. If you can, then I would
transition. If you can't, then this is the first rule of wing
walking, don't let go until you are holding on.
Mr. Coffman. Okay.
General Kehler. So we just want to make sure we are
cautious about how we did it.
Mr. Coffman. Mr. Loverro.
Mr. Loverro. Sir, I do not believe that we should buy seven
and eight under any conditions. It is the wrong strategic tool
for our warfighters, and that should drive our thinking, not
our fear of something new. And we know how to apply things
better if we want to. We have got to go ahead and overcome that
fear. And I am fully confident we have enough time, given the
six SBIR satellites we have already bought and the classified
number of DSP satellites that are still in operation.
Mr. Coffman. Mr. Chairman, may I finish?
Mr. Harrison, can you respond, quickly?
Mr. Harrison. I would quickly add and say that I think in
terms of the strategic missile warning mission, more payloads
in more places is better. That will make us more resilient. So
if we can take the payloads, similar to what is on our SBIR
satellite, and put them just in more places, if we can host
payloads, we have done the commercially hosted infrared payload
experiment in the past, more of that will help make the system
more resilient. So I think that would be a good use of funding.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, gentlemen, for being here. I
appreciate all your expert testimony. And I used to work with
General Kehler when I was the one-star at Offutt Air Force Base
and he was the four-star STRATCOM commander. I have a funny
memory I just have got to share real quick. My four-star boss
was at Langley Air Force Base, Virginia, and I remember General
Kehler saying, your dad may be at Langley, but I am your great
uncle, and I talk to your dad all the time.
General Kehler. I remember that.
Mr. Bacon. So it is good to be with my great uncle here.
So we look at having a new space force and having a debate.
I think a couple of things we need to look at, one of them is
acquisition and the decision-making process, as you say. I
think Mike Rogers does a great job showing all the duplication
that goes on there, a bunch of the services, and that there may
be a--there has got to be a better way to do it. But the one
that concerns me more is the culture and building of
warfighting space culture. And when our space warfighter
lieutenants come in and our airmen come in, I think we need to
have that thought process that they are the very best. They can
achieve service chief 35 years later.
And I don't know that we can say that today with the Air
Force. I think we have to be honest, it is a fighter pilot
oriented culture, 80 percent anyway. I mean, we have bomber
pilots and air lifters. But by and large, it is a fighter pilot
culture. If you look at our service chiefs going back a couple
decades, with maybe one exception, you know, it has been a
fighter pilot. And I have got to tell you, General Goldfein is
the best of the best. I think he is an outstanding leader. I
think he is onto this problem too, how do we build a space
warrior culture within the Air Force? The Navy has obviously
done it. They have submariners, surface, aviators, all of them
compete equally for that service chief's job or the CNO [Chief
of Naval Operations] position.
So my question to you three today would be, how does the
Air Force work to getting a culture where the space and the air
domain, the fighter pilot culture becomes equal? How do we
change that to become more like what the Navy has today? Is it
doable? And I will say I know General Goldfein is committed to
this, but I think it is a hard task. And I embrace his desire,
but how does this happen? And I turn the floor over to you.
General Kehler. Congressman, I was really glad that this
wasn't some retribution for me commenting about being your
uncle.
So first, I think I would ask myself, is it feasible? Is it
feasible for the United States Air Force to do what it is that
needs to be done? I am a non-pilot in the United States Air
Force for 39 years. I believe it is feasible for the United
States Air Force to do what needs to be done here. And I think
what needs to be done is there needs to be a conscious effort
to over-nurture space for a time until it gains that kind of
traction that we are talking about here.
I think that--and that is a step, by the way. It may be
that we need to go to a separate space corps or a separate
space force or something in the future, but those are really,
really big steps that bring with them other things that we
ought to think about carefully, I believe. I do think that the
pieces are in place there today in the Air Force. We haven't
sat there idly over the last 20 years. As a matter of fact,
since Desert Shield and Desert Storm, there is a lot that has
been done inside the Air Force.
But what has not happened, I think, is that it has not
gotten the consistent priority treatment that it needs, to
include a management of personnel that makes non-aviators
warfighters through the processes that the warfighters go
through, that the aviators go through as well, similar
processes to that. I think it is doable. I think it requires a
deliberate action on the part of the Air Force. And I think it
involves helping this hybrid command called Air Force Space
Command that has the pieces that it needs to grow up some more
too with some acquisition authorities and other things.
So I think it is feasible. I think it is possible. In the
near term, my preference would be to see that, because we have
urgent matters that need to be solved. I would hold the people
in those jobs accountable for solving them, instead of coming
up with something new that could be a distraction. So I am not
opposed, but I would be careful about how we go forward here.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, General Kehler. And I know General
Goldfein is committed to that. I have talked to him personally.
Mr. Loverro.
Mr. Loverro. Yes, sir. So General Kehler and I have argued
about this before, and it is a question of do you peel the
Band-Aid off slowly or do you rip the Band-Aid off. I am ready
to rip the Band-Aid off. The Air Force space corps needs an
identifiable existence within the Air Force. Today, the Air
Force space corps is made up of 2,000 individuals who are
called space operators. They have a specific identification
code. There are 2,000 of them, that is all there ever will be.
You can't build the corps out of that.
There are another 3,000 who use space acquisition who are
not identified as space warriors who should be because they
have the skills there that are distributed between the NRO
[National Reconnaissance Office] and the Space and Missile
Systems Center. There are another several hundred who are in
space intelligence officers, space maintainers, space thinkers,
all of--none of these people are identified as space people
and, therefore, we cannot get to the requisite number of space
smart folks who have the variety of those experiences necessary
to build that space warrior in the future.
The path that leads to a pilot doesn't include Wright-
Patterson Air Force Base. The path that leads to a space
warrior probably does include the NRO and the Space and Missile
Systems Center. There are two different paths. There are
different kind of career progressions, and the Air Force is
unable to go ahead and manage that within their current
personnel system.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. I defer to the chairman if we get one
more answer in. Thank you.
Mr. Harrison. I would add one more thing. I think it
actually is a larger issue than just space within the Air
Force. I think it is a broader issue that Congress needs to
address of DOPMA [Defense Officer Personnel Management Act]
reform. And the personnel system overall needs to be updated,
quite frankly, that some parts of the career model that were
built in decades ago are no longer working very well. Things
like the up-or-out promotion system and all of the joint
service requirements and all the educational requirements that
we put on folks. I think that is contributing to the pilot
shortfall in the Air Force, quite frankly. I think it is also
contributing to the lack of ability to create a viable space
cadre within the Air Force. So I think this is a bigger
personnel reform issue that I am hopeful Congress will tackle.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Kehler. Mr. Chairman, could I--I know that I am
probably violating some terrible rule here. Could I just add
one other thing?
The Chairman. Of course.
General Kehler. Five of the last four-star commanders of
Air Force Space Command have been non-pilots. The other one was
a pilot, but he was also a three-time shuttle pilot. He
qualifies, as far as I am concerned. Anybody who has been a
satellite I think is okay to command Air Force Space Command.
Three of those six have become the commander of U.S. Strategic
Command, the combatant commander. In the last couple of times
that the Air Force has considered senior officers to be the
chief of staff, I know that some of those officers were
actively considered to be the chief of staff.
So I think that to suggest that somehow that there has been
no progress here is not a good way to think about this. I do
think there are problems that need to be addressed. And I think
that there are issues for the Air Force to address that have
been laid out for quite some time that can be addressed. But I
just wanted to point out that there are some things here that I
think you should take note of.
The Chairman. Mr. Hice.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Harrison, I would like to follow up on a comment you
made that you are more concerned with the nonkinetic threats in
space right now. I would like to expand a little bit more on
that, specifically in regard to, is the concern that it is
harder to attribute the attacks? Is it that it is harder for us
to counter the attacks? Is it a threat to our satellites? All
of the above or whatever? If you could just go further with it.
Mr. Harrison. I am more concerned about the nonkinetic
types of threats because I think they are harder to deter for a
variety of reasons. And so when I say nonkinetic, I am talking
about electronic forms of attack, like jamming or spoofing a
signal where you fool a receiver into thinking, you know, what
they are receiving is really from the satellite, when it is
not. Also, nonkinetic forms of physical attack where you can do
physical damage to the satellite without actually touching it,
like lasing a satellite; lase an imagery satellite, you can
potentially blind it or at least temporarily dazzle it. High-
power microwave weapons can cause the electronics on a
satellite to be disrupted, cause computers to reboot, or can
actually fry the circuits in a satellite if it is a strong
enough attack and they are not well protected.
Then, of course, there are cyberattacks. Cyberattacks can
be many different forms. At the lowest level, someone could
just get into your network and be able to snoop on packets,
who's talking to whom. They may be able to crack into
encryption and actually read the data and exploit that for
military purposes. At the most extreme level of a cyberattack,
they could get into your data streams and manipulate the data.
Worst attack you can imagine would be if someone gets into your
command and control uplink and takes control of your satellite,
then they can effectively destroy it, at least make it not
usable to you.
Now, our military satellites have protections against some
of these, but not all of these, and it varies by the type of
system. And so, you know, I am concerned about these threats
because, one, an adversary may think that they could use an
attack that they don't think we can attribute to them and get
away it. So they may use it even before a conflict on Earth
begins. It may be part of their conditioning of us or trying to
prepare the battlefield. Also, an adversary may use something
like jamming that is a reversible form of attack. They may view
it as being below threshold that they can do it and we will
know that they can turn it off. And so they can just negotiate
with us.
We may not view it the same way. You know, our protected
satellite communications systems, they are used for nuclear
command and control as well as tactical missions. An adversary
may miscalculate and they may think that we would, you know,
view it as less below a threshold when we actually view it as
being above a threshold.
The other complication is that our allies and partners may
not view the same type of attack the same way that we do. And
so I know there are some ongoing discussions. I think there
need to be more ongoing discussions, and it is at this lower
end of spectrum of conflict where I think it gets very murky
and that is when it concerns me. Not to discount the kinetic
ASAT attacks; those, yes, have very devastating consequences,
but I think we need more attention in the nonkinetic side.
Mr. Hice. Mr. Loverro.
Mr. Loverro. Yes. Mr. Hice, I want to add to what Mr.
Harrison has said. And this is a critically important point. As
we put together our policies and our thinking about resilience,
one of the key goals was to force the--if the adversary wanted
to take away your space capabilities, was to force him to a
higher level of attack, i.e., kinetic attack, to take away the
so-called cheap shot of a laser or a jamming attack, remove
that from the thinking so that you would clearly have an act of
war if he tried to attack your satellites.
We know how to build jam-resistant satellites. We know how
to build architectures of satellites that cannot be jammed
individually or collectively. We know how to go ahead and build
jam-resistant GPS. We know how to go ahead and build satellites
that can't be blinded by lasers from the ground. We know how to
do all of these things. We need to be doing them so that the
only option an adversary has is to go ahead and attack us
kinetically. And then we need to build architectures where the
loss of a single satellite attack kinetically doesn't affect us
militarily, but now gives the President the wherewithal to act.
So these are critically important strategic, architectural
questions that we have to address and we are not doing.
Mr. Hice. So are there any policy decisions on our end that
need to be implemented?
Mr. Loverro. The policy that I just told you exists. It is
written. It was delivered in 2014 to the White House as part of
our overall ability to resist these--or to contend with these
problems. We are not--we are not building the capabilities.
There is always more policy work to be done--don't get me wrong
there. You know, otherwise, I would be out of business. But the
fact of the matter is the fundamental policies we need to
understand what to do are there; we have to act on these
policies.
Mr. Hice. Okay. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Whose job is it to make those architectural
decisions?
Mr. Loverro. Sir, that is the key issue, and that is why I
say it is not an acquisition issue; it is a decision issue. In
the 20 years that spanned 1990 to 2010, we basically allowed
that decision to be made by the acquisition chain in the AT&L
[Acquisition, Technology and Logistics]. That was never that
individual's job, but since nobody else would make a decision,
he or she did. Before that, back in the 1960s and the 1970s, it
was the responsibility of the DDR&E, the Deputy Director for
Research and Engineering. In the 1980s, late 1980s and 1990s,
it was the responsibility for the Assistant Secretary of
Defense [ASD] for C-Cubed-I [Command, Control, Communications,
and Intelligence (3CI)]. They were the person in the OSD
[Office of the Secretary of Defense] staff who would listen to
the services come in and say, we would like to seek to do this,
and they would basically say yes or no.
I often tell the tale that when I was running the GPS
program and I didn't believe we were on the right path, I
walked into John Stenbit's office, he was the ASD (3CI). I sat
down with him for 3 days and explained what we need--we needed.
He said, yes, you are right. Let's take it to the deputy. I was
at the deputy's office a week later. In less than 2 months we
had changed the entire course of the GPS program. Today, I
would have to go talk to 20 different people in the Pentagon;
none of them have the ability to go ahead and make that
decision. That is the problem that we have to go ahead and
solve.
The Air Force, I believe, will come up with excellent ideas
if we give them the responsibility to do that. And they should
have the responsibility to do that, and then they should be
responsible for bringing that to the individual in OSD who can
say yes or no. And they either get a yes, or no, go back and
work it again. But that will create the kind of pace of change
that we need, rather than the current structure.
Mr. Harrison. I would add to that that, you know, I would
choose to interpret some recent changes that Congress made in a
way. And I don't know that folks within the Pentagon would
agree with this, but I think it was fiscal year 2017 NDAA
[National Defense Authorization Act] that split up AT&L and
gave more acquisition authority to the services. So the
acquisition authority devolved to the services for many of
these programs. And then in last year's fiscal year 2018 NDAA,
it clearly gave the commander of Air Force Space Command the
sole authority for recruit, training, equipping space forces.
I would then interpret that as the commander of Air Force
Space Command should be the one who can make these decisions
and move out on it.
General Kehler. He doesn't have all the authority he needs
to do that. I mean, I take the point about the decision process
and the acquisition process; to me it is kind of tomato,
tomato. I think that there--this is all rolled together. What
has happened with the fragmentation of acquisition in larger
sense has impacted space as well.
I agree. I think that the commander of Air Force Space
Command has responsibility here to develop space architectures.
I had that responsibility when I sat out there, and what I
didn't have was the responsibility to develop the Department's
communications architecture. I could do the space piece of it,
but I didn't have the wherewithal to do the rest. That was
somebody else's responsibility. And once I had what I thought I
needed to do, my responsibility was to take it into the Air
Force and get it programmed.
So I think that channel is there. I think that channel is
still there. Again, I think this is about priorities. If these
are national priorities, then I think it gets looked at
differently in the program process when we are trying to decide
what to fund and what not to fund.
The Chairman. Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. I just want to again thank the panel. This is a
very important discussion for us to have. I hope that people
take away from this hearing that the one thing that came out
early and has recurred throughout it and that is we can't keep
doing what we have been doing. We have to do something
dramatically different, better, more efficient, and more
effective.
As you all know, I believe that we have to segregate those
5,000 people that Doug Loverro described into a separate
service, the space force, in the Department of the Air Force in
order to get that culture and educational system and career
development that we need to make space a priority. And the
point being, and one of the reasons why General Kehler and I
kind of [diverge] on this, is I believe that in order for us to
ever correct this, that the people that come to work every day
and work on space have to know that it is their number one
priority. It is the organization's number one priority. And the
Air Force will always have air dominance as its number one
priority culturally. And it should; it is the Air Force.
So we just have to recognize no organization can have two
number one priorities. And I think that is going to be the--
because General Kehler is right, it could possibly happen, but
it is probably not going to happen. If it would have been
likely, the Air Force would have done it by now. They are
humans, and it is just hard to do what we are asking them to do
in their current construct. And one evidence would be when you
talked about the four-stars space professionals who were
considered for chief, they didn't get chief.
But you did make a point that I agree with that in the
interim, between now and when I think we are going to have a
space force, like our Commander in Chief said yesterday--I like
him even better today--but between now and then, I think
General Kehler is exactly right, the Department of the Air
Force should make space a high, very high priority, and fund it
appropriately and give it inordinate attention. That means
resources, a different acquisition construct, and maybe a space
professional as the next chief of staff, like John Hyten or
somebody else. Those would be great signals to the Congress,
they are finally getting it.
But I still think we are going to have to make this
evolution to a separate segregated service. And I think this
hearing goes a long way to putting that information on the
record, and I thank you all for being a part of it.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Last question, is there something that jumps
to any of your minds that has been written in the last few
years that, not technical, but would be helpful for Congress to
read in thinking about space as a warfighting domain? I am just
curious.
Mr. Loverro. Sir, it is not the last few years, but it is
2001, written by the Rumsfeld Commission. We all were part of
it, at least I guess--I know General Kehler and I were part of
it. I am not sure about Todd. But I don't think a more thorough
description of the problem or the solution exists than that
report. It is--it is prescient in its understanding of what was
going to happen because everything it perceived to happen has
happened. It spoke about the fact that we need to get on the
path for a space corps then--now 19 years later, we are still
not on that path--because it saw that the only way to go ahead
and deal with this problem was to get on that path early.
I still find it to be the bible for most of this thinking,
and if you care to read all of the appendices, all of the
details spring out at you. So I would heartily recommend a
review of that report.
General Kehler. I would agree there, there have been a lot
of studies done. I think that is the best one, if you were
parachuting in to take a look at this. I think that one, it
sets the conditions, and I think it lays out the issues in a
very, very good way.
I would say, though, that some things have changed between
then and now. I think the threat that got talked about there
has arrived. And I think that we just need to be cautious here
that in going forward--and by the way, I do not disagree that
somebody should come to work every day thinking about space as
a full-time job. That was my job, as a matter of fact, in Air
Force Space Command. And I think that that is necessary. I do
believe that there are things that have to be done here just
like we have been talking about.
What I am concerned about, though, is how far you go and
how fast you get there, because my experience with major
organizational changes is that they always take longer and cost
more than we think. And so I don't think we have the luxury of
a lot of time. I think we have people in place today who have
organizations that can be responding and we need to make them
do it.
Mr. Harrison. One book that comes to mind is Crowded Orbits
by Clay Moltz. I think that is a good reading and it is a
little more contemporaneous. I also agree, though, that the
Rumsfeld Commission report is a great read, especially when it
comes to the organizational aspects that we have discussed much
today. And as someone who writes and publishes for a living, I
can't miss the opportunity to promote one of my own reports,
but we published a report last fall called ``Escalation and
Deterrence in the Second Space Age.'' So if you don't have a
copy, we will be glad to get you one.
The Chairman. I appreciate that.
I think just like in cyber, there are elements of this--of
space as a warfighting domain that are challenging for members
to think about. Because while you can draw analogies to
underwater and other things, there are differences. And so that
is part of the reason I asked the question.
I think this has been very helpful today. I thank each of
you for being here.
The hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:01 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================
A P P E N D I X
March 14, 2018
=======================================================================
PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
March 14, 2018
=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING
March 14, 2018
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. ROGERS
Mr. Rogers. What structural changes would you recommend be made to
how we organize for joint space warfighting in the future?
General Kehler. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Rogers. As you know, we dissolved the PDSA last year and the
Deputy Secretary of Defense has retained those authorities. I know we
also have an OSD office that has space policy. But where is the broader
space policy and budget oversight in the Department of Defense
currently? And where should it be?
Mr. Loverro. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Rogers. One of the issues that I have had with demonstrating
how seriously we take space is that a significant portion of the budget
for space is classified. Should we reconsider how much of that budget
is unclassified to be more accountable and perhaps even to message our
adversaries?
Mr. Loverro. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Rogers. Which programs seem to be the most egregious in space
acquisition failures? What is the common denominator in these programs?
Mr. Harrison. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Rogers. What do you believe is the root cause for these space
acquisition failures? GAO has repeatedly said it was fragmented
leadership decision making?
Mr. Harrison. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LARSEN
Mr. Larsen. What does the recruiting and training pipeline look
like for space operators?
General Kehler. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Larsen. What sort of personnel capabilities/qualifications are
needed and how will they be acquired/reorganized? (E.g. test pilots,
space acquisition professionals, satellite communications specialists.)
Mr. Loverro. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Larsen. What does a career path look like for a space
warfighter?
Mr. Harrison. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. TURNER
Mr. Turner. Last year's NDAA FY18 Conference Report terminated the
position and office of the Principal Department of Defense Space
Advisor (PDSA) and transferred duties, responsibilities, and personnel
to a single official selected by the Deputy Secretary of Defense. How
does this new change impact the Air Force, the Department, and our
readiness in the space warfighting domain?
General Kehler. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Turner. In the past year you've made statements stating that
creating a new service, for space, would not fix but instead distract
us from resolving issues with acquisition. Recently we have received
the DSD's Space Organization Interim Report which highlights
acquisition as a major focus in order for us to move at the speed of
relevance with incorporating innovation into the space acquisition
process. How important do you think the final report will be in
relation to deciding the direction of our space program and other
relevant decision making?
General Kehler. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Turner. As you have also noted in your publications, the NDAA
FY18 conference report eliminates the PDSA, the Defense Space Council,
and the newly created A11 and replaces them with a single official
selected by the Deputy Secretary of Defense. Does that change reduce
administrative burdens or increase them given the new change in
direction?
Mr. Harrison. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BANKS
Mr. Banks. The space launch industry is innovating in some pretty
incredible ways that could increase capability and reduce costs.
Reusability of rockets is one example, with all U.S. launch providers
moving toward reusable launch vehicles in some way. SpaceX has already
launched 9 previously flown rockets, including for NASA. How can the
Air Force plan to integrate reusability into its launch program?
General Kehler. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Banks. Our adversaries in space are aggressively pursuing
technologies and capability to exceed U.S. capability. What steps is
the Air Force taking to move more quickly to work with the private
sector to win this contest? We hear that things are at the working
level, like procurement timetables and certification activities in
launch continue to be painfully slow. How can DOD best address this?
General Kehler. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Banks. The space launch industry is innovating in some pretty
incredible ways that could increase capability and reduce costs.
Reusability of rockets is one example, with all U.S. launch providers
moving toward reusable launch vehicles in some way. SpaceX has already
launched 9 previously flown rockets, including for NASA. How can the
Air Force plan to integrate reusability into its launch program?
Mr. Loverro. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Banks. Our adversaries in space are aggressively pursuing
technologies and capability to exceed U.S. capability. What steps is
the Air Force taking to move more quickly to work with the private
sector to win this contest? We hear that things are at the working
level, like procurement timetables and certification activities in
launch continue to be painfully slow. How can DOD best address this?
Mr. Loverro. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
[all]