- RUSSIA SANCTIONS: CURRENT EFFECTIVENESS AND POTENTIAL FOR NEXT STEPS
[Senate Hearing 115-371]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-371
RUSSIA SANCTIONS: CURRENT EFFECTIVENESS AND POTENTIAL FOR NEXT STEPS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
BANKING,HOUSING,AND URBAN AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
ON
EXAMINING THE IMPLEMENTATION AND EFFECTIVENESS OF THE SANCTIONS PROGRAM
CURRENTLY IN PLACE AGAINST RUSSIA
__________
AUGUST 21, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available at: https: //www.govinfo.gov /
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
32-576 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON BANKING, HOUSING, AND URBAN AFFAIRS
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho, Chairman
RICHARD C. SHELBY, Alabama
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
BOB CORKER, Tennessee
JACK REED, Rhode Island
PATRICK J. TOOMEY, Pennsylvania
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
DEAN HELLER, Nevada
JON TESTER, Montana
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
BEN SASSE, Nebraska
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
TOM COTTON, Arkansas
HEIDI HEITKAMP, North Dakota
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
JOHN KENNEDY, Louisiana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
DOUG JONES, Alabama
Gregg Richard, Staff Director
Mark Powden, Democratic Staff Director
John O'Hara, Chief Counsel for National Security Policy
Kristine Johnson, Professional Staff Member
Elisha Tuku, Democratic Chief Counsel
Laura Swanson, Democratic Deputy Staff Director
Colin McGinnis, Democratic Policy Director
Dawn Ratliff, Chief Clerk
Cameron Ricker, Deputy Clerk
James Guiliano, Hearing Clerk
Shelvin Simmons, IT Director
Jim Crowell, Editor
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
TUESDAY, AUGUST 21, 2018
Page
Opening statement of Chairman Crapo..............................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
47
Opening statements, comments, or prepared statements of:
Senator Brown................................................
2
Prepared statement.......................................
47
WITNESSES
Sigal P. Mandelker, Under Secretary, Terrorism and Financial
Intelligence, and Acting Deputy Secretary, Department of the
Treasury.......................................................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
49
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Brown............................................
77
Senator Toomey...........................................
78
Senator Cotton...........................................
78
Senator Menendez.........................................
79
Senator Tester...........................................
79
Senator Warren...........................................
80
Senator Donnelly.........................................
81
Senator Schatz...........................................
82
Christopher Krebs, Under Secretary, National Protection and
Programs Directorate, Department of Homeland Security..........
6
Prepared statement...........................................
70
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Brown............................................
83
Senator Moran............................................
84
Senator Tester...........................................
88
Christopher A. Ford, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of International
Security and Nonproliferation, Department of State.............
8
Prepared statement...........................................
73
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Brown............................................
89
Senator Toomey...........................................
90
Senator Cotton...........................................
91
Senator Menendez.........................................
92
Senator Schatz...........................................
93
(iii)
RUSSIA SANCTIONS: CURRENT EFFECTIVENESS AND POTENTIAL FOR NEXT STEPS
----------
TUESDAY, AUGUST 21, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met at 10:02 a.m., in room SD-538, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Mike Crapo, Chairman of the
Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MIKE CRAPO
Chairman Crapo. This hearing will come to order.
This morning the Committee will receive testimony from
senior Administration officials from the Departments of
Treasury, State, and Homeland Security on the implementation
and effectiveness of the sanctions program currently in place
against Russia.
The reasons for these sanctions include Russia's standing
military incursions in Ukraine; abetting Assad's atrocities in
Syria; conducting cyberenabled information warfare activities
and cyberattacks against United States critical infrastructure,
including its malicious meddling in U.S. elections; and a host
of other malign Russian activities.
The Banking Committee plays a leading role in developing
any legislation that proposes the use of sanctions and
financial pressure, more especially those measures involving
financial institutions, sovereign debt, and other financial
instruments to address serious threats to the national security
of the United States.
Just about 1 year ago, on August 2nd, the President signed
into law the Countering America's Adversaries Through Sanctions
Act of 2017, known as ``CAATSA'', which included in it, among
other things, authorities for not only a set of strengthened
sanctions against Russia but also brand-new authorities for
several powerful mandatory secondary sanctions.
It was this Committee that put together the foundation for
those sanctions and financial measures on Russia and then
worked with the Committee on Foreign Relations to expand them
as a part of CAATSA.
CAATSA was truly a foursquare effort. It was not only
strongly bipartisan but also bicameral. It passed the House by
a vote of 419-3, and 2 days later by the Senate on a vote of
98-2.
It is not often that Congress acts together in such a
strong manner, as marked by near-unanimous votes. But then
Russia is a menace on so many different levels today that
Congress can be compelled to act with a single voice to find
solutions that will protect America and democratic values
across the world.
To its credit, the Administration, in the year since
CAATSA, has imposed some of the toughest sanctions on Russia in
years, particularly with regard to those imposed in April on
Russia's oligarchs and their business associations.
The bulk of sanctions imposed against Russia pertain to its
unlawful invasion and annexation of Crimea. These were
strengthened by Congress in CAATSA and, absent any other change
in Putin's behavior, will likely remain in place until he is no
longer in power and Crimea is returned.
In all, over the last year the Administration has
sanctioned over 200 targeted Russian individuals and entities,
for either its cyberattacks or Ukraine behavior, either
pursuant to congressional sanctions or under its own executive
authority. I hope to receive an update today from our witnesses
on how the sanctions against Russia are being implemented and
enforced.
It was a positive step when, 2 weeks ago, in response to
Russia's use of a nerve agent in Britain against one of its
former spies and his daughter, the State Department showed its
resolve against Moscow while it took a stand with our British
allies by imposing a set of escalatory sanctions under the
Chemical and Biological Weapons Control and Warfare Elimination
Act of 1991.
The Administration is taking some important steps against
Putin, his cronies, and the industrial apparatus they control.
But can Congress expect more from the Administration? And when?
Congress itself is positioned to do more. There are bills
in this Committee and in the Foreign Relations Committee which
seek to escalate economic pain throughout Russia's banking and
energy sectors and sovereign debt markets.
As we all--and that includes the Administration--consider
next steps to further constrain Putin, including sanctions and
other diplomatic initiatives, two questions come to mind:
What degree of success have the existing evolutions of
sanctions, which work to constrain the Russian economy and
derail the activities of those individuals closest to Putin,
had on Putin's behavior at home and abroad?
And, second, what is the most effective way to coordinate
and strengthen sanctions with our European allies and other
partners?
We will obviously have many more questions, but I am
finished with that at this point.
Senator Brown.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SHERROD BROWN
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am really glad
you are holding this hearing. Thank you to our witnesses for
serving in our Government. This is the first in the coming
weeks on sanctions and other measures to more forcefully
counter Russia's continuing efforts to attack the United States
and our allies.
While sanctions have had some effect on Russia's economy,
it is less clear what effect they have had on its malign
activities around the world. Russia remains in Crimea, its
proxies are still in Eastern Ukraine, it serves as the arsenal
of Assad, and it continues to attack our elections and other
critical infrastructure.
Earlier this morning Microsoft issued a new report
outlining Russian attacks on the U.S. Senate and on think
tanks, mostly anti-Russia or anti-Trump think tanks, one of
which hosts an important kleptocracy initiative targeting
oligarchs close to Putin. True to form, the Kremlin promptly
denied involvement. That is nonsense. The President should call
it that and forcefully respond.
Our Government--we and the President both--must right now
send a more powerful and direct message to Putin and those
within his circles: ``We know what you are doing. It must stop.
And if it continues, if you continue, you and your Government
will pay a dear price.'' So far the President has basically
been AWOL, undercutting even modest efforts of professionals in
Treasury, in State, in DHS, and the intelligence community.
Over a year ago, Congress gave the President, as the
Chairman just said, the authority to use more assertive
sanctions against Russia. My colleagues and I have pressed for
nearly a year for stronger CAATSA implementation. After months
of waiting, we requested assessments by the Inspectors General
of the intelligence community, State, and Treasury Departments.
These hearings and these IG audits are not simply a
reaction to the President's startling performance in Helsinki,
which was widely panned on both sides of the aisle and both
sides of the Atlantic. There is a deeper problem. With a few
exceptions, the President has refused to forcefully use the new
authorities under CAATSA.
Let me give one example. Administration officials
identified Russians responsible for supplying chemical weapons
components for use in Syria, the ones that killed and maimed
men, women, and children. Our U.N. Ambassador announced the
imminent imposition of sanctions. The next day they were
withdrawn, reportedly on orders from the President.
Instead, the Administration requested that a broader waiver
to Section 231 be included in the defense bill, basically
because the President could not certify the key condition of
the existing waiver: that Russia was reducing its cyberattacks
against the United States.
I think it was a bad idea to use the recent defense bill to
relax waiver authorities on Russian defense and intelligence
sector sanctions. Instead of strengthening sanctions, we have
gone in the opposite direction.
That is why the Administration continues to face fierce
bipartisan criticism from this Committee, from this body, on
its Russia policy, why a new round of oversight hearings is
being convened--and I give the Chairman credit for that--and
why members on both sides are proposing new sanctions.
In addition to urging the Administration to use CAATSA more
aggressively, I think most of us agree Congress should also do
more to increase pressure. Congress crafted tough Russia
sanctions enacted last August by overwhelming majorities in
both chambers. We should build on that.
We should focus on the facts and broader strategic
questions: What is Russia's Government still doing in Syria and
Ukraine? What active cyberattacks are they directing against
our elections and critical infrastructure? What powerful
economic, trade, financial, diplomatic, and political tools can
we deploy now to deter those attacks?
Russia's election interference, confirmed unanimously by
U.S. intelligence earlier this year and reaffirmed again today,
poses a problem that goes far beyond foreign policy and strikes
at the core of our democracy. In no way is this a partisan
issue.
We are 77 days away from another election, and the Director
of National Intelligence, Microsoft, and others have been
sounding the alarm that the warning lights are flashing red
again. And while some efforts are being made to bolster State
election security measures and otherwise contain these threats,
it appears little is being done to address their source:
Russia's Government.
I know my constituents are clear-eyed about these threats.
The Ukrainian community in Ohio and around the world knows
firsthand--like our NATO allies Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia--the
dangers of unchecked Russian aggression.
That is why we should not only press to more aggressively
implement current Russian sanctions, but we must also
strengthen our response. New bipartisan sanctions measures have
been introduced. These hearings are a critical next step.
Thank you to the three of you for joining us today. I am
interested to hear where we are, what effects, if any, the
current sanctions regime is having on Russia's economy and,
more importantly, on its behavior, and your ideas on how we
will more forcefully confront these threats in the months to
come.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Senator Brown.
Today we will hear testimony from three Administration
officials who deal firsthand with confronting the Russia
threat.
We will first hear testimony from Ms. Sigal Mandelker, the
Acting Deputy Secretary and current Under Secretary of Treasury
for Terrorism and Financial Crimes, who is the country's chief
sanctions architect.
Next we will hear from Mr. Christopher Krebs, the Under
Secretary of Homeland Security at the National Protection and
Programs Directorate, who is responsible for reducing, if not
eliminating, then recovering from threats to our Nation's cyber
and communications and other infrastructure.
And, finally, we will hear from Dr. Christopher Ford, the
Assistant Secretary of State responsible for the Bureau of
International Security and Nonproliferation at the State
Department, who can provide us with some valuable insight on
challenges with Russia.
As you can see, Members of the panel, we have a very good
attendance, and a number of those who are not here are at a
different hearing on Russia in the Foreign Relations Committee.
And because of that I thank you, first of all, for your written
testimony. It is extremely helpful to us. I ask you to honor
and remember the 5-minute rule for your oral testimony so we
can get through the questioning period from our Senators. And I
also remind our Senators that we have a 5-minute rule, and we
will try today to stick very closely to that.
With that, Ms. Mandelker.
STATEMENT OF SIGAL P. MANDELKER, UNDER SECRETARY, TERRORISM AND
FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE, AND ACTING DEPUTY SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT
OF THE TREASURY
Ms. Mandelker. Thank you. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member
Brown, and distinguished Members of the Committee, thank you
for inviting me here today to speak on behalf of the Treasury
Department and provide an update on our comprehensive efforts
to counter Russia's malign activity. Our efforts, taken
together with our partners across the U.S. Government and
around the world, are guided by a clear understanding of the
threat Russia poses to the United States and to our friends and
allies.
As this Committee is well aware, Russia seeks to challenge
the United States and its allies in a variety of ways. They are
continuing their occupation of Crimea and ongoing aggression
against Ukraine. They are attempting to subvert Western
democracies, including our own, through election interference.
They have used chemical weapons in an attempt to assassinate a
British citizen and his daughter in the United Kingdom. They
are perpetrating malicious cyberattacks, and they are
facilitating sanctions evasion and other illicit activity
across the globe. The breadth and brazenness of Russia's malign
conduct demands a firm and vigorous response.
Precisely for this reason, Treasury's Russia sanctions
program is among our most active and impactful. Since January
2017, this Administration has sanctioned 229 Russian-related
individuals and entities for a broad range of access, 212 of
which were sanctioned by there's Office of Foreign Assets
Control, including a number this morning.
Indeed, we have issued Russia-related measures in 7 of the
last 9 months in a number of different actions. In doing so, we
have targeted a veritable ``Who's Who'' of Russia's most
prominent companies. These include Russia's primary State-owned
weapons trading company, one of the largest independent power
companies in Russia, and a major Russian oil company. Our
targets also include the heads of major State-owned banks and
energy firms, such as VTB Bank and Gazprom, as well as some of
Putin's closest associates. These figures include Putin
affiliates Oleg Deripaska and Viktor Vekselberg, as well as
Putin's son-in-law.
Indeed, those who deal with such persons risk being
targeted by our powerful secondary sanctions authorities under
CAATSA. Sanctioning these Russian individuals and entities has
made them radioactive. We have made clear to the world that
those who choose to continue to do business with them do at
their own peril.
That CAATSA was passed by a near-unanimous vote
demonstrated great resolve by Congress to counter Russia's
malign activity, and we share that resolve.
As companies across the globe work to distance themselves
from sanctioned Russian persons, our actions are imposing an
unprecedented level of financial pressure on those supporting
the Kremlin's malign agenda and on key sectors of the Russian
economy, as the impacts of our Russia-related actions are felt
far and wide.
Indeed, Treasury's actions have extensively impacted the
financial interests of targeted individuals and entities. Our
oligarch sanctions alone have substantially reduced the net
worth of those individuals and their companies. Similarly,
other companies designated for their links to Crimea have been
forced to cut production and have lost business relationships
with foreign commercial partners.
In addition, we have cutoff malicious cyberactors from the
U.S. financial system and beyond, including those providing
offensive cybercapabilities to the Russian intelligence
services and covertly working on behalf of the Kremlin to
interfere with the 2016 U.S. election.
In addition to sanctions, we are also strategically and
smartly deploying Treasury's other economic authorities to
disrupt Russia's illicit financial conduct and harden the
international financial system against its predation. And we
regularly engage our foreign allies and partners, especially
those in Europe, to coordinate these efforts and augment the
impact of our sanctions and our other actions.
By strategically leveraging all of our complementary
authorities, we are increasing financial pressure on Russia to
advance our national security priorities while simultaneously
mitigating collateral impacts on the United States, our
European allies, and the global economy.
There is no question that we have imposed major costs on
Russia. Yet the significance of our actions and our other
financial measures must ultimately be measured in terms of
their strategic impact. Though Russia's malign activities
continue, its adventurism undoubtedly has been checked by the
knowledge that we can bring even more economic pain to bear
using our powerful range of authorities--and that we will not
hesitate to do if its conduct does not demonstrably and
significantly change.
Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Mr. Krebs.
STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER KREBS, UNDER SECRETARY, NATIONAL
PROTECTION AND PROGRAMS DIRECTORATE, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY
Mr. Krebs. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, Members of
the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the
Department of Homeland Security's ongoing efforts to mitigate
cybersecurity risk to our Nation's critical infrastructure.
Safeguarding and securing cyberspace is a core homeland
security mission in an area that I have the honor to lead for
DHS.
Malicious cyberoperations remain one of the most
significant strategic threats to the United States, holding our
national security, economic prosperity, the integrity of our
democracy and public health and safety at risk. Over the past
several years, network defenders in both Government and
industry have seen the threat landscape grow more crowded,
active, and dangerous. In fact, 2017 was one of the most costly
and active in terms of global cybersecurity incidents,
including the ``WannaCry'' ransomware incident attributed to
North Korea and the ``NotPetya'' malware incident attributed to
Russia. DHS and our interagency partners also worked with
industry to identify and alert on Russian Government efforts to
infiltrate domestic energy infrastructure.
But adversary actions did not begin or end in 2017.
Russia's attempts to interfere in the 2016 U.S. Presidential
election are well and widely known, as are their activities to
interfere in other elections in Western Europe. With the 2018
midterm just around the corner, we are working aggressively to
support State and local efforts to secure elections.
This partnership with election officials is representative
of one of two core anchors of the U.S. deterrence strategy.
Those two anchors are defense in depth to minimize or eliminate
adversaries' success and impose costs with strong consequences
from malicious behavior. My partner agencies here at the
hearing have equities in both denial and consequences, but my
organization, the National Protection and Programs Directorate,
is almost exclusively focused on defense through protection of
critical infrastructure.
Our approach is one of collective defense, emphasizing the
shared responsibility of cybersecurity across industry and
Government. We work through partnerships that identify
stakeholder requirements, align unique capabilities to gaps,
and add value and enable more effective security and risk
management outcomes. We are focused on sharing information
related to the threat and potential mitigation measures to
improve defenses, leading integrated, coordinated industry and
Government planning to address systemic risk, and conducting
incident response to limit harm and inform defensive measures.
We manage these activities out of operational centers
within NPPD, my organization, that prioritize collaboration
across the full range of stakeholders--industry or Government.
Our National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration
Center, or NCCIC, operates at the intersection of private
sector, State and local governments, Federal agencies,
international partners, law enforcement intelligence, and
defense communities. The operational focus of the NCCIC is
near-term, day-to-day cybersecurity risk management, providing
stakeholders with a 24-by-7 steady-state capability to address
today's cybersecurity challenges.
We also work with stakeholders to develop information-
sharing venues for affinity groups. Recently, working with
election officials, we established the Election Infrastructure-
Information Sharing and Analysis Center, or EI-ISAC. All 50
States participate in what is the fastest-growing ISAC.
The recently announced National Risk Management Center
provides a forum for Government and industry collaboration on
understanding risk and developing solutions for reducing cyber
and other systemic risk to national and economic security. The
operational focus of the National Risk Management Center is
longer-term strategic risk, providing a cross-Government and
industry capability to address tomorrow's challenges. Through
the NRMC, we will partner with innovative industry coalitions
like the Financial Systemic Analysis and Resilience Center and
the Council to Secure the Digital Ecosystem, aiming to break
down sector-based silos to craft a more holistic understanding
of national risk and the integrated strategies to drive down
that risk.
Our mission at DHS is to ensure that our stakeholders have
the necessary tools and support to understand and act on risk.
In the face of increasingly sophisticated threats, DHS is
stepping up our efforts to defend the Nation's critical
infrastructure from malicious cyberactivity. We are working to
better evolve our protection of critical functions from Nation-
State and other malicious activities.
And before I close, I would like to thank Congress for the
legislative progress thus far in strengthening DHS'
cybersecurity and critical infrastructure authorities. Now we
must move on to the next step: to create the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, or CISA, at DHS, which would
see our organization, the National Protection and Programs
Directorate, renamed and established as a new agency, an
operational agency. Establishing this agency would enhance DHS'
ongoing efforts as the focal point for private sector and
Government stakeholders in support of our Nation's
cybersecurity. We strongly support this much-needed effort and
urge quick action by the Senate to pass this into law.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the
Committee today.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Mr. Ford.
STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER A. FORD, ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUREAU
OF INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND NONPROLIFERATION, DEPARTMENT OF
STATE
Mr. Ford. Thank you, Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown,
and Senators. In light of the important role of this Committee
in particular, as you outlined, Mr. Chairman, in international
sanctions, I thought I would try to contribute today by
explaining a bit of how we are employing the tools that
Congress has given us vis-a-vis Russia in order to push back
against the various malign activities of the Putin regime. I
will focus in particular on Section 231 of CAATSA because that
has fallen to my Bureau, the Bureau of International Security
and Nonproliferation, to implement.
In passing CAATSA last year, Congress made very clear that
its intention was to pressure Russia to change its behavior
with respect to a very wide variety of malign acts, including
in response to Putin's effort to interfere in our own
Presidential election in 2016.
We have heard that message from Congress loud and clear,
but I want to stress also that these sanctions tools have value
in a broader arena of great-power competition and geopolitical
competitive strategy. This is an important theme for our
Administration.
The new National Security Strategy calls out ``the contest
for power'' as ``[a] central continuity in history,'' and it
warns about challengers--specifically, ``the revisionist powers
of China and Russia, the rogue States of Iran and North Korea,
and transnational threat organizations''--that are, as it
describes, ``actively competing against the United States and
our allies and partners.''
Similarly, Mr. Chairman, the National Defense Strategy
observes that ``[t]he central challenge to U.S. prosperity and
security'' today is ``the reemergence of long-term, strategic
competition.'' ``It is increasingly clear,'' that Defense
Strategy says, ``that China and Russia want to shape a world
consistent with their authoritarian model--gaining veto
authority over other Nations' economic, diplomatic, and
security decisions.'' The National Defense Strategy notes that
``[b]oth revisionist powers and rogue regimes are competing
[with us] across all dimensions of power.''
And this mindset, Mr. Chairman, is one that we bring to
approaching CAATSA with respect to Russia. Russia has
undertaken a campaign of malign activities in its attempt to
compete with us, our allies and our partners. And CAATSA 231
gives us more tools with which to respond.
We are focusing in particular upon transactions with the
Russian arms industry for multiple reasons. First of all, these
are often the same arms that Russia itself uses and continues
to use for aggression against Ukraine, for example. The world
should shun transactions of that sort.
Second, as Willie Sutton is reported to have said when
asked why he robbed banks, ``That is where the money is.''
High-technology military equipment is one of the only
competitive sectors of the Russian economy these days, and
Moscow makes a good deal of money from selling arms abroad.
These funds fuel the Kremlin's malign activities, spread its
influence, and support Russia's development of newer and even
more deadly weapons, and so we use sanctions tools to go after
those revenues.
But, more broadly, Russia continues to use its arms
transactions as a tool of geopolitical influence. For Russia,
it is not just about money, but about the relationships that
its arms trade creates. Scaling back and shutting down Russia's
arms deals and deterring such transactions in the future strike
directly at the Kremlin's malign activities and its influence,
and that is the philosophy that we bring to implementing
Section 231.
Naturally, we seek to cooperate with Russia wherever we can
on issues of shared interest because that is important for the
security of the world. But where we need to push back, we do
so, and we do so hard. And we have hard real successes in using
the availability of CAATSA sanctions and the threat of such
penalties in deterring and dissuading transactions with the
Russian arms business.
There are billions of dollars in transactions that have not
occurred and will not occur thanks to the tools that Congress
has given us and our ability to use those to provide diplomatic
leverage. That is billions of dollars that Putin's war machine
will not get and through which the Kremlin's malign influence
will not spread, and a slew of relationships between the
Kremlin and its would-be arms clients that will not occur or
broaden or deepen.
So we have not yet had, in fact, the opportunity, the need
to actually impose CAATSA sanctions yet, in part because we are
in the business of trying to make sure that those dogs do not,
in fact, bark. We want these things to be conspicuous by their
absence, and we are making good progress in dissuading and
deterring transactions from occurring.
We are not reluctant to do this, and if circumstances
warrant, we will certainly be forthright and vigorous in
applying the full breadth of the available penalties. But I
want to stress how important our successes have been to date in
making sure that billions of dollars of transactions do not
occur.
In my written remarks, which I would ask, Mr. Chairman, be
submitted as part of the record, I outline a series of
principles through which we approach implementation of Section
231. I would be delighted to talk about any or all of those as
the course of the hearing progresses, but let me simply
conclude by making the point that we are applying these as a
vigorous tool of competitive strategy to make sure that we do
as much as we can with those tools to undermine Russia's
ability and willingness to use its malign behavior as a way to
accrue its own strategic advantage around the world. We are
starting to have significant successes here, and I would be
happy to talk about these and take any other questions that the
Committee would like as this time goes forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Mr. Ford.
I will start with you, Ms. Mandelker. As a number of you
have said and we have said in our introductory remarks, there
have been a number of sanctions imposed against Putin, his
cronies, and the industrial apparatus they control. What type
of sanctions have had the most impact on Putin? And what is the
best strategy to change his behavior on either the Ukraine and
cyberintrusions?
Ms. Mandelker. Thank you, Chairman Crapo, for that
question. We have had, as I already mentioned, well over 220
sanctions across the interagency since the beginning of this
Administration, and the impacts of our sanctions have been felt
in a number of very significant ways.
I would point as an example to the designations that we had
in April against Russian oligarchs and very close associates to
Putin, as well as a number of senior foreign officials. In
addition to the oligarch sanctions, we also designated entities
that were 50 percent owned or controlled by those that we
designated, and as a result of those designations, we have seen
a number of very significant impacts, as we have sent the clear
message to those that surround themselves with Putin that there
are very grave consequences for their involvement with him in
malign activities around the world.
As you saw in those oligarch sanctions, the net worth of
the individuals who we designated as well as the net worth of a
number of other Russian oligarchs decreased substantially. The
companies that they own or control similarly suffered great
consequences. We continue to see the impact of those
designations in a number of different ways.
Similarly, we have had very substantial designations
against Russia's largest weapons trading company, against a
very significant power company, energy company. Our sectoral
sanctions not only remain in place since the beginning of the
Administration, but thanks to CAATSA, we have tightened the
directives that govern those sectoral sanctions. And, likewise,
we are seeing a very significant impact on the Russian economy,
on their energy projects, and the like.
Chairman Crapo. Can Congress expect more designations from
the Administration? And when?
Ms. Mandelker. Absolutely, Senator. In fact, this morning
we issued designations, Russia-related designations, both in
connection with our North Korea program where we designated
Russian shipping companies and business owners as well as
Russian vessels. We also designated entities and individuals
that have been involved in sanctions evasion by an entity that
we recently designated in connection with their work with
Russia's intelligence sector. Of course, we did so this
morning, and you will without a doubt continue to see more from
this Administration.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you. Again, I do want to--I might
have to come back and ask my questions of Mr. Krebs and Mr.
Ford, but, Ms. Mandelker, Russian firms subject to sanctions
have restrictions in place on their ability to borrow from U.S.
capital markets. The Russian Government, however, can still
sell bonds to U.S. investors and use the proceeds as loans to
Russian firms under sanctions.
Does this ability to invest in Russian sovereign debt
undercut the intent and effectiveness of existing U.S.
sanctions?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, pursuant to CAATSA, the Treasury
Department issued a report on Russian sovereign debt earlier
this year. I know Secretary Mnuchin has commented on that
report. I would leave it there. Of course, I know that there
continues to be concern about ongoing investment with Russia
which has as a general matter very significantly declined since
the beginning of this Russia program.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Krebs, the United States is currently in its primary
and special election season right now. The 2018 midterm
elections are now 11 weeks away, and you mention in your
testimony that, as a result of assessing activity in the 2016
election, DHS is actively increasing awareness of potential
vulnerabilities and providing capabilities to enhance U.S. and
allied election infrastructure.
What authority or other help does DHS and its stakeholders
need to better secure U.S. election infrastructure?
Mr. Krebs. Sir, thank you for the question. I certainly
think that since 2016 we have made significant progress in
terms of securing America's election infrastructure. As I
mentioned in my opening statement, I think the one piece of
legislation that I need within my organization is the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency Act. I think
that will streamline my organization and make us more effective
in terms of engaging our stakeholders. You have to remember
that my authorities are almost entirely voluntary, and so what
I have to be able to do is clearly articulate who I am, what it
is I do, and how I can help. And right now the National
Protection and Programs Directorate does not really provide me
that platform to describe those efforts.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Thank you.
Senator Brown.
Senator Brown. Ms. Mandelker, in April, our U.N. Ambassador
announced that Russian companies who had helped Syria make and
deploy chemical weapons would be sanctioned. On the Sunday
shows she said that Secretary Mnuchin ``will be announcing
those Monday, if he has not already,'' and they will go
directly to the sort of companies that were dealing with
equipment related to Assad and chemical weapons use. The next
day, those sanctions were pulled back, reportedly on orders
from the President.
My question is this: When she spoke, had entities that
aided in the chemical weapons attacks been identified and
cleared through the usual interagency process?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, I am not going to get into
interagency discussions. As you may be aware, in April we did
designate Rosoboronexport in connection with our Syria
authorities. We have designated other Russian--and its
subsidiary bank. We have designated other Russian entities in
connection with our Syria----
Senator Brown. I am sorry. I have a limited amount of time.
Of course, the sanctions were pulled back that she announced,
correct?
Ms. Mandelker. Again, Senator, I am not going to get into--
--
Senator Brown. Well, I know you do not--but the answer is
yes or no, that the sanctions were pulled back?
Ms. Mandelker. I am not going to get into those interagency
discussions, Senator----
Senator Brown. No, this is not an interagency discussion.
This was--the sanctions were pulled back. I am not asking did
President Trump do it personally. I am just asking, the
sanctions were pulled back, correct, that she announced?
Ms. Mandelker. We did not on that Monday announce
additional Syria-related designations, but we have subsequently
announced a number of very tough designations in connection
with Russia.
Senator Brown. I do not understand why you cannot tell me
what happened. You do not want to go into interagency
discussions, but you cannot tell me what happened. The
sanctions were or were not pulled back. She announced them.
They did not happen. That would suggest pulled back, stopped.
Choose your own verb. You may not want to talk about what
happened in the interagency discussions, but facts are facts,
even today in this country.
Ms. Mandelker. Again, you are asking me to comment on what
happened within the interagency. Any particular set----
Senator Brown. No, I am asking you--I am not asking you for
discussions within the interagency. I am asking you, had the
interagency actually identified and cleared them, and then what
happened between her announcement and the inaction taken. But
apparently you are not going to answer that.
Let me ask a question of you and start with Mr. Ford and
then back to Ms. Mandelker. Powerful sanctions authorities
Congress gave you last year, at least as applied so far, have
not worked to compel Russia to scale back its aggressive
behavior against the U.S. and its allies. All three of you
spoke to that. There is still a lot of room for the
Administration to use powerful authorities provided in CAATSA
that this body 98-2 gave you on corrupt oligarchs and defense
and intelligence sector most responsible for many of these
cyberattacks, other areas.
If you would spell out, Mr. Ford, what is your plan to
ratchet up pressure on the Kremlin in the short term prior to
the elections to deter future attacks? Is it going after the
personal assets of Putin and his cronies? Is it sanctioning
State-owned entities like VEB, the Kremlin slush fund? Is it
sanctioning Russia's sovereign wealth fund? What steps?
Mr. Ford. Thank you, Senator. With respect to influencing
Russia's behavior, there are obviously several ways that we try
to approach this. I mentioned the one of trying to cut back
specifically their arms transactions influence and revenues.
More broadly, I would like to make the point also that this
is only in part--obviously, the objective is to change Russia's
behavior. But even were Russia's behavior not to improve as
fast as we wished that it would, we think that these approaches
we are taking are having an impact in changing others' behavior
toward Russia in ways that will leave Russia less able to
engage in its ongoing campaign of malign activities. It will
not have as many resources, as many partners with which to
work. If we stigmatize dealings with Russia in varieties of
ways, they will be less able to exercise that influence, even
to the degree that they still wish to engage in it. That is
part of the chilling effect that we seek to achieve by economic
sanctions more broadly. It is part of the effect that we are
trying to achieve across the board here as well.
So it is not just about influencing Russia directly. It is
about having an influence upon the net impact of Russian
behavior in the aggregate across the international community.
So with that as a predicate, I am not in a position to sort
of forecast exactly what steps we will take. We are as a matter
of very high diplomatic priority putting a lot of emphasis both
with our partners, in conjunction with our partners, and
directly to the Russians on the importance of them
understanding that we are firmly of the view that this kind of
malign activity and further activity of this sort to which you
were referring, sir, were it to occur, we would continue to
confront Russia with painful, sharp, and stern consequences.
They need to know that.
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Ford. Is it especially
important to announce bluntly and aggressively ahead of time
what price Putin will pay if he engages in attacks on our
elections?
Mr. Ford. We are making it very clear, Senator, that there
will, of course, be consequences, and painful ones, if they
engage in additional unacceptable conduct. We also think it is
important not to be too specific about that. This is not a game
of forecasting or trying to encourage the Kremlin to study to
test. But it is a game in which we are making it very clear
that this behavior is not acceptable and will not be tolerated.
We are trying to do that mindful of all of the things with
which we agree with Congress.
It has been very clear, for example, in talking about
CAATSA legislation that there is a powerful desire here in
Congress, which we share, to signal that Russia's malign
activities are unacceptable and to try to deter them in the
future.
We also understand and agree with what appears to be
Congress' clear view that it is important to do that in ways
that do not have grave and unforeseen consequences for other
aspects of our U.S. interests, whether that is issues of U.S.
jobs and the economy and competitiveness or the relationships
that we need to maintain with allies and partners and friends
around the world, including that are important to us with
respect to Russia policy.
So we are trying to find the sweet spot between all of
these various competing approaches, and we are grateful for the
tools that Congress has given us to provide diplomatic leverage
to that effect.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Kennedy.
Senator Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to
thank my colleagues for letting me jump the line here.
Ms. Mandelker--am I pronouncing your name right?
Ms. Mandelker. Yes, Senator.
Senator Kennedy. OK. Does Mr. Putin personally own assets
in the United States?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, I would defer to my colleagues in
the intelligence community, and I would be happy to talk to
them about providing you a briefing on that subject.
Senator Kennedy. Well, they are not here, but you are. So
let me ask you again. Does Mr. Putin personally own assets in
the United States?
Ms. Mandelker. Again, Senator, that is not something that
we can discuss in an open or public setting, but we would be
happy to sit down with you and provide a classified briefing
with our intelligence community colleagues.
Senator Kennedy. Mr. Krebs, do you have anything to add to
that?
Mr. Krebs. No, sir.
Senator Kennedy. How about you, Dr. Ford?
Mr. Ford. No, Senator.
Senator Kennedy. OK. If he did personally own assets in the
United States, why would we not as a sanction consider seizing
them, hypothetically?
Ms. Mandelker. Hypothetically, Senator, if any Russian
oligarch or senior leader had assets in the United States, of
course, that is an action that we would consider undertaking,
assuming it is within our legal authorities to do so.
Senator Kennedy. Well, this is just my opinion, but here is
what I think: I think Mr. Putin does own assets in the United
States, and I think that Treasury knows what those assets are.
And whether we do it in a classified or unclassified setting,
that is above my pay grade. But I would like us to have a frank
and honest discussion about the ramifications of seizing those
assets. Would you object to that?
Ms. Mandelker. Not at all, Senator.
Senator Kennedy. OK. Last question. Dr. Ford, let us
suppose that the President of the United States came to you and
said, ``Look, I have had enough. Crimea, Ukraine, Syria,
chemical weapons, meddling in American elections. I hate to do
it, but I want to bring the Russian economy to its knees.'' How
would you do that?
Mr. Ford. Well, Senator, I am afraid I am not enough of an
economist to have a real crisp, off-the-cuff answer for you. I
certainly would hope and expect that we would approach any
challenge the President gives us with the kind of----
Senator Kennedy. Excuse me for interrupting. I want to keep
my--it sounds like you are not going to answer, so no offense,
I am going to keep moving.
Mr. Krebs.
Mr. Krebs. I would have to defer to the other experts. We
are focused on defending American infrastructure.
Senator Kennedy. All right. That is fair. I appreciate your
candor.
Ms. Mandelker.
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, were we to have any conversation
along those lines, of course, we would want to consider what
the global ramifications would be of taking those kinds of
actions. So as I have already mentioned----
Senator Kennedy. OK. Let us put the global ramifications to
the side for a moment, though; then we can talk about the
ramifications. Your task is to bring the economy to its knees.
How would you do that?
Ms. Mandelker. Again, Senator, I do not think you can have
a discussion about how to bring Russia's economy to its knees
without having a full understanding of what the global
consequences would be of taking certain kinds of actions. We
have----
Senator Kennedy. OK. Well, how about telling me what you
would do and then telling me the consequences so we do not get
the two mixed up?
Ms. Mandelker. Again, Senator, we have taken a number of
very aggressive actions targeting the Russian economy----
Senator Kennedy. I know that.
Ms. Mandelker. ----in very strategic, targeted, and
impactful ways.
Senator Kennedy. But the economy has not been brought to
its knees. Look, I do not want to use my time--if you are not
going to answer the question, just tell me.
Ms. Mandelker. Again, Senator, we would be happy to have a
conversation with you about that, but I think it is important
that in any conversation where we are talking about very
significant actions, we also have an understanding of what the
global consequences would be. I think that is the responsible
way to have that conversation.
Senator Kennedy. I just asked you to tell me those. I am
out of time. Sorry, Mr. Chairman. Sorry, guys, I could not do
any better. I tried to get answers.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Menendez.
Senator Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just came back from the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, which is also having a hearing on U.S.-Russia
policy, and while that Committee obviously deals with foreign
policy, this Committee's jurisdiction over economic tools to
promote our foreign policy is incredibly important, so I
appreciate today's hearing.
Let me just ask you all, clearly, notwithstanding what the
Congress has passed into law, what the Administration has
enforced through your own testimony elements of that law, it is
fair to say, is it not, that Russia has not been deterred in
its actions and malign activities? Is that a fair statement?
Ms. Mandelker. I think, Senator, we are seeing a number of
consequences as a result--and impacts as a result of the
actions that we have taken. There is no question that we
continue to see Russian malign activity and Russian malign----
Senator Menendez. Well, today Microsoft announced that, in
fact, there are attacks on the U.S. Senate and on some
venerable conservative institutions. That is a continuing
action. As far as I know, Russia is still annexing Crimea and
engaged with their regular forces in Eastern Ukraine. As far as
I know, Russia is propping up Assad in Syria. And I could go
down through a list.
So for the most part, I think it would be fair to say that
Russia has not been deterred in terms of its activities.
Ms. Mandelker. I think it is very fair to say that Russia
is continuing to engage in a wide range of malign activity that
causes us grave concern.
Senator Menendez. OK. So on that we are agreed.
Now, with that as something that is a reality, obviously
what we are doing, notwithstanding all the efforts of Congress
and the Administration to date, has not deterred them in these
malign activities in a way we would like to see, which is the
purpose of sanctions in the first place.
So I know that Senator Graham and I have legislation called
``Defending American Security From Kremlin Aggression.'' I know
that my colleague on the Committee with Senator Rubio also has
the DETER Act. I am sure there are other initiatives. Maybe the
Chairman is thinking of some with Senator Corker.
The bottom line is instead of telling us what is wrong with
these ideas and pieces of legislation, why don't you tell us
what, in fact, we can do to turn up the pressure on Moscow that
we are not?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, you know, in the last year, as you
have seen, we have taken a number of very aggressive actions in
connection with our Russia sanctions program, including a
number of actions under----
Senator Menendez. Madam Secretary, I do not need you to
regurgitate and eat up my time by telling me what you have
done. What you have done we have just collectively agreed has
not moved the ball in a way we would like to see. So what I am
saying--it is not a confrontational question. It is a question
of--Congress is going to act. You might as well know that. I
have been through Administrations, both Democratic and
Republican, who did not want to see sanctions legislation. At
the end of the day, Congress acted and many of them
subsequently learned that what we did was the best tools that
they had to try to move foreign policy. So it is going to act.
I would rather it act in a way that has your insights about
what would be helpful, but if you fail to provide insights,
then we will provide you with a law that ultimately will take
place without your insights. So that is all I am seeking here.
If you are telling me--and this question is collective--
there is nothing more that we can do than what we are doing, if
that is the answer, that means that Russia will continue to do
all the things I said before, nothing more that we can do than
what we are doing is going to change the course--and that is a
sad state of events for not only our country but the world. Is
that what you are telling me?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, we would be happy to work with you
on any particular piece of legislation. What I can tell you is
that we have a broad range of authorities currently in place
that we have been very actively using----
Senator Menendez. OK, with all due respect, I have heard
you say this. You are very good at repeating the same thing,
but it does not help me.
So let me ask you this: The expectation among Senators is
that you will continue to impose sanctions on oligarchs, but it
seems to some of us that you have decided to diminish pressure.
You have not designated any oligarchs since April 6th. You have
delisted Estonian banks, and now there are reports that you may
delist Rusal.
What kind of signal does that send to the Kremlin? We are
told to judge the Administration by its actions and not the
President's words, but these actions seem to be more in line
with the President's accommodating and disturbing rhetoric than
a tougher approach to the Kremlin. So why haven't you listed
any oligarchs since April 6th? And why are you delisting these
other entities?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, we have designated a number of
additional Russian-related entities since April 6th. It is a
very active program for us, including a number----
Senator Menendez. I mentioned specifically oligarchs, not
entities.
Ms. Mandelker. A number this morning. I am not going to
preview what our plans are, but we continue to look very
carefully at the oligarch report, and it continues to inform
our actions.
Senator Menendez. Secretary Ford, let me--so the answer is
you have not listed anybody else and you are delisting people.
Let me ask you this, Secretary Ford. I understand your
office implements Section 231. Convince me that your leverage
to convince individuals to not purchase Russian defense
equipment has somehow been strengthened by the new waiver
provisions included in the National Defense Authorization Act.
You have not imposed one sanction under this provision, not the
new provision with waivers. You have not imposed one sanction
under Section 231. Why?
Mr. Ford. Well, Senator, what we have been stressing to our
diplomatic interlocutors is that, unless and until something--
well, of course, under the statute there has to be a
significant transaction. We stress to our interlocutors that--
--
Senator Menendez. Clearly there have been those.
Mr. Ford. Well, no determination of significance has been
made yet, sir. It is important to stress that our focus has
been, as I indicated earlier, upon making sure as best we can
that transactions do not occur. Obviously, if they do, we will,
of course, evaluate its significance and reach a determination
as quickly as the bureaucratic process permits. It is important
to how we are approaching this to make sure that our
interlocutors understand that what we are trying to do is, in
fact, implement our own priorities and Congress' priorities
upon doing two things simultaneously.
One, of course, we need--and it is imperative to do so, we
need to make sure that Russia feels pressure from this. The
objective is to change Russia's behavior and, therefore, pain
needs to be felt. And the point is to bring that pain. But the
pain is against Russia, not against our friends and allies. And
we also understand Congress was very clear in passing CAATSA
also that this needs to be done in a way that is mindful of the
importance of protecting the relationships that we have and
that we need in our diplomacy and our foreign relations and our
national security affairs around the world with people who may
have had engagement with the Russian arms business but whom we
do not want to simply throw away our relationship with. So we
are trying to do those two things at the same time, sir.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Scott.
Senator Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
panel for being here this morning.
I certainly want to echo the comments of the Ranking
Member, the Chairman, and many of the Senators that reflect the
importance of finding ways to constrain Russian aggression,
especially as it relates to our country. And it seems like to
many of us that our efforts have just not been effective
enough.
If you look at from 2014 and forward, the sanctions, we
have sanctioned hundreds of Russian entities in response to the
annexation of Crimea, their human rights abuses, their
cyberattacks, their support of the Assad regime, weapons
proliferation. The list continues to go on and on and on to the
Russian aggression, and yet there is so little that we can show
for our efforts of sanctioning Russia.
I have two questions. One is about understanding the
certain sections of CAATSA that have yet to be implemented and
what steps we can take to ensure that our policies are able to
achieve the desired outcome. That is the first question.
The second question is: While we are looking at the
implementation of more sections of CAATSA, how do we protect
our American businesses as it relates to the negative impact
that will come from it?
So I understand that you all are in an incredibly sensitive
position trying to do two things that are actually not mutually
exclusive but really weigh heavily on one another. The
challenge of Senator Kennedy's question that it is really a
simple answer, frankly, if 70 percent of Russia's exports are
in the energy sector, it seems to me that the clear, simple
answer is that if you wanted to have the most impact that has
the ability to cripple the economy, the answer is in the energy
sector. Perhaps the challenge is that the energy sector
represents the sector that many of our allies in Europe depend
heavily on. So it does make your task challenging, but the fact
of the matter is that there is a very simple, clear, concise
answer to Senator Kennedy's question, which is that if 70
percent of the Russian economy--perhaps not 70, maybe it is 68
percent--flows through the energy sector, the answer is simple.
I am not quite sure why we are having such a difficult time
answering simple questions. We seem to be more evasive than
helpful in our desire to understand and appreciate the
magnitude of our actions on the Russian economy. And when there
are sections beyond Section 224 that deal specifically with
crude oil exports, or Section 226 and 227 and 228, and Bob
mentioned 231 and 232 and 233 and 234, the answers are all the
same, that we have not done much in those sections.
I would come back to my original question; that is, as we
look at CAATSA, how can we do more? It seems like I have just
given you a list of options on doing more. And why aren't we?
And is the answer to my second question that the impact on our
businesses is creating headwinds on our ability to impose more
sanctions and do more damage to the Russian economy because we
are afraid of what it does to our businesses and to our allies?
Ms. Mandelker. Thank you for your question, Senator. So
just with respect to the very specific provisions of CAATSA, as
you may be aware, we have designated over 160 entities and
individuals under authorities that are either subject to a
specific provision of CAATSA or Executive orders that have been
codified by CAATSA. So our desire to implement and our
execution of the implementation of CAATSA is very strong.
Very specifically in the energy sector, not only have we
designated entities under our energy authorities, but Russia's
energy sector is subject to two directives--Directive 2 and 4--
that were started in the Obama administration and which we have
tightened in this Administration. And we have seen significant
impact as a result of those designations.
You asked about U.S. businesses. Well, Exxon announced
earlier this year that they were withdrawing from joint venture
projects in Russia with Rosneft. Similarly, we heard--it was
announced that Rosneft was unable to complete certain projects
in the Black Sea. Because of our sanctions, they were unable to
get the kind of equipment and technology that they need in
order to do so.
Senator Scott. Thank you. Because I have 25 seconds left
and the Chairman already called one Member down for going over
time, I do not want to be the second Member, so I will not go
over the time by that much. But I will just say that perhaps
you would invest all of our time more wisely if we talked about
the interconnectedness of the global economy and how at times
if Russia is working with Saudi Arabia on output in order for
us to have a more positive impact on Iran through our, you
know, withdrawing from the JCPOA, we would have a more global
and panoramic perspective on the challenges and consequences
and the complexities of the task at hand, and we would have a
more productive time in understanding and appreciating the
challenges that you face, and at the same time be able to talk
to our constituents about the challenges that we face,
especially as the Wall Street Journal today reported that
Russian hackers target conservative groups and widening
cyberattacks, which only suggests that whatever we are doing is
not enough.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Tester.
Senator Tester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you all for being here, and I appreciate
your testimony, although it would be nice to get answers to the
questions. I am as frustrated as the folks who come before me.
So let me ask you this, Ms. Mandelker, and it is an honest
question because I do not know the answer to it. Say I have got
a $10 million ranch and I sell it to somebody who wants to
launder money for $20 million, and they turn around and sell it
for $15 million. Is that money then laundered?
Ms. Mandelker. It would depend on the facts and
circumstances, but that sounds like a situation where money was
laundered.
Senator Tester. OK. And is that legal?
Ms. Mandelker. If it is here in the United States, that
could potentially be a violation of our money-laundering laws.
Senator Tester. OK. And is that something that we do, we go
after folks who are trying to launder money? Is that something
the Treasury Department does?
Ms. Mandelker. Absolutely, Senator.
Senator Tester. It does?
Ms. Mandelker. Well, again, the criminal authorities are
the Justice Department's authorities, but we go after illicit
activity, money laundering, all over the world in a variety of
different ways.
Senator Tester. Can you tell me or can you get back to me
on how many money-laundering episodes in the last 5 years have
occurred and how many have been actually prosecuted?
Ms. Mandelker. Again, in terms of prosecutions, I would
defer to the Justice Department----
Senator Tester. Determined and turned over to the
Department of Justice. How about that way?
Ms. Mandelker. I am sorry?
Senator Tester. Determined that it was a money-laundering
situation and turned over to the Department of Justice. We will
deal with their prosecution later.
Ms. Mandelker. Again----
Senator Tester. Can you give me an example of how many have
happened in the last 5 years? How many have been brought forth
in the last 5 years by the Department of Treasury, not
prosecuted but just pointed out by the Department of Treasury
that they had grounds?
Ms. Mandelker. I cannot give you a number. We work----
Senator Tester. Can you give me a number if you go back to
your office and write it down on a sheet of paper and send it
to my office?
Ms. Mandelker. Again, Senator, it would depend on the
specifics of your----
Senator Tester. Is this--no, no, no, no, no.
Ms. Mandelker. ----question, but we work very closely with
the Justice----
Senator Tester. Look, look, we had one of these hearings in
a classified session that was worthless. And it was not
worthless because of the Chairman and Ranking Member. It was
worthless because you guys have filibuster down to an art. I
just want to know the answer to the question. Do you have the
number, yes or no?
Ms. Mandelker. Is your----
Senator Tester. You do not have the number?
Ms. Mandelker. I want to make sure that I understand the
question you are asking.
Senator Tester. I want to know the number of money-
laundering episodes the Department of Treasury has turned over
to the Department of Justice in the last 5 years--not 10, not
20, not 30. Five years, that is it.
Ms. Mandelker. Again, Senator, as you may be aware,
FinCEN----
Senator Tester. I am not aware. I just want to know how
many.
Ms. Mandelker. I would have to go back to my office to
see----
Senator Tester. OK. Go back to your office and you will----
Ms. Mandelker. ----if we have such a number.
Senator Tester. ----give me that information?
Ms. Mandelker. But I just want to be clear about what it is
that we do. We follow, we trace, we track money laundering all
over the world. We are also the recipients----
Senator Tester. I just want to know about the stuff that
happens in the United States. That is easier yet.
Ms. Mandelker. Let me go back and see what we can do to
answer your question.
Senator Tester. I appreciate that very, very much.
Mr. Krebs, you said in an answer to the Chairman's question
that you have made significant progress since the 2016
election. Can you give me a list of the things you have done to
make our election more secure this cycle?
Mr. Krebs. Yes, sir. So four buckets: governance,
information sharing, technical support, and incident response.
Senator Tester. OK. And have you done that to every State
in the Union?
Mr. Krebs. We work particularly through the Election
Infrastructure ISAC. We work with all 50 States. We provide
cyber remote-scanning capabilities to 36 States.
Senator Tester. I do not expect you to know this today, but
can you go back to your office and send me a list of what you
have done in Montana specifically?
Mr. Krebs. We can certainly give you a briefing on the
things we are doing nationwide.
Senator Tester. Just give me a sheet of paper. I do not
need a briefing. Tell me the things you have done in Montana to
help Montana have a more secure election cycle.
Mr. Krebs. We can follow up, yes, sir.
Senator Tester. And just a suggestion. It might not hurt to
do that for every Senator that is here. It would be a good
thing. Just what--I see Donnelly is nodding his head, so you
can do that for Indiana, and----
Mr. Krebs. We do need to--there is a certain degree of
confidentiality on every engagement----
Senator Tester. Oh, come on. These guys--now, look, look,
look. If these guys are screwing with voter rolls, tell us how
you fixed it. If they are screwing with voter machines, tell us
how you fixed it. There is no security there. This is about
confidence in our election system. Putin spent less money on
doing what he did last cycle to promote communism and destroy
democracy. I think the U.S. Senate needs to know this stuff.
Mr. Krebs. I agree, yes, sir. Let me----
Senator Tester. Just give us the information.
Mr. Krebs. We can follow up. Yes, sir.
Senator Tester. OK. Thank you.
Then can anybody tell me why Putin's ownership of anything
in this country is not public information?
Ms. Mandelker. Again, Senator, as I mentioned before, we
would be happy to sit down and have a conversation with you
about that.
Senator Tester. I do not want--just tell me. Why? What
national security risk is that?
Ms. Mandelker. Again, Senator, any discussion about where
assets are in the United States or elsewhere are either
classified or not something that we would discuss in any kind
of an open session.
Senator Tester. You do know that you can go down to the
courthouse and find out how much land I own? You know that. So
why is Putin different?
Ms. Mandelker. Again, Senator, I do not want to talk
publicly about where assets are here or anywhere in the world.
There are a number of different reasons----
Senator Tester. OK. I got that.
Ms. Mandelker. ----why we would not do that, but having
had----
Senator Tester. But a yes or no does not exactly----
Ms. Mandelker. ----a sitdown and having a conversation----
Senator Tester. A yes or no does not dictate section,
township, and range. A yes or no just says, yeah, he owns
property here.
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, I am not aware of any title or deed
that would have Mr. Putin's name on it here in the United
States. But, again----
Senator Tester. All right. All right. Thank you very much.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Cotton.
Senator Cotton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
appearing here. I hope it is clear from the questions so far
that we have bipartisan agreement about the threat that Russia
poses to our democracy and our interests. It is good to have
that agreement now, which we lacked for many years. In the last
Administration, even as Russia was surging troops into Syria to
prop up Bashir al-Assad and Iran and invading Crimea and waging
war in the Ukraine and beating a United States diplomat on the
doorstep of our embassy in Russia and flagrantly violating the
Open Skies Treaty and flagrantly violating the Intermediate
Range Nuclear Forces Treaty and a whole host of other malign
activities.
Now, we have heard a lot today that Russia is still not
deterred from these things. I would agree with that. We need to
take additional action. But we have not heard much about the
relative impact of the steps that this Administration has taken
versus the last Administration, in particular after the 2016
election.
Now, some members of the last Administration said that they
did not want to take provocative steps in the fall of 2016
because they feared that Vladimir Putin and Russia's
intelligence services might take additional steps to undermine
voter registration systems or vote tabulation systems. But
after the election, the Administration kicked out a few Russian
diplomats--it might not surprise you to know that those were
perhaps Russian spies--closed two Russian vacation homes, and
imposed sanctions on two Russian intelligence services.
Ms. Mandelker, how much money did the U.S. Government get
from those two intelligence services?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, I am not aware of assets that were
blocked as a result of those----
Senator Cotton. Is that perhaps because Russian
intelligence services do not keep money in the United States
banking system?
Ms. Mandelker. Again, Senator, that is not something I
would discuss publicly, but rest assured the designations that
we have had in this Administration have had far and wide-
ranging impacts in a variety of different way.
Senator Cotton. To say nothing of nonsanctions activities,
for instance, like encouraging our NATO partners to spend more
money on their defense, expanding our nuclear arsenal, spending
more money on ballistic missile defenses, providing the
antitank Javelin missiles that Ukraine's Government begged for
so long to receive.
The Congress has also learned over the last 18 months that
there was a serious interagency conversation in November and
December of 2016 about imposing tougher sanctions on Russia. In
fact, I understand that the professional staff at the Treasury
Department worked up a whole host of sectoral sanctions and
specific sanctions against Russian companies like Kaspersky
Labs. Yet those were strongly opposed by Secretary Jack Lew,
National Security Adviser Susan Rice, and Deputy National
Security Adviser Avril Haines.
Ms. Mandelker, can you explain why Secretary Lew opposed
taking tougher action after the election--after the election,
not before the election. After the election.
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, I was not in the Administration, of
course----
Senator Cotton. Though you are a representative of a the
Treasury Department, which surely has continuity files.
Ms. Mandelker. What I can tell you, Senator, is that, as I
have already made clear today, we have gone after very
significant and impactful designations in connection with
Russia's election interference, in connection with their
cyberattacks, in connection with their ongoing occupation of
Crimea and the like, and we have seen those designations result
in very impactful actions against, again, some of Putin's
closest allies and partners, his senior foreign official,
officials in his Administration. We have seen companies who
have tried to get into Crimea have a very heavy cost imposed
upon them when we have sanctioned them. They have cutoff their
ability to do business elsewhere in the world.
What I can do is speak to the very heavy costs and impact
of the designations that we have had. They have been quite
substantial, and I would say far more substantial than those
that were issued immediately after the November 2016----
Senator Cotton. It would be nice to know why Secretary Lew
believed that and why President Obama accepted his opinion.
Let us take one final question here about a gentleman you
mentioned earlier: Oleg Deripaska, a Russian oligarch whom our
Government has sanctioned. You have also sanctioned numerous
companies that he runs or heads, such as Rusal, En+, Basic
Element, and others.
We now know, in fact, we have emails right here that have
been released by the Congress between Christopher Steele, who
compiled what Jim Comey called ``a salacious and unverified
dossier,'' and Bruce Ohr, a senior Department of Justice
official in the Obama administration, where Christopher Steele
was advocating on behalf of Oleg Deripaska being admitted into
the United States. Christopher Wray, the FBI Director, would
not address a question I sent to him in a public hearing of the
Intelligence Committee earlier this year about whether
Christopher Steele was working for Oleg Deripaska. At the time,
by all appearances, he is working for him. Is Christopher
Steele and his business the kind of entity or subcontractor for
a sanctioned Russian oligarch that you have the authority to
sanction under CAATSA?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, I am not going to talk to any
particular individual, but Oleg Deripaska has been designated,
and that designation is subject to secondary sanctions. And so
what we have seen as a result of the Deripaska and other
sanctions against these oligarchs is that they have become
radioactive as the world understands that any entities that
they touch may similarly face severe consequences.
Senator Cotton. Just one final question. Just yes or no. It
is a question about a general legal principle. Do you have the
authority under CAATSA or any other law to sanction
professional service providers of sanctioned Russian oligarchs,
lawyers, lobbyists, financial advisers, and so forth?
Ms. Mandelker. We would likely have that authority,
Senator.
Senator Cotton. Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Warner.
Senator Warner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
witnesses' testimony.
I think the indication from Microsoft today of ongoing
Russian targeting of our elections and our systems is showing
that this is not something that is in the rearview mirror. The
truth is manipulating social media is both cheap and effective,
and Putin and his cronies realize that. I think it reinforces,
and if there is one message that ought to be taken out of this
hearing, it is that we all need to stay focused. And that focus
ought to extend--and I have some sympathy for you, Mr. Krebs,
in terms of trying to make sure our State and local election
partners take this message seriously and recognize that this is
not all in the rearview mirror, that none of these activities
stopped in 2016. They are ongoing, and this is an ongoing
threat. And I am particularly concerned about that last-mile
issue of even if we notify, will they then take action?
Ms. Mandelker, as I indicated to you beforehand and one of
the things our Intel Committee investigation is looking back
into in terms of Russian activity, we need your assistance. So
I need your public commitment today that those outstanding
document requests we have to FinCEN will be met in a timely
manner.
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, as you know, we have produced
thousands of documents----
Senator Warner. But not all of the documents have been
submitted. Will you meet our bipartisan requests for those
documents?
Ms. Mandelker. Absolutely.
Senator Warner. There has also been a BuzzFeed story that
says that FinCEN has decided that some of those documents will
not be turned over to the Committee. Will you refute that story
and say that all documents that the Committee has requested
will be turned over to the Committee?
Ms. Mandelker. I am not aware of that story, but I can
assure you that we are going to continue to produce documents
that----
Senator Warner. All documents in a timely manner, within
the next 30 days? Within the next 60 days?
Ms. Mandelker. I would have to consult with those who are
reviewing the----
Senator Warner. Many of these documents have been requested
literally for months.
Ms. Mandelker. But we commit to you that we will continue
to produce those documents on top of the thousands of----
Senator Warner. In a timely process so that we cannot----
Ms. Mandelker. Absolutely.
Senator Warner. Again, we are 7, 8 months behind on some of
these document requests.
Ms. Mandelker. We will absolutely continue to provide those
documents.
Senator Warner. And then one of the things--we have made a
formal request to you in the past, but I want to reiterate in a
public forum, because of the nature of some of these documents
that are fairly complicated, we need your office's technical
assistance in terms of interpretation of these documents. Will
you be able to provide that technical assistance?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, let me just add to my last
response. I am told that we have a document production that we
will be providing today, and as I mentioned before the hearing,
we are happy to provide additional assistance.
Senator Warner. But what we need is that technical
assistance to sort through this. I appreciate that.
Mr. Krebs, again, I mentioned--and you indicated you have
got only voluntary ability to work with those on the front
line. One of the things I have grave concerns about. In a
normal White House, when our country has been attacked, as it
has been, in this bipartisan consensus, there would be someone
designated in the White House as election security is a top
matter or someone designated on the National Security Council
as making this a top priority.
One of the things that has been extraordinarily disturbing
to me is we have had repeatedly top intelligence officials from
the Trump administration indicate to us that they have not been
told that election security ought to be a top priority, and
that raises huge concerns to me, recognizing that you are
trying to do your best at DHS. One of the questions--I have got
a serious of questions for you here, recognizing I have only
got a short amount of time. Is there any intention--we have
sanctioned the IRA officers indicated by the Mueller
indictments. Is there any effort to indicate or to sanction the
12 GRU officers that were also designated in the Mueller
indictments?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, as you are aware, we have
sanctioned a number of individuals connected to the GRU and the
FSB. In fact, some of the sanctions we issued this morning were
specifically in connection to their relationship to the FSB. We
did designate the----
Senator Warner. The IRA but not some of the 12 GRU----
Ms. Mandelker. We are very closely looking at that
indictment. I cannot preview what our plans are, but rest
assured that----
Senator Warner. All I will say is it would help, I think,
the American public, as we sanctioned these bad actors and
these bad actors' identities and a case that was built against
them was provided by the actions and workings of the special
prosecutor. It would do a great deal of benefit to the American
public in terms of the seriousness of this threat if the
President of the United States would not on a daily basis
denigrate the Mueller investigation and call it a ``witch
hunt,'' an investigation that has created 30-plus indictments,
a number of guilty pleas, and obviously has been a very
valuable tool in identifying these bad actors who in the past
and on an ongoing basis try to interfere in our election
activities.
Mr. Krebs, do you have indication of who attacked Senator
McCaskill's activities, a Senator up for reelection, other
elected officials? And what level of confidence do you have in
terms of overall Russian activities toward current sitting
elected officials and/or elections that are coming up in a few
months?
Mr. Krebs. So to the second question, certainly, I think,
Congress is a target for foreign intelligence collection just
based on your role in policy formation. So there are general
espionage and foreign intelligence collection concerns there,
with or without a midterm or a Presidential election coming up
across the horizon.
Now, the Microsoft, whether it was McCaskill or the recent
announcements, they have been in contact, as I understand it,
with DOJ and FBI. We have also had conversations with Microsoft
to get a better understanding of what they saw that enabled
them to take action. In terms of a formal attribution from the
Government, I would have to defer to the intelligence community
on that.
But, again, rest assured we are engaging on a day-to-day
basis with the Senate CIO, the House CIO, with the committees,
and I would encourage you to encourage your staff to work with
the Department of Homeland Security. And more than that, when
you do go back to your districts or when you go back to your
home States, please encourage your State and local officials to
work with the Department of Homeland Security on election
security matters.
Senator Warner. I think it is important then to make sure
that, as you contact States, you indicate that this is an
ongoing threat. It did not end in 2016. And, unfortunately,
some of your communications to States within the last week or
so have not had that kind of clarity.
Mr. Krebs. I am happy to follow up, and I look forward to
tomorrow's closed session.
Senator Brown. Mr. Chairman, if I could, I just wanted to
reinforce, in Senator Warner's admonition and request, how the
important these documents are that they be turned over in a
timely manner. Thank you.
Ms. Mandelker. We appreciate that, Senator, and as I
mentioned, we are dropping off another production today. We
have a big staff who have been working to get these requests
out quickly.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Moran.
Senator Moran. Chairman, thank you very much.
I direct this first question to any and all. Can you
identify changes in Russian behavior that have occurred since
the summit between President Trump and President Putin in
Helsinki? Different behavior by Russia than before the summit?
Mr. Krebs. I do not have anything to add. No, sir.
Senator Moran. Anyone?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, I would ask that any kind of
question like that be addressed in a closed session.
Senator Moran. We have had a closed session, and I share
the view of the Senator from Montana that getting answers in a
closed session is no easier than getting answers in an open
session.
Ms. Mandelker, your unwillingness to answer the question--
one of the things I thought would come from this hearing is a
recommendation or a set of recommendations of what Congress
might consider legislatively for additional sanctions. I have
not reached any conclusion that additional sanctions are
beneficial. I do not know the answer to that question. But I
would have thought that you could have been able to give us
ideas of what we might look at or pursue in cooperation with
you and the Administration.
Am I to take from your unwillingness to answer that kind of
question that there is opposition by the Administration to
additional sanctions? Or what is a better explanation?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, absolutely not. There is no
opposition to sanctions. As I have already mentioned, we have
designated well over 200 individuals and companies in
connection with Russia----
Senator Moran. I am talking about additional sanctions,
something that we are looking at in this Committee.
Ms. Mandelker. Including additional sanctions that we
issued just this morning. In terms of what additional
authorities we may need, we already have, through CAATSA and
through a variety of different Executive order, brought
authority to target big sectors of the Russian economy, to go
after the Russian oligarchs, to go after Russia's malicious
cyberactivities in a number of other areas. In fact, as I have
already mentioned, we have targeted not only a number of very
significant Russian companies, we have targeted the chairs of
those companies, making it much more difficult for them to
operate in the world.
So we would be happy to sit down and talk to Congress about
any proposed legislation, but we do have significant and
substantial authorities already on the books.
Senator Moran. And maybe that is the answer to the
question. It is not what you have been able to do, but the
answer to the question what more do you need is nothing is
known at the moment but you will consult with Congress if we
come up with an idea, is my takeaway from your testimony.
I think I generally agree with Senator Cotton that we ought
to be looking at other issues in addition certainly to
sanctions, which is our relationship with NATO, economic
alliances around the globe, resolving our trade differences
with other countries so that we are unified. I think the list
is longer than sanctions. We generally are focused on sanctions
in this Committee, but I take it from your answer that to date
you believe you have the necessary authorities to combat what
we are trying to combat with Russian behavior. Is that a fair
assessment?
Ms. Mandelker. Yes, Senator, but we are happy to talk to
you about----
Senator Moran. Happy to have that conversation.
Ms. Mandelker. ----additional authorities, and I agree with
you wholeheartedly, this is a whole-of-Government approach.
Sanctions alone are not going to solve the problem, and this
Administration has undertaken a number of additional activities
in connection with the Russian threat other than sanctions.
Senator Moran. Thank you very much.
The Administration--I think is probably--I do not know who
this is for. The Administration has called for a complete
cutoff of Iranian petroleum imports by November. That seems to
me to be just in time for winter. Does it stand to reason that
that will push Europe and others to be more dependent upon
Russian oil and natural gas? And is there coordination on the
sanctions that we are proposing pursuing with Iran and
sanctions that we have in place with Russia or are proposing
with Russia?
Ms. Mandelker. Absolutely, Senator, there is extensive
interagency coordination on those sanctions with the State
Department, with the Department of Energy, and, of course, with
our closest allies and partners.
Senator Moran. Mr. Krebs, in your testimony you note the
leadership role that the Department plays in conducting
elections, coordinating efforts to assess vulnerabilities and
mitigate risk. Within this structure, DHS also plays an
important role in sharing information with election officials.
I have visited with county clerks, county election officers in
Kansas, with personnel within our Secretary of State's office
that conducts oversight and management of elections in our
State.
What steps has DHS taken to ensure that information and
intelligence is shared with local officials? My general
impression is that while there is concern by election
officials, they do not know the direct nature of any threat.
Mr. Krebs. So we have prioritized security clearances for
State and local election officials. I think right now we are up
to about 92, and that includes every single State. But most
importantly----
Senator Moran. Is an election official somebody at the
State level or somebody at the local level?
Mr. Krebs. It started, yes, sir, at the Secretary of State
or the chief election official in each State, and we are
working our way down to the county level. Now, I do not think
we are going to get to the county level in terms of specific
clearances because our imperative here is to bring information
out of the classified space as rapidly as possible and share
actionable information so any--it does not matter what county
or locality they are in, that they have information from DHS
that is pulled generally from the intelligence community that
they can act on. Our mission is to shorten that time period.
So we are working on clearances, but more importantly, we
are trying to convene information-sharing fora. I mentioned the
ISAC. We have all 50 States and pushing a thousand local
jurisdictions. The challenge here is there are close to 10,000
election jurisdictions nationwide. so while we have what is
probably the fastest-growing, most successful ISAC, we still
have a pretty big gap to fill. And so we are working through
what is known as--it was mentioned by Senator Warner earlier--
the ``last mile.'' We have our own last-mile initiative where
we are developing tailored guidance to every single county, if
they would like it, across this country. And that will include
how to sign up for the ISAC, how to participate in instant
response and tabletop exercises.
Senator Moran. What is the timeframe for that to be
available?
Mr. Krebs. We are marketing this aggressively now. We have
already gotten four through the chute. We have 22--four States.
We have 22 more States in the works right now. We have the
capacity by the midterm, if every single State asks for a last
mile--and it is a poster that we can share with you, and we
will share it tomorrow at the closed session. It is an
unclassified document. We can do all 50 States, if asked, by
the midterm.
Senator Moran. Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Donnelly.
Senator Donnelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to
the witnesses.
Mr. Krebs, have you reviewed the security of elections in
Indiana specifically?
Mr. Krebs. I personally have not, but we do work with the
State of Indiana, yes, sir.
Senator Donnelly. Do you know if there are any reports in
regards to your Department and what has been done in terms of
hardening and securing Indiana's election for the upcoming
election?
Mr. Krebs. We certainly have a profile on the State and a
record of engagements and how we have engaged with the State.
Senator Donnelly. Would that list all direct contacts
between your agency and the State of Indiana?
Mr. Krebs. I am sorry. Could you repeat the question?
Senator Donnelly. Would that list all the direct contacts
that you have had back and forth, the meetings you have had?
Mr. Krebs. Yes, sir, we track the in-person engagement.
Senator Donnelly. What I would like to do is get a copy of
all of that so that we know on the State's end that we can be
helpful to our State to make sure that they are getting
everything they need, the last-mile program, all of these
things put in place so that we have the most secure possible
election, obviously in my State, but we want to have that
across the country.
Mr. Krebs. We can certainly engage and provide you an
update on what we are doing, particularly nationwide. But I do
need to reinforce the fact that there is a level of
confidentiality. Because my authorities are voluntary, I am in
an entirely dependent position upon a State or a local
jurisdiction to come to me and bring information and ask for
help.
Senator Donnelly. I understand.
Mr. Krebs. And if I am in a position where I am posting or
sharing what is confidential information--this is just like
attorney-client privilege. I am the attorney, they are the
client, they own the privilege. So it is up to the partner to
disclose----
Senator Donnelly. Well, in your best judgment, you know, we
would like to see what has been done to make sure that we are
taking as many steps as possible in our State to secure the
election.
Mr. Krebs. Yes, sir.
Senator Donnelly. Ms. Mandelker, at the Helsinki Summit, do
you know if the subject of sanctions was discussed between
President Trump and Vladimir Putin?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, I am not aware whether or not the
subject of sanctions was discussed in that very specific--in
the meeting between the two of them. But I believe the
President has addressed his----
Senator Donnelly. Well, I am not asking about the
President. I am asking you. Do you have any knowledge of what
was discussed in that summit between the President and Vladimir
Putin since you are the one who implements the very sanctions
that might have been discussed?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, I know the President has----
Senator Donnelly. I am asking, were you given a briefing as
to what was discussed regarding sanctions in that summit
meeting?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, we have had interagency discussions
following the Helsinki----
Senator Donnelly. Were you told what was discussed between
the President and Vladimir Putin regarding sanctions? Were you
given a reading as to everything that was discussed since you
are the one who enforces sanctions?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, we have had discussions following
the Helsinki Summit about what was addressed in the summit, and
my mandate has been the same since the summit, which is to
continue to deploy impactful sanctions----
Senator Donnelly. Were you told whether or not the
President and Vladimir Putin discussed sanctions?
Ms. Mandelker. Again, Senator, we have had----
Senator Donnelly. That is a simple question, yes or no.
Either you were told or you were not.
Ms. Mandelker. Again----
Senator Donnelly. Do you know if that subject was
discussed?
Ms. Mandelker. Again, Senator, Secretary Pompeo has
addressed what was discussed in Helsinki. I was not there. We
have certainly had interagency discussions about the Helsinki
Summit----
Senator Donnelly. I will try one more time. This is about
as simple as it gets. You can go, ``Did you tie your shoe or
not?'' Yes or no. Did you hear whether or not sanctions were
discussed in this meeting? Yes or no. Do you know if they were
discussed or not?
Ms. Mandelker. I do not know the specifics of whether or
not they discussed sanctions at that meeting, but I think the
President has publicly discussed his conversations with Mr.
Putin----
Senator Donnelly. But you are in charge of implementing
these sanctions.
Ms. Mandelker. What I can tell you is that, following the
Helsinki Summit, my mandate remains the same, which is to
continue to impose sanctions to counter Russia's malign
behavior, and we have done that in full force.
Senator Donnelly. The fact is Russia is still in Syria.
They have not changed their behavior. They are still in
Ukraine. They are still using cyberattacks. They are still
meddling in elections. They are preparing to meddle in the
upcoming elections. They are still violating the INF Treaty.
This is all taking place while we have sanctions in place,
which apparently have had no effect on this.
As you look at this, what sanction would have the most
effect to start to turn this behavior around? And let me ask
you one other question. I am running out of time here. I know
we are trying to run it tight. Who do you need to get approval
from to take further sanction steps?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, the determination----
Senator Donnelly. There has got to be somebody.
Ms. Mandelker. Yes, sure. Determinations about most
sanctions which are either subject to Executive order or
statute are made typically by the Secretary of the Treasury in
consultation with the Secretary of State.
Senator Donnelly. Has the Secretary of Treasury approved
you to take any further sanctions actions you deem necessary?
Ms. Mandelker. Absolutely. In fact, we issued sanctions
just this morning in connection with Russia.
Senator Donnelly. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Perdue.
Senator Perdue. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
your patience and forbearance this morning for being here,
guys.
First of all, I want to make a comment about the closed
classified briefing we had on July 31st. I must have attended a
different meeting, Mr. Chairman, but I got a lot out of that
meeting. There are those today who have said that we got no
answers, but I think we addressed one thing in that closed
briefing that I would like to touch on today, knowing that we
are in an open environment.
Secretary Mandelker, first of all, let me clarify a couple
things. Are you familiar with the Russian primary reserve fund
that they have just closed down?
Ms. Mandelker. Generally, Senator, but not----
Senator Perdue. So they just closed down their primary
reserve fund. They are now using their welfare reserve fund for
any profits, as you say, above $70 a barrel, let us say, on the
oil sector. So we are beginning to have some impact, but it has
not changed behavior yet. And here is my question: With the
interconnectivity of the global economy, if we put sanctions on
Russia, there is a trading partner that gets hit by that as
well. Today there is a study out in Germany by the Institute of
World Economy that says that about 40 percent of the detriment
of a sanction is borne by the trading partners across 37
countries that are dealing with Russia.
Now, that sends two messages, and I do not think either are
bad. Number one, in Russia we are going to continue to do this,
and trading partners of Russia, we are going to continue to do
this. Is that true?
Ms. Mandelker. I cannot verify the particular statistics,
but I can tell you there is no question that when you impose
sanctions in particular types of entities in Russia, those
impacts affect or are felt elsewhere, and that is because of
the fact that Russia is part of the global economy.
Senator Perdue. Right, it is a global economy. Then the
question is: Is it U.S. companies or is it European? Europeans
are now saying that they are bearing more of the brunt because
they have a higher degree of trade with Russia, and I have
begun to believe that subjectively. But from a quantitative
point of view, with CAATSA you have authority to do more than
we are doing today. Is that true?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, we have--as I have already
mentioned, we have issued a wide swath of designations under
CAATSA, under Executive orders. We can always do more, and you
are going to continue to----
Senator Perdue. So that is the question. Let me go----
Ms. Mandelker. ----see more from us.
Senator Perdue. ----right there. Without getting into
classified issues here, there are more things that you can do,
but there is a Governor that is being used right now by someone
in the Administration that says that the impact on the negative
side here, the short-term impact, we are not willing to bear
that. Is that true or not?
Ms. Mandelker. I would not say that is true, Senator. With
respect to any particular designation that we issue, of course,
we very closely study the impact. We want to know what the
impact is going to be to U.S. businesses, to U.S. jobs, what
the impact is going to be to our closest allies and partners.
We also engage in a number of different discussions with those
allies and partners. We study those carefully. We look to see
how we can mitigate those kinds of consequences, and we make
our decisions accordingly.
Senator Perdue. But you would agree that with a larger
economy like Russia, it is about a trillion-and-a-half economy.
It is an entirely different equation than trying to deal with a
$400 billion economy like Iran or a smaller economy like North
Korea. That is a fact.
Ms. Mandelker. I agree that those are different complex
problems, yes.
Senator Perdue. And the sanctioning regime is not an end-
all. You have already said it has got to be a whole-of-
Government. We have not talked enough about that today. Are you
integrating with other facets of the Administration for an
ultimate outcome here, and that is, a change in behavior in
Russia?
Ms. Mandelker. Absolutely, Senator.
Senator Perdue. So what other agencies do you guys
integrate with in terms of trying to change behavior in Russia?
Ms. Mandelker. We work closely with the State Department.
We work closely with the intelligence community. We work
closely with the Department of Homeland Security and others.
Senator Perdue. So, Secretary Ford, Russia has now dumped
about $90 billion of U.S. Treasurys. They are doing other
things to prepare for this next round of whatever sanction
regime efforts that we might make.
What efforts are you aware of that Russia is trying to do
to prepare? Are there things that we can do to counter that
prior to the issuing of any further sanctions?
Mr. Ford. Thank you for the question, Senator. I think in
an open session it is probably unwise to get too much into
specifics about that.
Senator Perdue. I understand.
Mr. Ford. You know, it is safe to assume that the Kremlin
is preparing for potential future sanctions because they know
full well what they intend to do and, therefore, I assume they
can also anticipate that if they continue to do the kinds of
things that they have done that have drawn sanctions in the
past, we will continue to react to that.
Senator Perdue. And are we in the State Department dealing
with our allies, particularly our European allies who I think
are bearing a higher degree of impact of this, are we in a
comfortable position that they are going to stay with us,
particularly when we talk about Nord Stream 2 proactively? Are
we going to try to do anything to preclude that? Are the
Russian allies hanging in there with us right now? And how do
you project that as we get further into the sanctioning effort?
Mr. Ford. That is an ongoing piece of the diplomatic
challenge. We, of course, hope that the people will hang with
us in this. We think we have been doing a pretty good job of
keeping the team together so far.
One example of that is the ongoing engagement that we have
had with our European friends with respect to ensuring the
continued rollover of sanctions against Russia for Crimea. You
know, this is the kind of thing that we spend a lot of time
doing.
You mentioned the issue of mitigating impact upon the U.S.
economy, for example. One of the things that we did when a
couple of weeks ago we issued sanctions against Russia for its
chemical weapons attack in the U.K., we had a series--the most
significant piece of that had to do with denial of export of
national security-controlled items, a presumption of denial
from the United States.
One of the carveouts that we had from that in an effort
specifically to try to take into consideration the kind of
concerns that you identified, sir, is a carveout for national
security exports to U.S. companies operating in Russia so that
we are not hurting our people operating in Russia, and we also
had a carveout for Russians employed by U.S. companies in the
United States, for example. So we are always mindful of those
kinds of effects, and we try to mitigate them as best we can.
Senator Perdue. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Jones.
Senator Jones. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like just a real quick--it is something that I have
been concerned about, and that is, I hear in the classified
meetings and I hear today, and I see all of the issues that are
going and all the sanctions that are being imposed and the
impact, the financial impact and everything, but yet we are not
hearing as much of the deterrent--the impact and the
effectiveness of the deterrent. And I am curious as to just a
real--if you can, has the President's comments about all this
being a hoax and anything like that, is that undermining your
efforts? Is Putin trying to just wait it out and hoping the
President will have his way? Is that undermining your efforts?
Ms. Mandelker. I think to the contrary, Senator. If you
look at the wide range of activities that this Administration
has undertaken under the direction of the President, including
the very significant sanctions that we have been able to
launch, including the expulsion of 60 Russians out of our
country, including the closing of Russian entities in the
United States, what Russia sees is a United States that is very
aggressively----
Senator Jones. Yeah, but when the President is standing
right next to Mr. Putin and he is just talking about hoaxes on
Twitter, it just seems to undermine that. But that is OK. I
understand. And I understand the response.
Mr. Krebs, I would like to ask you briefly, I know in my
election in December, DHS had officials on the ground in case
there were some problems. We had seen some issues with bots and
other things coming up, but apparently there was not a lot of
activity that day, at least as far as the Russians were
concerned.
I want to kind of follow up on what Senator Tester was
asking. Are you going to be able to provide that kind of
support this coming November for 50 States? And what kind of
support would that look like? Are you focusing on specific
response threats? What are we going to see from DHS on election
day in November of this year?
Mr. Krebs. Thank you for the question. So, absolutely,
across the 50 States, if requested, we will deploy our
personnel, our field personnel--we have protective security
advisers and cybersecurity advisers--across the country. They
will be in the incident response cells for the State CIOs. They
will also be sitting alongside the homeland security advisers.
And we will deploy that again come midterms.
We just actually ran through this process last week. We had
Tabletop the Vote, which was a nationwide tabletop exercise, 3-
day exercise. Forty-four States plus the District of Columbia
ran through scenarios, both technical hacking of election
infrastructure as well as foreign information operations. And a
couple takeaways from that, and just again to reinforce, when
you go home, please encourage your State and local officials to
work with us. But there is a need, as I mentioned, in our
dependent position, we need more information as soon as it
comes up. The ``If you see something, say something'' mantra
applies here as well. We really do need State and locals to
alert us as quickly and as early as possible so that we can
stitch together that national picture.
So a few other things. We will be standing up, our National
Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center. We will be
in kind of a war room posture that day. But we will also have a
national situational awareness room where State and local
officials can get on to basically a web chat, something like
that, and they can share information across the country.
So, again, if they see anything, they can put it up in the
situational awareness room, and they can share information
visibility to get that common operating picture of our election
security posture on the midterm.
Senator Jones. That is great. I want to follow up real
quick with that, because you first said that if the States
request it, I am assuming leading up to election day, though,
there is going to be a considerable amount of information being
shared. And if you are seeing something, you are going to be
encouraging those States to request that information or try to
do that. I mean, some States--you know, look, a lot of States
are reluctant to get the Feds involved, Alabama probably one of
them, you know, for a lot of reasons. But I assume there is
going to be a lot of information sharing leading up to that, so
you can help identify--not just relying on the States, but you
can help identify where there is a particular vulnerability.
Mr. Krebs. Yes, sir, absolutely. We have every single day
steady-state engagement with all 50 States and local
jurisdictions. Secretary Merrill has been a partner, and we
look forward to continuing to work with him. We are not just
waiting for election day. The amount of progress that we have
made in the last year alone is quite substantial, and we will
continue pushing, pushing, pushing through the midterm. And
then we will do a hot wash. We will figure out where we need to
get better, and we will make that run up to the 2020
Presidential.
Senator Jones. Great. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Tillis.
Senator Tillis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here and the good work you are doing.
Ms. Mandelker, or, actually, Mr. Ford, this may be in your
lane, but I think one of the things that would be helpful to
the Committee that could either be provided in a classified
setting or ideally in an open setting so we can cut through
some of the stuff that we heard today are trend lines. I am
very curious to see what--let us say activities with foreign
direct investment into Russia, you know, if you applied it back
over some period of time, if you take a look at exits, Exxon
was mentioned here. Interestingly enough, I think that JV
started in the 2013-14 timeframe, probably months before Crimea
was invaded, and yet for that entire period of time under the
prior Administration there was not enough action to make Exxon
take pause as to whether or not it made sense to do that. This
Administration has.
So I think if we look at some of the economic fundamentals,
movement in their GDP, the sorts of foreign direct engagement,
those are going to be very helpful for us to have and kind of
map that to actions that you all have taken. You may not be
able to derive direct causation, but I think that that would be
helpful to show, and I think we are seeing trends moving in the
right direction.
I do not know if you have any information you can provide
with that or whether or not that could actually be provided
publicly at some point.
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, we would be happy to provide that
publicly or to you personally. There is no question that we are
seeing those kinds of trend lines. There is no question that
our sanctions are--the fact that we have actually gone after
some of these very significant entities, oligarchs, military--
--
Senator Tillis. Yeah, I would like to get that, because I
would like to drill it down so that when you hear no action is
being taken, no repercussions are being experienced, that seems
to suggest--or to defy any logic with anybody that follows the
Russian economy.
Mr. Ford, do you have anything to add to that?
Mr. Ford. Nothing to add, Senator, except that I think I
would agree completely that it is very clear that Russia has
been feeling pain from this. I do not have specific figures in
front of me, but, of course, things like direct investment,
clearly down--after we sanctioned them for the----
Senator Tillis. Well, let us get that information, because
I would really like to point to it, and we can talk more in the
session tomorrow.
Mr. Krebs, do you believe that Russia started meddling in
elections just in 2016 in the United States?
Mr. Krebs. Without speaking to any classified specifics, I
find it hard to believe that the intelligence service has not
been trying to collect information on policymakers and
influence foreign outcomes.
Senator Tillis. Do you believe it is fair to say, without
sharing anything of a classified nature here, that prior
Administrations would have been aware of this?
Mr. Krebs. Well, certainly the last Administration was
aware, and I think before that likely----
Senator Tillis. Do you see any evidence that internally
there was any aggressive action being taken as a matter of
policy or request for Congress to act to provide additional
tools in that timeframe?
Mr. Krebs. So as the Under Secretary mentioned, I also was
not there at that time. There is continuity of records. We have
seen discussions. There were actions taken. I do think that
there was perhaps a lack of appreciation at the time of the
full scope of the efforts, and as you get more intelligence----
Senator Tillis. It is easy to lay your hands on some of
that that may be helpful in the closed session tomorrow, but
that is not a formal request. If you can get it and it is easy,
I want you to be prepared for what you intend to talk about
tomorrow.
You know, the other point in relation to some questions
here about burning down the Russian economy, I think that that
sounds good. It may be a good sound bite. I think it is not
good as a matter of strategic, precise policy where you are
trying to ratchet things up without having the unintended
consequences. I think, Secretary Mandelker, that is what you
were trying to get to. So I think in tomorrow's session, if we
could talk more about some of the matters that may not be
appropriate for this setting, I would appreciate getting into
that.
Mr. Krebs, in my remaining time, you mentioned that there
are 22 States currently engaged that are getting into the last-
mile program. Do you know whether or not or can you say whether
or not North Carolina is one of them?
Mr. Krebs. Sir, I would have to circle back on that, but,
again, you know, we tend to not talk about specific State
engagement.
Senator Tillis. I think the other thing that is very
important, I think I heard you right by saying they have got to
come and request your support.
Mr. Krebs. Yes, sir.
Senator Tillis. So it would probably also be helpful for
those of us in the Senate who want to make sure that the State
is availing themselves of these resources, that we as Member of
the Senate communicate to the Secretary of State or the
election officials that this is a resource they should take
advantage of. I would like to get your advice on how we should
communicate that.
Mr. Krebs. Absolutely.
Senator Tillis. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Heitkamp.
Senator Heitkamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Krebs, I do not know if you are familiar with the story
that was just out, a letter or a primary source from a young
17-year-old?
Mr. Krebs. Yes, ma'am, I did see that this morning.
Senator Heitkamp. Very interesting reading, actually,
attending a conference, a programming conference, where they
were asked to try and hack into State databases and change
numbers. But he decided he would do something different, and he
ended up, in 5 minutes, without really knowing a lot about it,
crashing the system.
You know, anyone who reads this has no confidence at all
that we are headed in the right direction and that we are
taking the right kind of prophylactic measures. And one of the
things that we know we absolutely have to do is we have to have
paper ballots.
Mr. Krebs. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Heitkamp. So how many States have a system where
they do not require paper ballots right now?
Mr. Krebs. So 5 States are entirely electronic, 14 States
total have some degree of electronic nonpaper ballots.
Senator Heitkamp. This is very problematic.
Mr. Krebs. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Heitkamp. And I cannot say enough about the need to
be very vocal in those States where they do not have paper
ballots.
Mr. Krebs. As far as I have seen, every single State that
does not have paper ballots is on track toward, whether at the
legislative level----
Senator Heitkamp. Will they be on track for the 2018
election?
Mr. Krebs. I do not believe so, but I think every single
one of them is aiming for 2020.
Senator Heitkamp. This is a real problem. And, you know, I
am not--I was not there in the exercise. I do not know, you
know, maybe in closed session we can talk a little bit about
whether this experience that this young 17-year-old had is
consistent with your concerns. But, you know, obviously very,
very concerning and a wake-up call for all of us.
Mr. Krebs. If I can comment on that article, you know, I
try to look at the glass is half-full side of this. I think
with the DefCon and Black Hat conference, what we are seeing is
an awakening and an awareness of the importance of security and
cybersecurity in election security. That is happening. No one
is sitting back and taking this on the chin. We are stepping
forward. We are making progress.
I would also say that when you have--I think that
individual has been in computer science for 5 or 6 years. That
is also one of the greatest gaps that we have as a Nation,
cybersecurity workforce, but also STEM education in our K-12
and higher education.
So when I read that article, I have some doubts----
Senator Heitkamp. He professed that he did not have a level
of skill sets that would in any way match a Russian data base
or bank of hackers.
Mr. Krebs. But he is in the game, and I tell you what, that
17-year-old and the other 11-year-old that they were talking
about, I want their resumes in 5 years. We need more of that.
Senator Heitkamp. Well, I am telling you, it is a wake-up
call.
Ms. Mandelker, you know, I am just going to say that I
watch and we can look at all the metrics that Senator Tillis
was talking about and GDP and effect. But let us get down on a
microlevel because I have been watching your work regarding
Rusal. It seems pretty schizophrenic. It seems not only on your
side but on the tariff side where, you know, all of a sudden
out of nowhere they are granted a waiver; when it becomes
public, the waiver is withdrawn from their tariffs.
And so how does it really benefit us if we say we are going
to give you extensions so that you can get rid of the oligarch
so you can continue to function? And that seems schizophrenic
to me.
Ms. Mandelker. So, Senator, I cannot talk to the tariffs.
That is a decision made by the Department of Commerce.
Senator Heitkamp. I know that.
Ms. Mandelker. Very specifically, with respect to Rusal, we
were clear that when we designated Deripaska and his companies,
we were designating those companies because they were 50
percent or more owned or controlled by Mr. Deripaska. The same
was true with respect to the other oligarchs who we designated.
At the same time----
Senator Heitkamp. But you let him take his money out of the
company before--then said, ``We will lift the sanctions.''
Ms. Mandelker. We have not lifted any sanctions on Rusal.
On the very same day that we issued those designations, we also
appreciated, as we have been discussing, that those kinds of
designations can have wide-ranging----
Senator Heitkamp. Isn't that the purpose of these, to
actually have wide-ranging effects that will lead to economic
harm and will lead to consequences?
Ms. Mandelker. Yes, but, Senator, with all due respect, the
impact that some of those sanctions can have, Rusal was----
Senator Heitkamp. That is true in any kind of global
economy. We are going to have--no one cares that soybean
farmers are collateral damage. So why do we care if other
people who use aluminum are collateral damage on sanctions?
Ms. Mandelker. So, Senator, Rusal is one of the biggest
aluminum companies in the world. They have operations all over
Europe. We have been in close discussions with our close
partners and allies. We wanted to make sure that the impact of
the designation was felt on Mr. Deripaska and not our close----
Senator Heitkamp. I am out of time, but my only point on
this is there is an approach avoidance on what you guys do, and
it just seems to me that when you have your boot on the neck of
a bad actor, you should keep it there.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank all of
you for your testimony today. And, Mr. Krebs, you have been
clear that the Department of Homeland Security focuses on
defense, trying to harden our infrastructure, including when it
comes to elections, our election information. But I think we
would all agree that even as we need to harden our defense, the
best defense would be if we could deter the actions ahead of
time, regardless of what they may be.
Mr. Krebs, you have talked about some of the positive signs
you have seen with respect to the sanctions, and you talked
primarily about other countries not engaging with the Russians
when it comes to arms sales. You described it as ``the dog that
did not bark,'' right?
Mr. Krebs. I believe that was----
Senator Van Hollen. I am sorry. Mr. Ford said that.
But when it comes to interference in our elections, the
dogs are barking really loudly, right? I mean, we have the
Director of National Intelligence Dan Coats say the lights are
flashing red. We had all of the President's top national
security advisers just a few weeks ago saying that the Russians
are planning to interfere or are already interfering in the
2018 elections. We have got the Microsoft story today. We have
the Facebook story from a couple weeks ago.
So my question to you as an experienced diplomat, who is
Putin listening to? Is he listening to DNI Coats or is he
listening to what President Trump is saying in Helsinki and at
the rally 24 hours after all those national security advisers
met saying that this is ``a Russian hoax''? Who is President
Putin listening to?
Mr. Ford. I guess I will venture to take that one, Senator.
Senator Van Hollen. That is, I am sorry, Mr. Ford, for you.
Mr. Ford. I am obviously not in a position to describe in
any useful detail, you know, to whom President Putin is
listening in his own inner councils. I certainly hope someone
knows that, but I do not know myself. I can say that my own
impression from these issues has been that the Russians are
very well aware of what in the Soviet era they used to call
``the correlation of forces.'' They understand what it means to
feel pain and what it is for economic and other sanctions--
other factors to play together in a country's national power.
What we are trying to do, putting aside whatever it is--I
understand your question, but I think from a Russian
perspective, my guess would be that they are very attuned to
the net impact we are having upon their ability to project
power into----
Senator Van Hollen. Mr. Ford, I am asking about the
elections. We have evidence, including this morning, that they
clearly have not gotten the message with respect to interfering
in our politics, in our elections. You said earlier that the
obvious objective is to influence Russian behavior. That is the
obvious objective of sanctions. You also said that we need to
make it clear that there will be a painful result if the
Russians engage in malign behavior.
Here is what Secretary Pompeo said in response to a
question from Senator Rubio just a few weeks ago in the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee, because Senator Rubio and I have
introduced the DETER Act, which would establish very clear,
certain penalties on Russian behavior if we catch them again
interfering in our elections.
Secretary Pompeo said, ``Senator, I completely agree with
you that there is a cost-benefit calculation that is undertaken
before the Russians act. So it follows necessarily that putting
them on notice with essentially a fail-safe about things that
will follow has the likelihood of being successful in raising
the cost in terms of how he calculates risks associated with a
wide range of actions.''
Do you agree with the Secretary's statement?
Mr. Ford. I clearly agree with Secretary Pompeo. I think it
is important--as I was explaining a bit earlier, I think it is
important to protect and advance a couple different equities
simultaneously here. We need to influence Russian behavior. In
the sanctions context, we need to protect the economic and
competitive interests and job equities that we have. We need to
protect our relationships with other players around the world.
We do not have, to my knowledge, an interagency position on
that particular piece of legislation at this time. I believe it
presents challenges from the perspective of the degree to which
we are in--the degree to which it is possible to have a
national security waiver. As part of----
Senator Van Hollen. Mr. Ford, I am sorry. My time is
running out, and we can work on issues regarding a waiver.
Mr. Ford. We would be happy to engage in all these
questions.
Senator Van Hollen. But I worried a little bit when you
said they can study to the test. The reality is under the DETER
Act, there is no getting around the penalties, right? That is
the whole idea of deterrence. You have clear, harsh penalties.
And I should stress these are contingent penalties. We have had
a lot of talk about whether we should increase sanctions on
Russia today. What we are talking about in this piece of
legislation is if they get caught interfering in our elections
in 2018, after this bill were to pass, then there would be
harsh sanctions. Do you agree with the Secretary that that
seems like a good framework to approach this issue?
Mr. Ford. We have already made very clear that, you know,
there are behaviors--and that is one of them--that would be
unacceptable, and we certainly plan and would expect to make
Russia regret any step of that sort. We would be happy to work
with you and your staff to provide input to make sure that this
legislation, if it moves forward, is as well crafted as it can
be, including from the perspective of making sure that this is
not a blunderbuss but more of a rapier or rheostat that we can
use as a tool of diplomacy and behavioral inducement to help
ensure that Russia behaves better and that we can modulate
pressures in response to how their behavior----
Senator Van Hollen. Well, thank you. That was a lot of
adjectives, but the point--today we know that they are not
getting the message. I mean, we know that, right? You do not
have to tell us. The Director of National Intelligence and
everybody has told us that they clearly are not getting the
message today, despite what you and everybody else has been
saying.
So we have got about 80 days, less than that, to go, and my
goodness, if we cannot come up with a way to safeguard the
integrity of our democracy in the next 80 days, shame on us.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Cortez Masto.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Let me try a different tactic. Let me ask the three of you
if you can help me understand the Administration's strategy
toward Russia's election interference. What theory of
behavioral change is the Administration pursuing that entails
Treasury designating a series of Russian entities and
individuals on the one hand, and has President Trump standing
next to Putin and saying Russia is not targeting U.S. elections
on the other? What is the thinking that links those two
actions? Can any of you answer that?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, I think the President later
corrected what he had said during that press conference. But
the bottom line is that we have been----
Senator Cortez Masto. And are you getting clear direction
from the President in addressing the concern that I am hearing
from all of my colleagues in a bipartisan manner to address
what Russia is doing in interfering with our election process?
Ms. Mandelker. Absolutely, Senator.
Senator Cortez Masto. So what additional sanctions can
Treasury impose?
Ms. Mandelker. Again, this morning we imposed additional
sanctions. It is a very active program for us. As I have
already mentioned, we have designated some of the biggest
companies in Russia. We have designated some of Putin's closest
allies who have an enormous amount of wealth, which was
seriously impacted by our sanctions. The impact of our
sanctions has also had a worldwide impact for Russia. It has
had a chilling effect on individuals and companies and
countries who are considering doing business with Russia
because they understand that----
Senator Cortez Masto. Well, Ms. Mandelker, I only have so
much time. Let me ask, because I know----
Ms. Mandelker. ----there are always more to come from the
Treasury Department.
Senator Cortez Masto. I appreciate that, and we have had
this conversation in the confidential briefing as well, which I
was not impressed with.
There is evidence through the Panama Papers or Russian
Forbes suggesting that several childhood friends of President
Putin have come into enormous financial windfalls that raise
strong suspicions of corruption. These men are just a few of
the Russian individuals and entities that experts have
suggested should be designated under CAATSA authority. Does
Treasury have the authority under CAATSA to pursue these
individuals? And are you pursuing them?
Ms. Mandelker. I cannot speak to any particular individuals
without knowing their names and circumstances, but, absolutely,
we have very broad----
Senator Cortez Masto. So you are not aware of those
individuals and the evidence through the Panama Papers or the
Russian Forbes? You are not familiar with what I am talking
about?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, as you are aware, we have conducted
with the interagency a very extensive report under CAATSA which
detailed a number of oligarchs and senior foreign officials who
are close to Putin. We have a great deal of information about
those individuals, and we have designated a number of them.
Senator Cortez Masto. So my colleague just referred to the
DETER Act. Do you support it?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, I know the Administration is happy
to work with the Senate on the DETER Act or any other
particular piece of legislation----
Senator Cortez Masto. Is there any language in the DETER
Act that you have concerns about?
Ms. Mandelker. We are happy to sit down and provide that
kind of guidance. I think those discussions have already been
well underway.
Senator Cortez Masto. Mr. Krebs, you identified there were
five States without paper ballots. Are you currently working
with those States to shore up the integrity of their election?
Mr. Krebs. Yes, ma'am. We work with all 50 States.
Senator Cortez Masto. And you are currently working with
those five?
Mr. Krebs. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Cortez Masto. Is there anything that we can do in
Congress to continue to support shoring up the election
integrity in all of those States and what you are doing in
working with them?
Mr. Krebs. Absolutely. I think I have already mentioned
that when you do go back to your jurisdictions, when you go
back to your districts, please encourage your State and local
officials to work with us. You know, we hit them up every day,
but I think the more voices they hear--you know, I do not want
to undersell the level of work and partnership we are seeing,
but we can always do more.
Senator Cortez Masto. So there was an opportunity to
supply--appropriate $250 million to the States, on top of the
$380 million that was appropriated for the States that the
States have utilized. Are you hearing from those States that
additional dollars, the $250 million, would have been helpful
to help shore up the integrity of the election process?
Mr. Krebs. As I understand it, they are in the process of
implementing that $380 million, which was a much-needed
infusion. Going forward, there will be a requirement for
additional funding. What we are trying to help States with is
refine what the ask is and really get to the bottom of what is
it that they need and how are they going to use it.
There have been investments at the State level because
ultimately this is a State and local responsibility to
administer Federal elections. We are in a supporting role. The
question going forward is: Is there money needed? How much?
Where is it going to come from? And then how are going to--if
it is a Federal spend, how are we going to ensure the
appropriate risk-based security outcome?
Senator Cortez Masto. And besides paper ballots, is there
anything else that can be----
Mr. Krebs. Auditability, yes, ma'am. Auditability.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK. Thank you. I know my time is
running out. Thank you very much.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Warren.
Senator Warren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Sanctions usually involve an effort to follow the money,
and Russians close to Putin are using every opportunity they
can to make it harder for the United States to follow the
money. The recent defense bill requires Treasury to brief
Congress on the assets owned by Vladimir Putin and his cronies,
including the location, value, size, and contents of their bank
accounts, real estate holdings, and all other financial assets,
and the shell companies they use to hide those assets. That
bill has now been signed into law.
Under Secretary Mandelker, when can we expect you to
provide this briefing?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, we would be happy to work with your
staff on this briefing. What I can also tell you----
Senator Warren. This is not about working with my staff.
You are supposed to give a briefing to all of Congress. I just
want to know when it will be ready.
Ms. Mandelker. I cannot give you a date, but I am happy to
get back to you on that. I am happy to give you that briefing.
Senator Warren. Weeks? Months?
Ms. Mandelker. Again, Senator, I believe that that
requirement was that we conduct that briefing in consultation
with the Director of National Intelligence and the State
Department----
Senator Warren. Have you started that?
Ms. Mandelker. ----and we will--we have a number of efforts
underway. In fact, we detailed----
Senator Warren. Is that a yes or a no?
Ms. Mandelker. Again, Senator, we have a number of efforts
underway to follow the money. We just provided an extensive
report to Congress pursuant to CAATSA, and----
Senator Warren. Well, you know, you have a requirement here
in the law, and I am just asking about one thing, about a
report you are supposed to produce, and I just want to know
when you are going to produce the report. I ask this question
because, frankly, I am not convinced that Treasury is doing
everything possible to hold Putin accountable for using
cyberattacks to interfere in our elections and those of our
allies, for illegally occupying Ukraine, for propping up Syrian
dictator Assad.
Congress required Treasury to provide a report on the net
worth and income sources of senior Russians close to Putin, and
instead, I saw what you did. You copied and pasted the Forbes
billionaires list. Thank you, but we already had that.
The Senate Intelligence Committee asked Treasury to help
follow the trail of dirty Russian money to investigate Russia's
interference in our election, and you are reportedly dragging
your feet on that. It has been over a year since Congress
overwhelmingly passed sanctions on Russia. You still have not
implemented seven mandatory provisions of that law.
It is not hard to see why Putin thinks he can still
interfere in our elections and get away with it. The American
people and the world deserve to know how Putin makes his money,
and if we want to squeeze Putin and his cronies, we need to
follow the money and expose those assets so that these corrupt
individuals have fewer ways to ignore the sanctions.
So I want to ask you another question, following up on what
Senator Heitkamp asked. Last month, just says after President
Trump met with President Putin in Finland, Rusal, this
sanctioned Russian aluminum company controlled by a sanctioned
Putin crony, received an exemption from President Trump's
tariffs in the Commerce Department. Treasury reportedly signed
off on this exemption. I sent a letter to the Commerce
Department asking questions about the decision, and 1 day
later, the Administration reversed its tariff exemption. I was
very glad to see that. But can you tell me--I still have a
simple question. How did Treasury allow a tariff exemption for
the subsidiary of a sanctioned Russian company in the first
place, given that the tariff was meant to protect American
suppliers?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, that was a decision by the
Department of Commerce, not a decision by the Treasury
Department. That is not a decision----
Senator Warren. And so the information that you signed off
on it and then reversed positions is not accurate?
Ms. Mandelker. That is right, Senator.
Senator Warren. OK. You are saying it did not--it is not
accurate that that did not happen. All right. So let me ask the
rest of it. Meanwhile, Treasury is reportedly considering
lifting sanctions on Rusal, which is sanctioned for its
financial ties to a corrupt Russian oligarch who contributed to
Putin's illegal occupation of Ukraine. Treasury Secretary
Mnuchin recently said he was concerned about ``the hardworking
people of Rusal.''
So let me ask, has Putin withdrawn from the illegal
occupation of Ukraine, stopped cyberattacks and disinformation,
or halted efforts to spread corruption?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, I just want to correct one point
from your earlier question.
Senator Warren. Yes?
Ms. Mandelker. The oligarch report, the classified oligarch
report, as we have said repeatedly, was a very extensive piece
of work. It involved over 2,500 hours of work within the
interagency. So in terms of following the money, we have
undertaken----
Senator Warren. Well, look, I am now out of time----
Ms. Mandelker. ----not just in that report but in a
number----
Senator Warren. ----but let me just say on this, we just
passed a law about this. I just asked you about when you--
asking you for a report, and it was signed into law, and all I
ask you is when are you going to follow that, and you tell me,
``We already have.'' If we thought you had already done it, we
would not have passed another law asking for this report. So I
think it is perfectly fair to ask you when you are going to
comply with the law that President Trump recently signed in
effect?
Ms. Mandelker. And, again, Senator, I have made clear that
that law requires that we provide a briefing. We are happy to
do that. We just provided a report last week----
Senator Warren. When? That was my question.
Ms. Mandelker. ----covering illicit finance of money
laundering by Russia.
Senator Warren. And when are you ready for that briefing?
Ms. Mandelker. Excuse me.
Senator Warren. When? That was my question. That was the
whole question. It was a short question.
Ms. Mandelker. I understand. We are happy to get back to
you. That is a briefing that we would do with the Director of
National Intelligence and the State Department. I am not
prepared to give you a date today, but we will give you a date
in short order.
Senator Warren. Or even a ball park. Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Reed.
Senator Reed. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me ask if anyone would disagree with the statement that
we have irrefutable, uncontradicted evidence that the Russian
Government, at the direction of President Putin, interfered in
the 2016 election to favor the candidacy of President Trump and
disfavor the candidacy of Secretary Clinton, that they continue
to engage in activities to undermine our election process
throughout the United States? Does anyone disagree with that?
Mr. Krebs. Sir, I think that tracks against the
intelligence community's assessment----
Senator Reed. That is a fact. So, again, going back to
questions that Senator Jones and Senator Van Hollen raised, why
does the President seem unwilling to accept this fact? As
recently as yesterday, he suggested that it may or may not have
been the Russians in an interview with Reuters. Why doesn't he
accept what is the facts?
Mr. Krebs. Sir, I believe he has supported the intelligence
community. He supports the intelligence community. As Under
Secretary Mandelker said, he clarified his statement on the
Tuesday after. Just a couple weeks ago in New York City, Vice
President Pence was very emphatic about supporting the
intelligence community and that protecting our elections is a
priority.
Senator Reed. So why yesterday when he is asked about the
Mueller investigation, he criticizes it, says it plays right
into the hands of Russians, if it was the Russians?
Mr. Krebs. Sir, I am not aware of that report. Again, I----
Senator Reed. Well, it was in the newspaper today.
Mr. Krebs. So the President has been clear he supports the
intelligence community. I have all the guidance, the direction,
and the authorities that I need to help State and local
election officials.
Senator Reed. Would it help your efforts if the President
of the United States, your efforts both nationally and
internationally, if the President of the United States made a
statement to the American people that essentially reaffirmed
the statement I just made, i.e., we were attacked by the
Russians at the direction of Putin, it was designed to affect
the election in 2016, they are continuing to attack us? Would
that help your efforts in terms of bolstering election security
if the President actually said that directly rather than every
other day equivocating?
Mr. Krebs. Again, sir, the President supports the
intelligence community assessment. He has said that publicly. I
have what I need to----
Senator Reed. Well, then why does he turn around and say,
``I support the intelligence community assessment,'' but just
as recently as yesterday saying, ``Well, it may be the
Russians, maybe not''? How does that support the intelligence
community assessment when the intelligence community
assessment, as you have all conceded, is absolutely conclusive
as to the involvement of Russia at the direction of Putin, and
their continuing ongoing threat to the United States? I mean,
this is as if a previous President sort of said, ``Well, you
know, we were attacked, but it could have been those guys or
maybe somebody else.'' I do not think that is the way our
previous Presidents have acted. I do not think you have an
answer.
Mr. Krebs. Sir, again, I have the guidance I need to go and
engage.
Senator Reed. But what about engaging the American people
and the international community? They are looking at, as my
colleagues have suggested, questions of, well, the President
does not really believe that. One of the issues that is coming
up shortly is that the European Union every 6 months has to
renew sanctions. That expires January 31st of 2019. Is there a
chance that one--and it has to be unanimous--that one of those
countries could say, you know, ``This is no big deal with the
President, I mean, we do not have to do that''?
Ms. Mandelker. Senator, we engage very extensively with our
European colleagues precisely on those sanctions. They just
issued additional sanctions at the end of last month that
followed sanctions that we had previously designated. We are
going to continue to work with our colleagues in the EU to have
them continue to ratchet up the pressure that we have already
been placing on the Russian economy. Those discussions have
been quite productive.
Senator Reed. So have you heard any of your European
colleagues suggest to you that they are confused about the
President's statements?
Ms. Mandelker. No, Senator.
Senator Reed. So they are as completely assured of his
situation as we are? And, frankly, you cannot explain the
comment yesterday. Neither can I. Why would one question
whether the Russians are involved in the election as recently
as yesterday if, in fact, you do support the intelligence
community?
Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Senator Reed, and that concludes
the questioning.
Questions submitted by Senators will be due by next
Tuesday, and I ask all of our witnesses to respond promptly to
those questions if they are submitted to them.
And with that, this hearing is concluded. Thank you again
for your attendance and willingness to share your expertise
with us here today. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:14 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[Prepared statements and responses to written questions
supplied for the record follow:]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MIKE CRAPO
This morning the Committee will receive testimony from senior
Administration officials from the Departments of Treasury, State, and
Homeland Security on the implementation and effectiveness of the
sanctions program currently in place against Russia.
The reasons for these sanctions include Russia's standing military
incursions in Ukraine; abetting Assad's atrocities in Syria; conducting
cyberenabled information warfare activities and cyberattacks against
United States critical infrastructure, including its malicious meddling
in U.S. elections, among a host of other malign Russian activities.
The Banking Committee plays a leading role in developing any
legislation that proposes the use of sanctions and financial pressure,
more especially those measures involving financial institutions,
sovereign debt, and other financial instruments to address serious
threats to the national security of the United States.
Just about 1 year ago, on August 2nd, the President signed into law
the Countering America's Adversaries Through Sanctions Act of 2017,
known as CAATSA, which included in it, among other things, authorities
for not only a set of strengthened sanctions against Russia but also
brand new authorities for several powerful mandatory secondary
sanctions.
It was this Committee that put together the foundation for those
sanctions and financial measures on Russia and then worked with the
Committee on Foreign Relations to expand them as part of CAATSA.
CAATSA was truly a four-square effort: it was not only strongly
bipartisan but also bicameral. It passed the House by a vote of 419-3
and two days later, by the Senate on a 98-2 vote.
It's not often that Congress acts together in such a strong manner,
as marked by such near-unanimous votes. But, then, Russia is a menace
on so many different levels, today, that Congress can be compelled to
act with a single voice to find solutions that will protect America and
democratic values across the world.
To its credit, the Administration, in the year since CAATSA, has
imposed some of the toughest sanctions in years on Russia, particularly
with regard to those imposed in April on Russia's oligarchs and their
business associations.
The bulk of sanctions imposed against Russia pertain to its
unlawful invasion and annexation of Crimea. These were strengthened by
Congress in CAATSA and absent any change in Putin's behavior, will
likely remain in place until he's no longer in power and Crimea is
returned.
In all, over the last year, the Administration has sanctioned over
200 targeted Russian individuals and entities, for either its
cyberattacks or Ukraine behavior either pursuant to congressional
sanctions, or under its own executive authority.
I hope to receive an update today from our witnesses on how the
sanctions against Russia are being implemented and enforced.
It was a positive step when, 2 weeks ago, in response to Russia's
use of a nerve agent in Britain against one of its former spies and his
daughter, the State Department showed its resolve against Moscow while
it took a stand with our British allies by imposing a set of escalatory
sanctions under the Chemical and Biological Weapons Control and Warfare
Elimination Act of 1991.
The Administration is taking some important steps against Putin,
his cronies, and the industrial apparatus they control, but can
Congress expect more from the Administration--and, when?
Congress itself is positioned to do more. There are bills in this
Committee and in the Foreign Relations committee which seek to escalate
economic pain throughout Russia's banking and energy sectors and
sovereign debt markets.
As we all, and that includes the Administration, consider next
steps to further constrain Putin, including sanctions and other
diplomatic initiatives, several questions come to mind----
What degree of success have the existing evolutions of sanctions,
which work to constrain the Russian economy and derail the activities
of those individuals closest to Putin, had on Putin's behavior at home
and abroad?
What is the most effective way to coordinate and strengthen
sanctions with our European allies and other partners?
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR SHERROD BROWN
Mr. Chairman, thank you for agreeing to this important hearing, the
first in a series in the coming weeks on sanctions and other measures
that might more forcefully counter Russia's continuing efforts to
attack the U.S. and our allies.
While sanctions have had some effect on Russia's economy, it's not
clear what effect they have had on Russia's malign activities around
the world. Russia remains in Crimea, its proxies are still in eastern
Ukraine, it serves as the arsenal of Assad, and it continues to attack
our electoral system and other key components of our infrastructure.
We must send a more powerful and direct message to Putin and those
within his circles: We know what you're doing, it must stop, and if you
continue, you and your Government will pay a dear price.
Over a year ago, Congress gave the President the authority to use
more assertive sanctions against Russia.
My colleagues and I have pressed for nearly a year for stronger
CAATSA implementation. After months of waiting, we requested
assessments by the Inspectors General of the Intelligence Community,
State, and Treasury Departments.
These hearings, and these IG audits, are not simply a reaction to
the President's startling performance in Helsinki, which was widely
panned on both sides of the aisle and the Atlantic. There is a deeper
problem. With a few exceptions, the President has refused to use the
new authorities under CAATSA.
Let me give you one example. Administration officials identified
Russians responsible for supplying chemical weapons components for use
in Syria, the ones that killed and maimed men, women, and children
alike. Our U.N. Ambassador announced the imminent imposition of
sanctions. The next day they were withdrawn, reportedly on orders from
the President.
That is not the way mandatory sanctions operate. Section 231 of
CAATSA requires that once violators are identified, they must be
sanctioned, or waivers exercised--these defense and intelligence
sanctions in CAATSA were not permissive, they were mandatory. And then
the Administration requested that a broader waiver to section 231 be
included in the defense bill last month, basically because the
President could not certify the key condition of the existing waiver:
that Russia was significantly reducing its cyberattacks against the
United States.
I think it was a bad idea to use the recent defense bill to relax
waiver authorities on Russian defense and intelligence sector
sanctions, and then effectively exempt those waivers from Congressional
review under CAATSA. Instead of strengthening sanctions, we've gone in
the opposite direction. We should be strengthening, not weakening,
sanctions.
And that's why the Administration continues to face fierce
bipartisan criticism on its Russia policy, why a new round of oversight
hearings is being convened, and why members on both sides are proposing
new sanctions.
In addition to urging the Administration to use CAATSA as it was
intended, I think most of us agree Congress should also do more to
increase pressure. Congress crafted tough, comprehensive Russia
sanctions, enacted last August by overwhelming majorities in both
chambers--419-3 in the House, 98-2 in the Senate. We should build on
that broad bipartisan consensus.
We should focus on the facts and broader strategic questions: What
is Russia's Government still doing in Syria, Ukraine and Crimea? What
active cyberattacks are they directing against our elections and
critical infrastructure? And what powerful economic, trade, financial,
diplomatic and political tools can we deploy now to deter those
threats--or threaten to deploy by dropping the hammer if they continue?
Russia's election interference, confirmed unanimously by U.S.
intelligence earlier this year, and reaffirmed since then, poses a
problem that goes far beyond foreign policy, and strikes at the core of
our democracy. This is not a partisan issue. There is no disagreement
about what happened here.
Now we're less than 100 days away from another election, and the
Director of National Intelligence has been sounding the alarm that the
warning lights are blinking red again.
And while some efforts are being made to bolster State election
security measures, and otherwise contain these threats, including a
markup of a measure this week in Rules, it appears little is being done
to address their source: Russia's Government.
I know my constituents are clear-eyed about these threats. The
Ukrainian community in Ohio and around the world knows firsthand--like
our NATO allies Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia--the dangers of unchecked
Russian aggression.
I also know, as past Committee witnesses have said, U.S./EU unity
is critical if sanctions on Russia are to be effective.
That's why we should not only press to more aggressively implement
current Russian sanctions, but we must also strengthen our response.
New bipartisan sanctions measures have been introduced. These hearings
are a critical next step.
Today we're joined by Treasury Under Secretary Mandelker; Assistant
Secretary for International Security and Non-Proliferation Chris Ford
from the Department of State; and Christopher Krebs, Under Secretary
for the National Protection and Programs Directorate, Department of
Homeland Security--three people responsible for policy on countering
Russia within the Administration. I welcome you all. I am interested to
hear your perspective on where we are, what effects the current
sanctions regime is having on Russia's economy and behavior, and where
you think we're headed in the coming months.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF SIGAL P. MANDELKER
Under Secretary, Terrorism and Financial Intelligence, and Acting
Deputy Secretary, Department of the Treasury
August 21, 2018
Treasury's Efforts To Counter Russian Malign Activity
Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and distinguished Members of
the Committee, thank you for inviting me here today to speak on behalf
of the Treasury Department and provide an update on our comprehensive
efforts to counter Russia's malign activity. Our efforts, taken
together with our partners across the U.S. Government and around the
world, are guided by a clear understanding of the threat Russia poses
to the United States and to our friends and allies.
As Russia seeks to challenge the United States and its allies, we
see this threat manifest itself in a variety of ways, including by:
continuing its occupation of Crimea and ongoing aggression against
Ukraine, attempting to subvert Western democracies, including our own,
through election interference; enabling the Assad regime's massacres in
Syria; using chemical weapons in an attempt to assassinate a British
citizen and his daughter in the United Kingdom; perpetrating malicious
cyberattacks; maintaining ties to transnational organized criminal
groups; violating human rights at home; fostering corruption across
Russia's economy; and facilitating sanctions evasion and other illicit
activity across the globe. The breadth and brazenness of Russia's
malign conduct demands a firm and vigorous response.
Precisely for this reason, Treasury's Russia sanctions program is
among our most active and impactful. Since January 2017, this
Administration has sanctioned 217 Russian-related individuals and
entities for a broad range of activities, 200 of which were sanctioned
by Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC). Indeed, we have
issued Russia-related measures in 7 of the last 9 months. Since the
start of this Administration, Treasury has also added 32 Russian
entities to its Sectoral Sanctions Identification List, subjecting
those listed to debt and equity restrictions, as well as prohibitions
on the provision of goods, services, and technology in support of
certain energy projects in Russia. Pursuant to the Countering America's
Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (CAATSA), we have also tightened
these restrictions.
In doing so we have targeted a veritable ``who's who'' of Russia's
most prominent companies. These include Rosoboronexport, Russia's
primary State-owned weapons trading company; EuroSibEnergo, among the
largest independent power companies in Russia; and Surgutneftegaz, a
major Russian oil company.
Our targets also include the heads of major State-owned banks and
energy firms, as well as some of Putin's closest associates. These
figures include Putin affiliates Oleg Deripaska and Viktor Vekselberg;
Putin's current or former son in law Kirill Shamalov; the heads of
State-owned companies such as Gazprom's Alexei Miller, Gazprombank's
Andrey Akimov, and VTB Bank's Andre Kostin; the head of the Russian
Security Council, Nikolai Patrushev; and the Russian Minister of
Interior, Vladimir Kolokoltsev. Dealings with such persons on our
Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List, moreover,
create exposure to secondary sanctions under CAATSA, meaning that
persons who deal with them risk being sanctioned themselves. Targeting
these Russian individuals and entities have made them radioactive, as
we have made clear to the world that those who choose to continue to do
business with them do so at their own peril.
That CAATSA was passed by a near unanimous vote demonstrated great
resolve by Congress to counter Russia's malign activity. We share that
resolve. The Department of the Treasury's approach towards Russia is
informed by this Administration's 2018 National Security Strategy,
which clearly recognizes the full range of Russian malign activity, and
which prioritizes the importance of economic tools to ``deter, coerce,
and constrain'' our adversaries.
As companies across the globe work to distance themselves from
sanctioned Russian persons, our actions are imposing an unprecedented
level of financial pressure on those supporting the Kremlin's malign
agenda and on key sectors of the Russian economy.
Treasury's actions have caused extensive consequences to the
financial interests of targeted individuals and entities, including
blocking hundreds of millions of dollars in Russian assets in the
United States. Targeted State-owned banks and other sanctioned entities
likely have higher financing costs than they otherwise would if not for
Treasury's prohibitions on debt purchases. Russian companies designated
for their links to Crimea have been forced to cut production and have
lost business relationships with foreign commercial partners. In
addition, we have cut off, from the U.S. financial system and beyond,
malicious cyberactors, including those providing offensive
cybercapabilities to the Russian intelligence services, some of whom
covertly worked on behalf of the Kremlin to interfere with the 2016
U.S. election. Such reactions illustrate the substantial costs our
measures are imposing on those who undermine U.S. interests.
Building on sanctions implemented since 2014, the impacts of our
Russia-related sanctions are felt far beyond the targeted entities and
persons. Western sanctions and subsequent geopolitical tensions have
raised uncertainty and dampened domestic and foreign private investment
in Russia. In the energy sector, our sanctions have limited important
investment in exploratory energy projects needed to help grow Russia's
oil and gas production capacity. Overall foreign direct investment into
Russia has fallen over 5 percent since 2013, with sizeable declines in
direct investments from the United States, which have fallen 80 percent
since 2013. Direct investment into Russia from other major economies
also declined over the same period. Russia is taking note of these
impacts.
In addition to sanctions, we are also strategically and smartly
deploying Treasury's other economic authorities--such as anti- money
laundering (AML) measures, enforcement actions, actions under Section
311 of the USA PATRIOT Act, foreign engagement, and private sector
partnerships, among other tools--to disrupt Russia's illicit financial
conduct and harden the international financial system against its
predation. We are directly engaging our foreign allies and partners,
especially those in Europe, to coordinate these efforts and augment the
impact of our actions. We are working closely with our interagency
partners to deploy the full range of other financial, intelligence, law
enforcement, and diplomatic tools to expose, disrupt, and impose costs
on those responsible for Russia's malign activities.
By strategically leveraging all of these complementary authorities,
we are increasing financial pressure on Russia to advance our national
security priorities while simultaneously mitigating unnecessary impacts
on the United States, our European allies, and the global economy. We
recently submitted a report pursuant to Section 243 of CAATSA further
elaborating on these efforts (see Attachment).
We have imposed major costs on Russia. Yet the significance of our
actions and other financial measures must ultimately be measured in
terms of their strategic impacts. Though Russia's malign activities
continue, we believe its adventurism undoubtedly has been checked by
the knowledge that we can bring much more economic pain to bear using
our powerful range of authorities--and that we will not hesitate to do
so if its conduct does not demonstrably and significantly change.
Overview and Impact of April 6 Oligarch and Russian Official
Designations
An important example of the impact that Treasury actions have had
on Russia was in our April 6, 2018, designation of 38 entities and
individuals, including 7 Russian oligarchs and 12 companies they own or
control, and a major State-owned Russian weapons trading company and
its bank subsidiary. This action included sanctions against 17 senior
Russian Government officials, many of whom were appointed to their
posts by Putin and hold prominent positions in the Russian Government
and business community.
Among the 12 companies sanctioned are Renova Group, an
international group of asset management companies and investment funds
owned by Vekselberg; RUSAL, the second-largest producer of aluminum in
the world; EN+, a publicly traded holding company for Deripaska's
metals and energy assets; GAZ Group, Russia's leading producer of
commercial vehicles; and EuroSibEnergo, as mentioned above, one of
Russia's largest independent power companies.
As a result of this action, we have impeded the ability of these
actors to access the financial system, reduced the value of their
assets, and forced companies to extricate themselves from involvement
with designated actors. Other tangible impacts include:
Since being designated, Deripaska's estimated net worth has
dropped by roughly 50 percent, and the share price of EN+ fell
from $12.20 to $5.40 on the London Stock Exchange following its
designation.
Vekselberg's net worth dropped an estimated $3 billion, and
foreign Governments have launched investigations and frozen
Vekselberg's assets in their jurisdictions. Additionally,
Vekselberg's Renova Group was forced to divest from ventures in
Switzerland and Italy.
As our public actions continue to draw high-profile attention to
those individuals and entities charged with carrying out Putin's
orders, the world takes note. Many have become pariahs in the
international community and have lost their ability to portray
themselves as legitimate businessmen.
Additional Treasury Actions
We have also targeted Russia's malicious cyberactivity, sanctioning
those behind Russia's interference in the 2016 U.S. election, as well
as companies developing and procuring offensive cybercapabilities and
underwater technologies for the Federal Security Service (FSB). We
designated two Russian intelligence organizations--FSB and the Main
Intelligence Directorate (GRU)--both of which engage in activities that
undermine U.S. cybersecurity on behalf of the Russian Government.
In March, we designated Russian oligarch Yevgeniy Viktorovich
Prigozhin under our cyberauthorities for funding the operations of the
Internet Research Agency, which has covertly worked on behalf of the
Kremlin to influence social media networks and interfere with the 2016
U.S. election. In exposing the activities of these organizations and
designating companies for their dealings with them, we not only cut
them off from the United States and U.S. persons, but subject third
parties who deal with them to potential sanctions as well.
We also are exposing and disrupting Russian support to rogue
States. We used our Syria authorities to sanction Russia's primary
State-owned defense firm and its bank subsidiary for supplying Russian
military equipment to the Assad regime, hindering the firm's ability to
receive payments from existing contracts with other countries. And just
earlier this month, we designated a Russian bank, Agrosoyuz Commercial
Bank, for knowingly facilitating a significant transaction on behalf of
U.S. and U.N.-designated North Korean individuals and entities.
Our sanctions have blocked hundreds of millions of dollars in
Russian assets in the United States and caused extensive damage to the
economic interests of affected individuals and entities. Companies and
individuals around the world have cut ties to sanctioned actors in
attempts to protect their commercial interests. Notably, in early 2018,
Exxon announced that it had decided to end its joint exploration
ventures with Rosneft due to the continued economic pressure imposed by
our sanctions. In 2017, Rosneft separately announced a hold on a major
South Black Sea project, citing sanctions as limiting its ability to
obtain modem technology and equipment.
We also continue to track and target illicit financial hubs where
Russian actors try to hide their money. Earlier this year, we used our
authorities under Section 311 of the USA PATRIOT Act to find Latvian-
based ABLV Bank to be a foreign financial institution of primary money
laundering concern, proposing to prohibit U.S. financial institutions
from maintaining correspondent accounts on behalf of the bank. In this
finding and proposed rulemaking, FinCEN cited multiple instances of
institutionalized money laundering in which ABLV management solicited
high-risk shell company activity that enabled the bank and--its
customers to launder funds. ABLV's facilitation of shell company
activity typically benefited illicit actors engaged in an array of
illicit conduct, including transnational organized criminal activity,
corruption, and sanctions evasion, including activity emanating from
Russia. This finding and proposed action not only was a shock to the
Latvian banking system, helping prompt that country to undertake
certain reforms, but it also put financial institutions in other
similar financial hubs on notice that we will not hesitate to act
against banks that institutionalize money laundering as a pillar of
their business practice.
TFI's Work To Advance Our National Security
In the Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (TFI), I work
with some of the most dedicated professionals in the U.S. Government,
who are working countless hours to implement programs that protect our
national security. This is especially true when it comes to our Russia
team, who are wholly committed to the mission.
In addition to our robust Russia program, we also have teams of
people working across a wide spectrum of other programs. Under this
Administration, Treasury has sanctioned more than 1,300 individuals,
entities, vessels, and aircraft.
In order for us to implement all of these programs and maximize the
effectiveness of our financial tools, Treasury also has spent
significant resources drafting new Executive Orders, issuing
advisories, and providing guidance such as Frequently Asked Questions
to the public and private sector. Our team also travels around the
world to ensure our sanctions are effectively implemented and the real-
world risks of transacting with designated individuals and entities are
fully understood.
Here in Washington, our staff fields thousands of inquiries
regarding compliance and licensing issues--many highly complicated
questions that require substantial amounts of time, expertise, and
effort. Since the start of FY2018, OFAC has received nearly 50,000
phone calls for guidance on our sanctions programs, including our
various Russia-related authorities. On top of this, we are required to
prepare and submit at least 80 reports to Congress in 2018--reports
that require thousands of hours of work. To highlight just one example,
the classified oligarch report required by Section 241 of CAATSA
encompassed more than 2,500 hours of interagency work over the course
of several months.
TFI and the interagency colleagues with whom we work bring this
same dedication to the range of programs for which we are responsible.
I am proud and humbled to lead these efforts on behalf of the Treasury
Department and am grateful for the opportunity to help advance our work
on behalf of our national security.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER KREBS
Under Secretary, National Protection and Programs Directorate,
Department of Homeland Security
August 21, 2018
Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and Members of the Committee,
thank you for today's opportunity to testify regarding cyberthreats to
critical infrastructure. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
serves a critical role in safeguarding and securing cyberspace, a core
homeland security mission. The National Protection and Programs
Directorate (NPPD) at DHS leads the Nation's efforts to ensure the
security and resilience of our cyber- and physical-infrastructure.
DHS is responsible for assisting Federal agencies in protecting
civilian Federal Government networks and collaborating with other
Federal agencies, as well as State, local, tribal, and territorial
governments, and the private sector to defend against cyberthreats. Our
work enhances cyberthreat information-sharing across the globe to stop
cyberincidents before they start and help businesses and Government
agencies to protect their cybersystems and quickly recover should such
an attack occur. By bringing together all levels of Government, the
private sector, international partners, and the public, DHS is taking
action to protect against cybersecurity risks, improve our whole-of-
Government incident response capabilities, enhance information sharing
of best practices and cyberthreats, and to strengthen resilience.
Threats
Cybersecurity threats remain one of the most significant strategic
risks for the United States, threatening our national security,
economic prosperity, and public health and safety. Regarding
cyberthreats to our critical infrastructure, the Director of National
Intelligence recently said that ``the warning lights are blinking
red.'' We have seen advanced persistent threat actors, including
cybercriminals Nation-States and proxies, increase the frequency and
sophistication of malicious cyberactivity. Our adversaries have been
developing and using advanced cybersecurity capabilities in attempts to
undermine critical infrastructure, target our livelihoods and
innovation, steal our national security secrets, and threaten our
democracy.
Although the intelligence community has not yet seen evidence that
Russia intends to conduct a robust campaign aimed at tampering with our
election infrastructure or influencing the makeup of the House or
Senate in 2018, Russia has previously demonstrated the capability and
intent to interfere with our elections. Russian efforts to influence
the 2016 elections were one of the most recent expressions of Moscow's
longstanding desire to undermine the U.S.-led liberal democratic order.
The Russian Government conducted malicious cyberoperations by
compromising and leaking emails from U.S. political figures and
institutions, and targeting election infrastructure. These activities
demonstrated a significant escalation in directness, level of activity,
and scope of effort compared to previous operations. Accordingly, we
view the 2018 midterm elections as a potential target for Russian
cyberoperations and are working aggressively to mitigate any foreign
threats to our election systems or infrastructure.
Global cyberincidents, such as the ``WannaCry'' ransomware incident
attributed to North Korea and the ``NotPetya'' malware incident
attributed to the Russian military in May and June 2017, respectively,
are examples of malicious actors leveraging cyberspace to create
disruptive effects and cause economic loss. These incidents exploited
known vulnerabilities in software commonly used across the globe. Prior
to these events, DHS had already taken actions to help protect networks
from similar types of attacks. NPPD's National Cybersecurity and
Communications Integration Center (NCCIC) publishes a list of known
software vulnerabilities and pushes this information out to
stakeholders on a routine basis. Additionally, through requested
vulnerability scanning, we helped stakeholders identify vulnerabilities
on their networks so they could be patched before incidents and attacks
occur. Recognizing that not all users are able to install patches
immediately, we shared additional mitigation guidance to assist network
defenders. As the incidents unfolded, we led the Federal Government's
incident response efforts, working with our interagency partners, in
providing situational awareness, information sharing, malware analysis,
and technical assistance to affected Government and critical
infrastructure entities.
In a series of incidents since at least May of last year, working
with U.S. and international partners, DHS and FBI have identified
Russian Government actors targeting Government entities and businesses
in the energy, nuclear, water, aviation, and critical manufacturing
sectors. DHS assesses that this campaign ultimately collected
information pertaining to industrial control systems with the intent to
gain access to industrial control systems environments. The intrusions
have been comprised of two distinct categories of victims: (1) staging
and (2) intended targets. Through the Department's incident response
actions, we identified activities by Russian Government actors to
target certain entities that then become pivot points, leveraging
existing relationships between the initial victim and the intended
targets to hide their activity, as part of a multistage intrusion
campaign to gain access to networks of major, high-value assets that
operate components of our Nation's critical infrastructure. Based on
our analysis and observed indicators of compromise, DHS has confidence
that this campaign is still ongoing, and threat actors are actively
pursuing their ultimate long-term campaign objectives. DHS and FBI
continue to conduct incident response related to this activity and have
published a joint technical alert and hosted public webinars to enable
network defenders to identify and take action to reduce exposure to
this malicious activity.
Since 2015, the U.S. Government received information from multiple
sources--including public and private sector cybersecurity research
organizations and allies--that cyberactors are exploiting large numbers
of network infrastructure devices (e.g., routers, switches, firewall,
Network-based Intrusion Detection System devices) worldwide. Earlier
this year, DHS, FBI, and the United Kingdom's National Cyber Security
Centre published a publicly available joint technical alert attributing
this activity to Russian State-sponsored actors. Targets are primarily
Government and private-sector organizations, critical infrastructure
providers, and Internet service providers supporting these sectors.
Several days after publication of the alert, an industry partner
notified DHS and FBI of related malicious cyberactivity in which the
actors redirected certain queries to their own infrastructure and
obtained sensitive information, which included the configuration files
of networked devices. Russian State-sponsored actors are using
compromised routers to conduct man-in-the-middle attacks to support
espionage, extract intellectual property, maintain persistent access to
victim networks, and potentially lay a foundation for future offensive
operations.
Cybersecurity Priorities
DHS, our Government partners, and the private sector are committed
to a more strategic and unified approach as we work to improve our
Nation's overall defensive posture against this malicious
cyberactivity. Presidential Policy Directive-21, Critical
Infrastructure Security and Resilience, recognized that only a more
integrated approach to managing risk would enable the Nation to counter
malicious cyberactivity our adversaries. In May of this year, DHS
published a Department-wide Cybersecurity Strategy, providing DHS with
a strategic framework to execute our cybersecurity responsibilities
during the next 5 years.
This Administration has leaned forward even further, prioritizing
the protection and defense of our people and economy from the range of
threats that exist today, including those emanating from cyberspace.
Last year, the President signed Executive Order 13800, Strengthening
the Cybersecurity of Federal Networks and Critical Infrastructure. This
Executive Order set in motion a series of assessments and deliverables
to enable the improvement of our defenses and lower our risk to
cyberthreats.
Executive Order 13800 requires continued examination of how the
Federal Government and industry work together to protect our Nation's
critical infrastructure, prioritizing deeper, more collaborative
public-private partnerships in threat assessment, detection,
protection, and mitigation. In collaboration with civilian, defense,
and intelligence agencies, we have worked to identify authorities and
capabilities that agencies could employ, soliciting input from the
private sector, and developed recommendations to support the
cybersecurity efforts of those critical infrastructure entities at
greatest risk of attacks that could result in catastrophic impacts. It
is only through this collective defense model that we will be
successful against this threat.
NPPD's NCCIC operates at the intersection of the private sector,
State and local governments, Federal departments and agencies,
international partners, law enforcement, intelligence, and defense
communities. The Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015
established DHS as the Federal Government's central hub for the
automated sharing of cyberthreat indicators and defensive measures. The
NCCIC's automated indicator sharing (AIS) capability allows the Federal
Government and the private sector network defenders to share technical
information at machine speed,. The NCCIC also provides entities with
information, technical assistance and guidance they can use to secure
their networks, systems, assets, information, and maintains
confidentiality with our data, by reducing vulnerabilities, ensuring
resilience to cyberincidents, and private partners supporting their
holistic risk management priorities. DHS does this in a way that
protects privacy and civil liberties.
National Risk Management
We are facing an urgent, evolving crisis in cyberspace. Our
adversaries' capabilities online are outpacing our stovepiped defenses.
Working together with the private sector and our Government partners,
we are addressing this problem and taking collective action against
malicious cyberactors.
Specifically, there is a need to enhance and promote the
Department's cross-sector, cross-Government coordination on critical
infrastructure security and resilience.
We must improve our focus on examining the critical functions that
drive our economy and facilitate national security. In other words, we
need to continually advance our ability to organize and collaborate on
risk strategies, planning, and solutions. For many years, DHS has
worked closely with the private sector, but it has become clear that it
must be a focal point for turning threat intelligence into joint
action.
At the Department's first National Cybersecurity Summit this
summer, in response to a clear demand signal and after extensive
consultation with industry and Government partners, Secretary Nielsen
announced the rebranding of the Office of Cyber and Infrastructure
Analysis (OCIA) as the National Risk Management Center (NRMC). Housed
within DHS, the NRMC is the logical evolution of the ongoing
improvements made over the last several years in information sharing
and partnership building between the Government and industry. The NRMC
draws on existing resources and functions from across NPPD, the
Department and our Federal and international partners to bring our risk
management efforts to the next level in effectiveness.
The NRMC's mission is to continually facilitate analysts and
planners, from both public and private sector, in their efforts to
assess our country's cyber-risks, plan to combat those risks and--most
importantly--enable implementation of tailored solutions to protect our
networks. The full expertise of the Federal Government should be
brought to bear on these challenges. With this in mind, the NRMC will
provide the private sector with an entrance point for project teams to
access programs from all departments and agencies and coordinate
defenses against cyberthreats that can affect all sectors.
Perhaps most importantly, the Center's core mission focuses on the
systems or functions that cut across sectors. Ultimately, the Center
will facilitate a partnership among and across Government and industry
that can provide a unified, collective approach to the defense that the
Nation needs to achieve superiority over our adversaries.
We cannot fail to evolve as the threats continue to come. The NCCIC
and National Infrastructure Coordination Center (NICC) will continue to
carryout current operations but the NRMC will enhance their efforts.
The NRMC will support NCCIC and NICC operations by helping with
prioritization and other needs, while also looking ahead to plan more
strategically, and leveraging feedback from the operations and other
partners.
Election Security
DHS is committed to ensuring a coordinated Federal Government
effort to assess vulnerabilities and mitigate risk to election
infrastructure. We understand that working with election infrastructure
stakeholders is essential to ensuring a more secure election. Based on
our assessment of activity observed in the 2016 elections, DHS and our
stakeholders are increasing awareness of potential vulnerabilities and
providing capabilities to enhance the security of U.S. election
infrastructure as well as that of our allies.
Under the Constitution and our system of laws, State and local
election officials in thousands of jurisdictions administer Federal
elections. Risk management for election officials did not begin in
2016. State and local election officials across the country have a
long-standing history of working both individually and collectively to
reduce risks and ensure the integrity of U.S. elections. DHS is working
with all 50 States to provide value-added--yet voluntary--services to
support their efforts to secure elections.
This year our Nation is in the midst of primary and special
elections as well as the general election in November. We have been
working with election officials in all States to enhance the security
of their elections by offering support and by establishing essential
lines of communications at all levels--public and private--for
reporting both suspicious cyberactivity and incidents. This information
sharing is critical and our goal is to enhance transparency and have
visibility of aggregated elections-related cybersecurity efforts. We
are also working with election officials, vendors, the Election
Assistance Commission (EAC), and National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) to characterize risk to election systems and ensure
appropriate mitigations are understood and available in the
marketplace. As a part of this process, we work with these stakeholders
to recommend best practices to ensure a secure and verifiable vote.
Through the Government Coordinating Council, we also developed guidance
for States on how best to spend funding received through the Help
America Vote Act grant issued by the EAC.
DHS has made tremendous progress and has been committed to working
collaboratively with those on the front lines of administering our
elections--State and local election officials and the vendor
community--to secure election infrastructure from risks. Engagement
with all 50 States and the establishment of the Election
Infrastructure-Information Sharing and Analysis Center with nearly
1,000 members reflects the advances we have made in building a
coalition committed to securing elections from cyberthreats. The
establishment of Government and sector coordinating councils will build
the foundations for this enduring partnership not only in 2018, but for
future elections as well. We will remain transparent as well as agile
in combating and securing our physical and cyberinfrastructure.
However, we recognize that there is a significant technology deficit
across State and local governments, and State and local election
systems, in particular. It will take significant and continual
investment to ensure that systems are upgraded and insecure or
vulnerable systems are retired.
Conclusion
In the face of increasingly sophisticated threats, DHS employees
stand on the frontlines of the Federal Government's efforts to defend
our Nation's critical infrastructure from natural disasters, terrorism
and adversarial threats, and technological risk such as those caused by
cyberthreats. Our infrastructure environment today is complex and
dynamic with interdependencies that add to the challenge of securing
and making it more resilient while not endangering freedom of speech,
freedom of religion or failing to protect an individual's privacy.
Technological advances have introduced the ``Internet of Things'' and
cloud computing, offering increased access and streamlined
efficiencies, while increasing access points that could be leveraged by
adversaries to gain unauthorized access to networks. As new threats
emerge, we must better integrate cyber and physical risk management in
order to secure effectively the Nation. Expertise in cyberphysical risk
assessments and cross-sector critical infrastructure interdependency
evaluation is where NPPD brings unique experience and capabilities.
We must ensure that NPPD is appropriately organized to address
cybersecurity threats both now and in the future, and we appreciate
this Committee's leadership in working to establish the Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Security Agency to accomplish this goal. We are
committed to working with Congress to ensure that we address
cybersecurity in a way that cultivates a safer, more secure and
resilient Homeland.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the Committee today,
and I look forward to your questions.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER A. FORD
Assistant Secretary, Bureau of International Security and
Nonproliferation, Department of State
August 21, 2018
Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and Senators, thank you for
inviting us.
I represent the Bureau of International Security and
Nonproliferation (ISN), and I am pleased to join Treasury Under
Secretary Sigal Mandelkar and DHS Under Secretary Christopher Krebs, to
help explain how we are employing the various sanctions tools Congress
has given us vis-a-vis the Russian Federation and the various malign
activities of the Putin regime. For my part, I will be focusing
principally upon Section 231 of the Countering America's Adversaries
Through Sanctions Act of 2017 (or CAATSA), because implementation of
that section has been entrusted to my bureau at the State Department.
But if I might, Mr. Chairman, before I talk about our approach to
implementing Section 231, I'd like first to put my bureau's work in
this respect into a broader context.
Our Philosophy of CAATSA Section 231 Implementation
At the ISN Bureau, our traditional focus is upon the myriad threats
and policy challenges facing the United States from the spread of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD), to delivery systems, and advanced
conventional weapons. These issues are of enormous importance to
national and international security, of course, and ISN's eponymous
role in ``international security'' has been seen primarily through the
nonproliferation prism.
But ``international security'' can--and does--encompass more than
just nonproliferation, and one of our roles is to implement sanctions
under Section 231 of CAATSA. In passing that legislation last year,
Congress made very clear its intention that the purpose of the Russia
sanctions provisions therein was to pressure Russia to change its
behavior with respect to a wide variety of malign acts--including
Vladimir Putin's effort to interfere in the 2016 U.S. presidential
election. We have heard that message loud and clear.
Significantly, there is more to this than a much-deserved response
to malign acts and deterrence to such provocations in the future--
though those are, of course, laudable goals that we fully support, and
which we are using CAATSA to help bring about. As I see it, these
sanctions tools also have value in better equipping us to play a role
in broader arenas of great-power competition and geopolitical
competitive strategy.
The new National Security Strategy calls out ``the contest for
power'' as ``[a] central continuity in history,'' and warns about
challengers--specifically, ``the revisionist powers of China and
Russia, the rogue States of Iran and North Korea, and transnational
threat organizations''--that ``are actively competing against the
United States and our allies and partners.''
Similarly, the new National Defense Strategy observes that ``[t]he
central challenge to U.S. prosperity and security'' today is ``the
reemergence of long-term, strategic competition.'' ``It is increasingly
clear,'' that document states, ``that China and Russia want to shape a
world consistent with their authoritarian model--gaining veto authority
over other Nations' economic, diplomatic, and security decisions.''
Indeed, the NDS notes that ``[b]oth revisionist powers and rogue
regimes are competing [with the United States] across all dimensions of
power.''
This is the mindset that we also bring to approaching CAATSA
sanctions against Russia. Russia has undertaken a campaign of malign
activities in its attempt to compete with the United States and our
allies and partners. The array of sanctions the United States has
imposed against Russia, and those that materially support its malign
activities, respond directly to its aggressive action against our
country, our allies, and our partners.
And this is where CAATSA's Section 231 comes into play. The threat
of mandatory sanctions against individuals or entities that have
engaged in significant transactions with the Russian defense or
intelligence sectors can be so useful, but we need to use this powerful
tool surgically--to excise the malignancy without damaging our very
important foreign relationships. As we have been implementing Section
231, we began by emphasizing to our allies that transactions with the
Russian arms industry could have consequences.
Firstly, these are the same arms that Russia used and continues to
use in its aggression against Ukraine. Our implementation of the CAATSA
sanctions reinforces this Administration's unwavering commitment to
Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity, including over Crimea.
Secondly--as Willie Sutton reportedly said when asked why he robbed
banks--``that's where the money is.'' High-technology military
equipment is one of the only competitive sectors of the Russian economy
these days, and Moscow makes a great deal of money from selling arms
abroad indiscriminately--be it to Iran or the Assad regime. These funds
fuel the Kremlin's malign activities, spread its malign influence, and
support Russia's development of newer, even more deadly weapons.
Accordingly, if Russia is to feel pressure in response to its malign
activities, it makes sense to go after these revenues--revenues that
may also help offset the costs of developing newer, even more deadly
weapons that threaten and undermine the security of the United States
and our allies and partners.
More broadly, however, Russia also uses its arms transactions as a
tool of geopolitical influence. For Russia, it isn't just about money,
but about the relationships that the arms trade creates for Moscow.
Scaling back and shutting down Russia's arms deals and deterring such
transactions in the future strike directly at the Kremlin's malign
activities and influence that it seeks to exert in the international
community.
That is our central philosophy behind Section 231 implementation.
The broadest challenge, of course, is how to manage a relationship with
Russia that has both important cooperative aspects and important points
of disagreement. As the President and Secretary Pompeo have made clear,
we seek to cooperate with Russia on subjects of shared interest
wherever we can, because of course there are important shared interests
on which it would be irresponsible of us not to cooperate. This was,
for instance, well symbolized by the conference we held at the State
Department on June 28 that brought together the United States, United
Kingdom, and the Russian Federation as the Depository States of the
Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT), to commemorate the 50th
Anniversary of that Treaty being opened for signature. For the
occasion, the three foreign ministers of these Depository States issued
a joint communique reaffirming their shared commitment to the NPT and
the nonproliferation regime of which it is the cornerstone.
At the same time, the Department and my Bureau have not been shy
about acting forthrightly in pushing back against Russian malign
activities. The sanctions tools you have given the State Department,
including CAATSA's Section 231, are valuable elements of how this
Administration is contributing to American success in responding to
Russian aggression in this new era of great power competition.
A Record of Successes to Date
As we have dispatched our diplomats repeatedly around the world to
spread word about Section 231 and encourage Russia's arms clients to
wean themselves from Moscow, we have had some notable successes to
date. Most of these successes are ones about which it is not possible
or advisable to speak in public, because most interlocutors who take
action to reduce their exposure to Section 231 sanctions are not keen
to publicize the fact. We very much wish to respect their
sensibilities, because that's how friends treat each other. We also
want to honor these confidentialities because embarrassing partners who
have done the right thing in reducing their Russian arms entanglements
isn't a good way to encourage others to follow suit--we are also
cognizant of potential Russian retaliation against these interlocutors.
Nevertheless, though we can't speak about them publicly, we have
had real successes--in the form of something on the order of billions
of dollars in announced or expected Russian arms transactions that have
quietly been abandoned as a result of our diplomatic outreach about
Section 231. That's billions that Putin's war machine will not get, and
through which the Kremlin's malign influence will not spread, and a
slew of strategic relationships between the Kremlin and overseas
partners that will not broaden and deepen. We're proud of this record,
and we're working hard to run up the score further.
So effective has the threat of CAATSA sanctions been to date,
moreover, that we have been able to do all this without imposing
sanctions on a friend or partner State of our own. I urge you not to
look at the scorecard as whether the United States has imposed
sanctions. In this case, sanctions reflect our failure to turn off
Russian arms deals. The time will come when we will have no choice but
to impose sanctions, but we are keenly aware that Congress' purpose in
passing Section 231 was to pressure Russia and incentivize Russia to
change its behavior, not to hurt U.S. friends and allies who might
happen to purchase arms from Moscow.
Six Principles for Implementation
Mr. Chairman, I will be happy to answer any questions you have
about these matters--at least as best I can in an open forum. I am also
very happy to participate in or send briefers for a closed session.
Before I conclude, however, let me say a few more words about our
approach to Section 231. In particular, I'd like to outline six
principles that help guide our work:
1.
First, as I said earlier, the target of Section 231 sanctions is
Russia, not the countries that happen to purchase arms from
Russia. Our interlocutors and partners need to know that
although CAATSA may compel us to have challenging conversations
with them, the underlying problem is not with them. Rather, our
problem lies with Moscow and its own destabilizing role in the
international community. I am sure that this is not always a
great consolation, but it is vital that our interlocutors
understand it all the same.
2.
Second, we are not usually concerned with Russia's mere provision
of spare parts or its maintenance of military equipment that
another country already possesses. We know that many States
still possess some Russian arms, and we are certainly not in
the business of trying to insist that such countries give up on
defending themselves. For CAATSA purposes, we are comfortable
with the maintenance of equipment or the provision of spare
parts not generally being considered a transaction that is
considered significant under Section 231.
Our concerns begin where and when something more consequential
occurs--something such as a major transfer of foreign funds to
the Russian defense sector, for instance, or a new shipment of
equipment representing a qualitative upgrade in capability,
such as an S-400. In such cases, the issue of ``significance''
becomes more problematic, and the risk of mandatory sanctions
thus increases. This is the message we have been relaying to
interlocutors in our diplomatic outreach, and it is one of
which we hope Congress will approve.
3.
Third, we have also been sending the message that a transaction
generally won't be considered significant unless and until a
major change in the status quo actually occurs. Just talking
about or announcing a Russian arms deal, in other words, is not
generally in itself a trigger for Section 231 sanctions. The
problem arises when new Russian equipment starts to show up or
perhaps when large sums of money begin to change hands.
We don't expect Russia's arms clients to disavow or renounce
their deals. In truth, Russia is not a very good or reliable
arms partner on a good day, and even with global suppliers more
reputable and reliable than Russia, consummation of a purchase
of sophisticated equipment can take a long time and experience
detours, obstacles, or reasons to fall apart. If in this new
CAATSA environment, Russia's major arms clients never quite
finalize their purchase, then the State Department will have
nothing about which to have to assess ``significance'' under
Section 231 in the first place.
4.
And speaking of off-ramping, another piece of our diplomatic
message has been that even with respect to new equipment, we
are not necessarily asking countries immediately to go ``cold
turkey'' on Russian arms. We understand that can be very
difficult. As long as new deliveries of more advanced equipment
don't occur, we have room for some flexibility vis-a-vis new
purchases, provided that the overall trend line is demonstrably
``down.'' That is, that such countries are weaning themselves
off of the arms transactions that help fund Moscow's
adventurism and that create geopolitical partnerships that the
Kremlin can thereafter exploit for destabilizing ends.
5.
With respect to the new CAATSA waiver language in the NDAA, we
are glad to have greater flexibility on these issues. At
Secretary Pompeo's hearing before this Committee on July 25,
Chairman Corker and Senator Cardin emphasized to him that
Congress views the new waiver language as narrow--in your
words, Mr. Chairman, ``to allow countries that we're dealing
with that we wish to buy American military equipment to be
weaned off Russian equipment.'' Secretary Pompeo, in turn, made
clear his agreement--noting that the new waiver is a way to
avoid driving countries with historical Russian entanglements
more into Moscow's arms while permitting them ``the capacity of
spare parts'' or to ``round out th[e] process'' of weaning
themselves of their dependency on Russia. We will use this
understanding to guide implementation of Section 231.
6.
Finally, it's worth pointing out that Section 231 only applies to
Russian arms transactions. To the extent that a country
contemplating a purchase of advanced Russian equipment can
pursue alternative sources of supply in meeting its defense
needs, therefore, this is an excellent way to avoid sanctions
liability. Purchases from European or other international
suppliers of sophisticated weaponry, for instance, would raise
no Section 231 concern. Nor, of course, would purchases from
the United States--and we are always happy to try to facilitate
discussions with relevant U.S. interlocutors about such
possibilities.
These principles help guide our Section 231 diplomacy, and I think
they are producing some very good results for the United States.
Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to have had the chance to explain our
approach to Section 231 of CAATSA, and I look forward to taking your
questions. Thank you.
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR BROWN
FROM SIGAL P. MANDELKER
Q.1. CAATSA Implementation: Many of us on both sides have
repeatedly urged more assertive implementation of mandatory
sanctions under CAATSA, in order to deter further Russian
attacks. I know you have begun to do a bit more in recent
months, and in some cases would prefer to use EO authorities
because you see them as more flexible. But there is still a lot
more that could be done with mandatory CAATSA sanctions.
Can you give us a more precise sense of what you have
planned before the elections to signal more powerfully to
Russia's leaders that they must stop--and what you are
preparing for generally, in terms of escalation, if the
Russians continue their aggressive actions through the
elections and beyond?
What are the general sanctions areas--banking, energy,
sovereign debt, sectoral sanctions, or a mix of all of them--
that you think would have the most significant impact on
Russian behavior?
A.1. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.2. Sovereign Debt: The Treasury Department's unclassified
report on sovereign debt required by CAATSA noted that,
``expanding sanctions could hinder the competitiveness of large
U.S. asset managers and potentially have negative spillover
effects into global financial markets and businesses.''
What would be the impact on U.S. interests if we expanded
sanctions to include dealings in new Russian sovereign debt and
the full range of derivatives, with a transition period, and
with certain explicit limits on the term of such debt? What
would be the impact on global financial markets and businesses,
and what suggestions do you have for mitigating any unintended
consequences if we decide to go this route?
There have been articles, and concerns expressed by my
colleagues (including at today's hearing) that Treasury and/or
FinCEN have been delaying the production of material requested
by Congress and possibly withholding information that was
requested by Congress--and I mean in response to even
bipartisan requests. You committed to provide further documents
requested by the Intelligence Committee immediately, and to
cooperate on this front. My colleague Senator Warner noted that
Treasury is 7-8 months behind in some of these document
requests. My questions to you are these:
Has Treasury or FinCEN ever intentionally delayed or
withheld the production of material that was requested by
Congress?
Has anyone at Treasury ever directed FinCEN to delay or
withhold the production of material requested by Congress? If
so, can you describe those circumstances, and the rationale for
such action?
A.2. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.3. Going After Putin Assets, and Those of His Cronies:
Leaving aside the diplomatic consequences, if we were to
require of banks that they block Putin's personal assets, and
those of his family members and close associates to whom he's
transferred assets--like we did years ago with certain
Iranians--given that they are often so well-hidden in layers of
dummy corporations and anonymous entities--would that have any
real effect beyond the symbolic? I gather we have struggled to
do this for many years, and he has hidden them well. But do we
at least know who manages his assets for him, and could we not
go after them with blocking or secondary bank sanctions? Why
have we not done this already?
A.3. Response not received in time for publication.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR TOOMEY
FROM SIGAL P. MANDELKER
Q.1. Some European countries have expressed their opposition to
the United States' withdrawal from the JCPOA.
The Treasury Department has indicated that on November 4,
2018, renewed sanctions on Iran will include those ``on the
provision of specialized financial messaging services to the
Central Bank of Iran and Iranian financial institutions,'' per
the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions and Divestment Act of 2010.
These services include transactions on the Society for
Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications (SWIFT)
network. Please explain, in unclassified terms, what will
happen if the Treasury department is obligated to prohibit
SWIFT transactions with the CBI and designated Iranian
financial institutions but certain SWIFT member organizations
elect to continue doing so.
What will be the effect of the European Commission's
``blocking statute''--a mechanism Jean-Claude Juncker has said
will ``neutralize the extraterritorial effects of U.S.
sanctions in the EU''--on European companies doing business
with Iran?
Has this changed Treasury's view on the potential impact of
sanctions on EU firms?
A.1. Response not received in time for publication.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR COTTON
FROM SIGAL P. MANDELKER
Q.1. Russia has recently embraced digital currencies,
particularly Ethereum (see https://cointelegraph.com/news/
suddenly-vladimir-putin-meets-vitalik-buterin-endorses-
ethereum).
What can policymakers in the U.S. do to ensure that we are
the leader in developing blockchain and digital currencies
rather than Russia and China?
The SWIFT network facilitates cross-border payments through
its vast messaging system. If the President wants to isolate
Russia like Iran, is it true that the international SWIFT
payments network based in Belgium can follow Europe and not
unplug banks from those countries?
SWIFT and the EU's cooperation are needed to ensure
sanctions involving cross-border payments are fully implemented
(https://www.axios.com/trump-administration-iran-sanctions-
swift-financial-messaging-8fae6cd6-11c9-42a8-9d5b-
6d3140a7ae83.html). The next generation of payment
infrastructure is likely to involve Blockchain and digital
assets.
How can policymakers support American payment companies
utilizing this technology to ensure this innovation develops
here and aligns with our national security interests?
A.1. Response not received in time for publication.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF
SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM SIGAL P. MANDELKER
Q.1. In the April 6th sanctions designations, Oleg Deripaska
was designated pursuant to E.O. 13661 for having acted or
purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, a
senior official of the Government of the Russian Federation, as
well as pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy
sector of the Russian Federation economy.
As you gathered intelligence to build this sanctions
package, did you examine Mr. Deripaska's interference in the
United States?
Did you examine his relationship with Paul Manafort or
other American citizens?
The United States has imposed sanctions on the FSB and GRU.
Please describe the tangible impact of those sanctions.
How many FSB and GRU officers' accounts have been frozen?
How much money have these individuals lost access to as a
result of these sanctions?
Have any FSB or GRU officer's property in the U.S. been
seized as a result of these sanctions?
Please describe your dialogue with those American entities
who invest in Russian sovereign debt. What specific measures
have you taken to encourage U.S. entities to not invest in
Russian sovereign debt?
A.1. Response not received in time for publication.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR TESTER
FROM SIGAL P. MANDELKER
Q.1. Economic Effects of Sanctions: What tools does the
Department of Treasury use to measure the effectiveness of
sanctions?
Specifically, what metrics does the Treasury utilize to
indicate when sanctions have had their intended effect?
By these measures, have sanctions against Russia under the
Countering America's Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (CAATSA)
been successful?
A.1. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.2. Money Laundering: With the understanding that the
Department of Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
(FinCEN) has no criminal investigative or arrest authority, it
has data analysis to support investigations and prosecutions of
financial crimes, and refers possible cases to law enforcement
authorities when it is warranted. FinCEN also submits requests
for information to financial institutions from law enforcement
agencies conducting criminal investigations and has the
authority to issue civil money penalties.
Over the last 5 years, how many cases of money laundering
has FinCEN referred to the Department of Justice or any other
law enforcement authorities?
Out of those, how many have involved Russian nationals? Of
those involving Russian nationals, how many were connected with
U.S. individuals, LLCs or nonprofits?
A.2. Response not received in time for publication.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR WARREN
FROM SIGAL P. MANDELKER
Q.1. In the conference report attached to the Fiscal Year 2019
National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA), the Treasury
Department, in coordination with other agencies, is directed to
provide a briefing to Congress on the assets owned by Vladimir
Putin, Russian business persons, and senior Russian Government
officials, and their immediate family members and proxies. This
briefing must include the location, value, size, and contents
of their bank accounts, real estate holdings, and all other
financial assets, and the shell companies they use to hide
those assets.
When will you schedule this briefing?
Without disclosing intelligence sources and methods, would
you consider publishing an unclassified report on the assets
currently held by Putin, Russian business persons, senior
Russian Government officials, and their immediate family
members and proxies, and the companies they use to hide those
assets, on a website of the Treasury Department? If yes, when
can we expect Treasury to publish that unclassified report? If
no, please explain why not.
During their press conference in Helsinki last month,
Russian President Putin announced that he and President Trump
``agreed to create the high-level working group that would
bring together captains of Russian and American business.''
Can you guarantee that no individual or entity under U.S.
sanctions will be included in this working group of U.S. and
Russian business leaders, if this working group is implemented?
If not, please explain why not.
Based on the available information, do you believe that
there is sufficient evidence to impose sanctions under existing
U.S. law against Russian President Vladimir Putin personally?
If there is sufficient evidence, why has the Treasury
Department not imposed sanctions on Vladimir Putin?
How many waivers have the Treasury Department granted for
the Countering America's Adversaries Through Sanctions Act
(CAATSA)? Please describe the parties for whom Treasury has
granted such waivers.
Do you believe there is sufficient evidence to impose
sanctions on the 12 Russian intelligence officers that the
Justice Department indicted on July 13, 2018, for hacking the
Democratic National Committee (DNC), the Democratic
Congressional Campaign Committee (DCCC), and the presidential
campaign of Hillary Clinton? If yes, does the Treasury
Department intend to impose sanctions? If not, please explain
why not.
The Commerce Department on July 29, 2018, granted Rusal
America an exemption from aluminum tariffs imposed by President
Trump. This exemption (exclusion) was reversed one day after I
wrote to the Commerce Department on August 7, 2018. Commerce
Department officials indicated that ``they had coordinated with
the [Office of Foreign Assets Control] in considering the Rusal
application,'' and that OFAC ``was ultimately the decider on
whether sanctions should prevent approval of an exclusion.''
Is this statement by the Commerce Department accurate?
Has the Commerce Department coordinated with OFAC or any
other Treasury Department official regarding the eligibility of
sanctioned companies generally for tariff exemptions?
Has the Commerce Department coordinated with OFAC or any
other Treasury Department official regarding the eligibility of
Rusal America for tariff exemptions?
Was OFAC ``the decider'' on whether Rusal America or any
other sanctioned entity should be eligible to receive an
exemption from the tariffs?
Did the Treasury Department play any role in the reversal
of the Rusal America exemption on August 8, 2018? Please
provide any and all documents in the Department's possession
related to the July 9, 2018, or August 8, 2018, decisions on
tariff exemptions for Rusal America.
A.1. Response not received in time for publication.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF
SENATOR DONNELLY FROM SIGAL P. MANDELKER
Q.1. Sanctions Effectiveness: Ms. Mandelker, since the United
States stepped up sanctions against Russia in 2014, sanctions
have not changed or moderated the behavior of the Putin
Government.
Are you currently holding back from taking enforcement
actions against Russian entities or individuals that may
currently be violating sanctions?
Do you have the staff and resources to implement and
enforce an effective sanctions regime?
If provided, would additional staff and resources be used
to implement and enforce existing sanctions, or to undertake
additional enforcement actions?
A.1. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.2. North Korea Sanctions Enforcement: Ms. Mandelker, I am
concerned that our hard work to strengthen North Korea
sanctions has now gone to waste as Russia and China, among
others, have relaxed their enforcement efforts. In the case of
Russia, there are reports that it is still hiring North Korean
workers and facilitating petroleum shipments.
Do you think that the sanctions pressure we are currently
applying is sufficient to achieve our objective of ending North
Korea's nuclear program?
Has Russia's and China's enforcement of North Korea
sanctions improved, remained the same, or worsened since the
President's summit in Helsinki?
What steps are you taking to ensure that both Russia and
China are enforcing sanctions on North Korea?
A.2. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.3. Sanctions on New Russian Sovereign Debt: There are various
pending legislative proposals to strengthen Russia sanctions,
including proposals to sanction Russian sovereign debt and
related derivatives. But Treasury has stated in the past that
such sanctions could negatively impact U.S. investors.
Do you think that sanctions on new Russian sovereign debt
and related derivatives will help to change Putin's calculus?
Do you think that the EU would be open to implementing
similar actions?
As a last resort strategy, some have referred to sovereign
debt sanctions as the ``nuclear option''. Do you support that
conclusion, that sanctioning sovereign debt would only be
considered after all else fails?
A.3. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.4. Beneficial Ownership and Corporate Transparency: Many
reports have concluded that the U.S. is among the easiest
countries to create an anonymous shell company. As a result,
corrupt oligarchs and rogue Nations can often exploit our
vulnerabilities to evade sanctions and move money through the
U.S. as a legal business entity.
To what extent have Russian officials utilized shadow
companies to access the U.S. financial system?
Do the use and exploitation of anonymous shell companies
negatively impact our national security?
Would legislation requiring corporate beneficial ownership
transparency increase your ability to effectively apply
sanctions against corrupt oligarchs and officials?
In May, FinCEN implemented its Customer Due Diligence (CDD)
Rule to require financial institutions to identify the
beneficial owner of legal entity customers. The CDD rule will
be helpful going forward, but it is not retroactive for
existing accounts.
What is the expected impact of the CDD rule on beneficial
ownership disclosure?
What additional steps must the United States take to
eliminate the glaring systemic vulnerability of anonymous shell
companies that criminals and corrupt foreign officials exploit
to move money through the financial system?
A.4. Response not received in time for publication.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR SCHATZ
FROM SIGAL P. MANDELKER
Q.1. Is the U.S. Government committed to deterring and, if
necessary, punishing foreign interference in the democratic
election, processes, or institutions of a treaty ally,
political ally, or partner Government of the United States?
If yes, describe the tools that are available to the U.S.
Government to prevent and punish foreign interference in ally
and partner Governments in Europe and Eurasia, including the
existing sanctions authorities that the U.S. Government can
levy against individuals or organizations suspected of foreign
interference.
How does the U.S. Government coordinate with NATO allies
and the Governments of other political allies and partners to
share information about suspected foreign interference in
democratic elections, processes, or institutions?
What mechanisms exist for the U.S. Government to gather
information from NATO allies and the Governments of other
political allies and partners about individuals and
organizations responsible for foreign interference in
democratic elections, processes, or institutions overseas?
Describe how, if at all, the U.S. Government currently
makes decisions with NATO allies and the Governments of other
political allies and partners to take actions to punish
individuals or organizations for foreign interference in
democratic elections, processes, or institutions overseas.
Does the U.S. Government face any limitations with
coordinating with NATO allies and the Governments of other
political allies and partners as it relates to deterring
suspected individuals or organizations from or punishing them
for foreign interference in democratic elections, processes, or
institutions overseas?
If yes, what recommendations would you make to Congress to
ensure that the U.S. Government has sufficient authority to
coordinate with appropriate foreign Governments concerning
election interference?
A.1. Response not received in time for publication.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR BROWN
FROM CHRISTOPHER KREBS
Q.1. Ongoing Russian cyberattacks on the U.S. have been widely
reported--as your testimony notes, Homeland Security has issued
warnings on Russian attempts to penetrate critical
infrastructure, targeting organizations in the business,
energy, nuclear, water, aviation, and manufacturing sectors.
The alerts describe ``multistage intrusion campaigns'' which
allowed remote access to U.S. energy sector networks, including
the control systems for energy generation facilities. As you
said, ``we are facing an urgent, evolving crisis in cyberspace.
Our adversaries' capabilities online are outpacing our
stovepiped defenses.''
Can you describe the nature and scale of these attacks,
their intensity, purposes, and key targets? Are they deploying
malware for future use? Reconnaissance? Testing our system
security? Do we think they could actually take control of any
utility plants?
A.1. Since at least March 2016, Russian Government cyberactors
have targeted Government entities and multiple U.S. critical
infrastructure sectors, including energy, nuclear, commercial
facilities, water, aviation, and critical manufacturing
sectors. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) characterize this
activity as a multistage intrusion campaign by Russian
Government cyberactors who targeted small commercial facility
networks where they staged malware, conducted spear phishing,
and gained remote access into energy sector networks. After
obtaining access, the Russian Government cyberactors conducted
network reconnaissance, moved laterally, and collected
information pertaining to industrial control systems, or the
operational technology that operates our Nation's critical
infrastructure.
While significant and concerning, the activity identified
in these incidents did not put these malicious cyberactors in a
position to take control of utility plants. Additional
information on this activity can be found in the joint
technical alert by DHS and FBI, found online at: https://
www.us-cert.gov/ncas/alerts/TA18-074A.
Q.2. Are your efforts to eliminate the stovepipe problem and
better coordinate, both within the U.S. Government, and between
the Federal Government and State and local governments, enough
to defeat them?
A.2. To break down information stovepipes and ensure cross-
sector approaches to protecting our Nation, the Department's
specific cybersecurity authorities executed through NPPD--
including authorities related to sharing, analyzing, and
coordinating actionable information related to cybersecurity
risks and incidents; protecting Federal information systems;
and responding to cybersecurity incidents--enable NPPD to
engage with Federal and non-Federal entities (i.e., all
stakeholders--public, private, and international) and across
and beyond all critical infrastructure sectors to
collaboratively improve cybersecurity practices and protect
Federal and non-Federal entities from cyber-risks.
The Homeland Security Act of 2002, and following
amendments, as well as Executive Branch policies, have
centralized functions of the Federal Government focused on
protecting critical infrastructure at the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS). The Homeland Security Act was amended
in 2014 and 2015 to codify the role of the Department's
National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center
(NCCIC) as the Federal-civilian interface for sharing
information regarding cybersecurity risks and incidents and
authorize the NCCIC to provide cybersecurity related technical
assistance, risk management support, and incident response
capabilities to Federal and non-Federal entities. In a similar
fashion, the Cybersecurity Act of 2015 also establishes the
NCCIC as the Federal Government's central hub for sharing
cyberthreat indicators between the private sector and the
Federal Government and requires the Department to establish the
Federal Government's capability and process for sharing
cyberthreat indicators with both Federal and non-Federal
entities.
Cross-sector centralization and coordination of the Federal
Government's cybersecurity efforts is critical to our Nation's
national security, economic security, and public health and
safety. Information regarding cybersecurity threats,
vulnerability, and incidents must be shared as quickly as our
adversaries move in cyberspace.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR MORAN
FROM CHRISTOPHER KREBS
Q.1. The Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014
(FISMA) expanded and clarified the Department of Homeland
Security's (DHS) responsibilities in implementation and
oversight of information security at other Federal agencies
upon enactment, including the authority to develop, issue, and
oversee agencies' implementation of ``binding operational
directives,'' or BODs. With examples of BODs spanning from
requiring agencies to participate in risk assessments to
outright banning the use of Kaspersky Lab equipment, it is
important for Congress to understand DHS's decision-making and
oversight processes.
First, please describe how DHS identifies the necessary
conditions to issue a BOD.
How does DHS establish and maintain oversight of agencies'
implementation of the BOD?
Does DHS have the necessary authorities and capability to
ensure accountability of BOD implementation across diverse
agencies?
How does DHS measure the effectiveness of the BOD?
Ultimately, how are BODs integrated in a comprehensive
cybersecurity strategy?
A.1. The Secretary of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security
(DHS), in consultation with the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB), has the authority under 44 U.S.C.
3553(b)(2) to develop and oversee the implementation of
binding operational directives (BOD). The Federal Information
Security Modernization Act (FISMA) includes specific topics for
BODs, including requirements for reporting security incidents
to DHS's National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration
Center (NCCIC), requirements for the contents of the annual
FISMA reports, requirements for the mitigation of exigent risks
to information systems, and other operational requirements as
OMB, or DHS in consultation with OMB, may determine are
necessary.
DHS, acting through the National Protection and Programs
Directorate (NPPD), identifies risks or requirements to be
addressed through BODs. DHS also accepts ideas for potential
BODs from entities, such as the Federal Chief Information
Officer (CIO) Council, independent security researchers, or
other partners. As needed, DHS may convene a group of subject
matter experts from Federal agencies, OMB, and the National
Institute of Standards and Technology to consider the relative
merits of particular risks in order to determine the
appropriateness of a given BOD or determine the prioritization
of different BODs.
Generally, when determining whether a certain issue is
appropriate for a BOD, DHS considers the following questions:
Is the proposed BOD related to an active threat? If
so, what is the scope and magnitude of the problem?
Is the proposed BOD related to a potential
identified risk?
What category/schedule does the potential BOD fit
into (planned, escalation of issue, or emergency)?
Is this issue specific to a particular Federal
agency or could it be applicable across the civilian
Federal executive branch?
What is the difficulty to exploit the
vulnerability?
Is the issue/subject sensitive or classified?
Are external events or threat intelligence driving
the need for or request of the proposed BOD?
Can the proposed BOD be measured and validated by
DHS?
Could the issue or threat be addressed
satisfactorily and fully through other mechanisms?
Has DHS socialized the proposed BOD subject with
applicable stakeholders, such as CIO/Chief Information
Security Officer (CISO) councils?
What is the end state of proposed BOD?
What other operational requirements have been
issued by way of policy, guidance, and standards in
relation to this BOD?
Does the BOD address or reemphasize Federal program
such as Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation,
EINSTEIN, automated indicator sharing, etc.?
Is this BOD associated with the requirements for
the content of the annual reports required to be
submitted by Federal agencies?
Is this BOD associated with the requirements for
reporting incidents to the NCCIC?
Is there another action that would be more
effective than a BOD?
DHS has found its current authorities to be effective at
coordinating and driving the timely response and implementation
of specific BOD requirements but acknowledges that, under
certain circumstances, DHS will be unable to ensure
implementation at the agency-level unilaterally. DHS ensures
Federal agency compliance with BODs using several methods.
First, BODs have historically been issued by the Secretary to
Federal agency leadership as high-priority items, and their
implementation status is followed closely by DHS's senior
leadership. When implementation issues arise, DHS engages with
Federal agency CIOs and CISOs. If the agency continues not to
comply, DHS leadership may engage with his or her counterpart
at a noncompliant agency. When additional attention is needed,
DHS may work with OMB. Ultimately, the Secretary or Deputy
Secretary may, at their discretion, contact their counterparts
at each noncompliant agency.
DHS measures BOD effectiveness based on the completion of
all required tasks by agencies, along with achieving the
stated, desired end state which is defined by eliminating or
adequately addressing the identified risk. Throughout the
development of a BOD, required actions on the part of agencies
are determined to ultimately minimize or eliminate the risk
posed by previously identified vulnerabilities. For instance,
in 2015 the Secretary directed agencies to promptly patch known
vulnerabilities on their Internet-facing systems. Agencies have
responded quickly in implementing the Secretary's BOD and have
sustained this progress. When the Secretary issued this BOD,
NPPD identified more than 360 ``stale'' critical
vulnerabilities across Federal civilian agencies, which means
the vulnerabilities had been known for at least 30 days and
remained unpatched. Since December 2015, NPPD has identified an
average of less than 40 critical vulnerabilities at any given
time, and agencies have addressed those vulnerabilities
rapidly.
Consistent with the Department's cybersecurity strategy,
BODs have addressed cybersecurity priorities requiring
immediate attention and mandatory action by Federal agencies to
protect Federal information and information systems. It is
important to note that BODs are just one tool DHS has at its
disposal to ensure Federal agencies and their associated
networks are adequately and properly protected.
Q.2. Your written testimony described the joint efforts of DHS
and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) to identify
practices of Russian Government actors targeting certain
entities that eventually become ``pivot points'' to leverage
access to major, high-value assets operating the Nation's
infrastructure.
What have been some of the priority recommendations that
DHS and FBI have provided network defenders to reduce exposure
to this malicious, yet strategic, exposure?
A.2. Since at least March 2016, Russian Government cyberactors
have targeted Government entities and multiple U.S. critical
infrastructure sectors, including energy, nuclear, commercial
facilities, water, aviation, and critical manufacturing
sectors. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) characterize this
activity as a multistage intrusion campaign by Russian
Government cyberactors who targeted small commercial facility
networks where they staged malware, conducted spear phishing,
and gained remote access into energy sector networks. After
obtaining access, the Russian Government cyberactors conducted
network reconnaissance, moved laterally, and collected
information pertaining to industrial control systems, or the
operational technology that operates our Nation's critical
infrastructure.
Additional information on this activity can be found in the
joint technical alert by DHS and FBI, found online at: https://
www.us-cert.gov/ncas/alerts/TA18-074A.
Recommendations provided to network defenders include
monitoring for known indicators of compromise, active defense
for spear-phishing and watering hole intrusion vectors,
blocking all outbound server message block network traffic,
requiring the use of multifactor authentication for all
external interfaces, use of malware signatures, and other
recommended courses of action provided within the technical
alert.
Q.3. Your written testimony mentions the collaborative efforts
of DHS with private industry actors to improve assessment,
detection, protection, and mitigation of cyberthreats,
including Executive Order 13800.
What are some of the best examples of public-private
partnerships that the agency has been a part of (that you are
able to share with this Committee)? What exactly were those
partnership able to achieve?
A.3. Executive Order 13800, Strengthening the Cybersecurity of
Federal Networks and Critical Infrastructure, recognizes that
effective cybersecurity requires entities to identify, detect,
respond, and, when necessary, recover from cyberintrusions.
Through outreach to stakeholders, the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) is sharing cybersecurity threat
information and assisting with the prioritization and
mitigation of cybersecurity risks.
DHS leads efforts to defend our Nation's critical
infrastructure from cyberthreats. Today's infrastructure is
more complex and dynamic with interdependencies that increase
the challenge of reducing risk and ensuring resiliency. DHS not
only shares unclassified and classified cyberthreat information
as well as providing a full range of technical assistance
capabilities, but also closely coordinates with our Federal
partners, including intelligence agencies, law enforcement, and
sector-specific agencies.
The National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration
Center (NCCIC) fosters a strong network of trusted global
partnerships. The NCCIC routinely collaborates with these
trusted partners to share information, coordinate actions,
conduct analysis, and develop common processes and joint plans.
The NCCIC offers a portfolio of no-cost products and services
organized around its core functions. Some examples include the
Industrial Controls Systems Joint Working Group to facilitate
information sharing and to reduce the cyber-risk to the
Nation's industrial control systems; the Cyber Information
Sharing and Collaboration Program enables actionable, relevant,
and timely unclassified information exchange through trusted
public-private partnerships across all critical infrastructure
sectors; the automated indicator sharing capability enables the
exchange of cyberthreat indicators between and among the
Federal Government and the private sector at machine speed; and
the Enhanced Cybersecurity Services is an intrusion detection
and prevention capability that is available to U.S.-based
entities and State, local, tribal, and territorial government
organizations.
Q.4. With the support of the Administration and colleagues from
both sides of the aisle, I was successful in getting the
Modernizing Government Technology (MGT) Act signed into law as
part of the National Defense Authorization Act for FY2018. The
law addresses the foundational cybersecurity threats that
outdated legacy systems in our Federal agencies pose.
Would you agree that outdated, unsupported legacy IT
systems pose a serious threat to the information security of
our Federal agencies?
A.4. Yes, the challenges posed by outdated, end-of-life (EOL),
legacy Federal information technology systems create serious
risks to the information security of our Federal agencies. For
instance, the issue has been apparent in the implementation of
the U.S. Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) Binding
Operational Directives (BOD). As an example, during the
implementation of BOD 15-01 (Mitigating Critical
Vulnerabilities) and BOD 16-02 (Securing Network Infrastructure
Devices), DHS identified and monitored dozens of EOL systems.
Some legacy systems could no longer be patched, others were not
supported by the vendor, and some experienced significant
performance issues if not reconfigured during the security
upgrade and enhancement process. Most legacy systems are simply
not designed for the current environment and the need for
modern security approaches. Fortunately, in most cases, DHS and
the agency were able to address these issues and either
upgrade, transition, or mitigate.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR TESTER
FROM CHRISTOPHER KREBS
Q.1. Please provide a detailed list of what DHS has taken to
date in order to improve election security in the State of
Montana since the 2016 election cycle.
A.1. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) engages
with non-Federal entities, such as the State of Montana, to
share cybersecurity information and provide technical
assistance on a voluntary basis. Successful voluntary
partnerships require trust and confidentiality. As such, DHS
generally defers to individual entities to respond to questions
regarding details of an incident or steps that an entity may
have taken to mitigate vulnerabilities.
Q.2. To the best of your knowledge, has the State of Montana
implemented any of the suggested election security improvements
offered by DHS?
A.2. As noted in the previous response, DHS generally defers to
individual entities to respond to questions regarding details
of an incident or steps that an entity may have taken to
mitigate vulnerabilities.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR BROWN
FROM CHRISTOPHER A. FORD
Q.1. CAATSA Implementation: Many of us on both sides have
repeatedly urged more assertive implementation of mandatory
sanctions under CAATSA, in order to deter further Russian
attacks. I know you have begun to do a bit more in recent
months, and in some cases would prefer to use EO authorities
because you see them as more flexible. But there is still a lot
more that could be done with mandatory CAATSA sanctions.
Can you give us a more precise sense of what you have
planned before the elections to signal more powerfully to
Russia's leaders that they must stop--and what you are
preparing for generally, in terms of escalation, if the
Russians continue their aggressive actions through the
elections and beyond?
A.1. The Department of State has made it clear to the Russian
Government at the highest levels that any efforts to interfere
in the 2018 midterm elections will not be tolerated and will be
met with severe consequences. While the Department's mandate is
to lead on foreign policy, we will continue to support the
efforts of the Departments of Homeland Security and Justice--
and, as appropriate, State and local officials--to secure our
elections, leveraging all necessary and available Department
resources and tools to counter Russian malign influence.
Q.2. What are the general sanctions areas--banking, energy,
sovereign debt, sectoral sanctions, or a mix of all of them--
that you think would have the most significant impact on
Russian behavior?
A.2. We have robust sanctions authorities at our disposal,
which we are using in close coordination with our allies and
partners to impose costs on Russia for the entirety of its
malign behavior. Sanctions are a powerful foreign policy tool,
and are most impactful when used in coordination with allies
and partners to maximize their effectiveness. Sanctions have
the strongest impact when tied to a clear foreign policy goal,
and used in tandem with diplomatic outreach. Providing the
State Department with flexibility in implementation allows us
to engage with allies, maintain unity, and maximize sanctions
pressure on Russia. For example, the threat of sanctions under
CAATSA Section 231 has prompted other States to abandon
billions of dollars in planned or announced arms deals with
Russia, imposing additional financial costs on the Russian
Government. As a result, Russia has fewer resources with which
to finance its influence campaigns.
Q.3. Maintaining Multilateral Support for Sanctions: It's clear
that enlisting other countries in our efforts to push back on
Russian aggression--including countries like France, Germany,
Britain, the Baltic States, and others who have been victimized
by Russian aggression--is critical. They also have a huge stake
in ensuring Russia abides by international law in Crimea and
Ukraine, and in protecting their own elections and
infrastructure systems.
Can you describe precisely what we are doing to enlist the
support of other countries in our efforts to impose real costs
on continuing Russian aggression across the board, in all these
areas?
A.3. We work closely with partners and allies to respond to
Russian aggression, share best practices, expose Russian
campaigns and tactics, and build collective resilience. We work
both on a bilateral and multilateral basis to achieve these
goals. For example, the coordinated expulsion of Russian
officers from 28 countries and NATO in response to the
Salisbury attack on Sergei and Yulia Skripal sent a strong
message to Russia that its destabilizing and brazen activity
will not be tolerated by the international community.
Additionally, we support multilateral efforts to share
information and build collective resilience, such as at the
European Center for Countering Hybrid Threats in Helsinki. We
have exposed Russian malicious cyberactivity publicly, in
concert with partners.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR TOOMEY
FROM CHRISTOPHER A. FORD
Q.1. Some European countries have expressed their opposition to
the United States' withdrawal from the JCPOA.
The Treasury Department has indicated that on November 4,
2018, renewed sanctions on Iran will include those ``on the
provision of specialized financial messaging services to the
Central Bank of Iran and Iranian financial institutions,'' per
the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions and Divestment Act of 2010.
These services include transactions on the Society for
Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications (SWIFT)
network. Please explain, in unclassified terms, what will
happen if the Treasury department is obligated to prohibit
SWIFT transactions with the CBI and designated Iranian
financial institutions but certain SWIFT member organizations
elect to continue doing so.
What will be the effect of the European Commission's
``blocking statute''--a mechanism Jean-Claude Juncker has said
will ``neutralize the extraterritorial effects of U.S.
sanctions in the EU''--on European companies doing business
with Iran?
Has this changed Treasury's view on the potential impact of
sanctions on EU firms?
A.1. Response not received in time for publication.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR COTTON
FROM CHRISTOPHER A. FORD
Q.1. Russia has recently embraced digital currencies,
particularly Ethereum (see https://cointelegraph.com/news/
suddenly-vladimir-putin-meets-vitalik-buterin-endorses-
ethereum).
What can policymakers in the U.S. do to ensure that we are
the leader in developing blockchain and digital currencies
rather than Russia and China?
A.1. The Department of State is closely monitoring both the
development and deployment of this technology. U.S. private
sector companies have made the United States a global leader in
this emerging technology. Supporting a strong and open U.S.
innovation ecosystem, pursuing promarket approaches, removing
barriers to innovation, and preserving the freedom to pursue
new ideas and business models will allow us to continue to lead
blockchain innovation now and in the future. In contrast to
State-led national planning for technological development, our
light-touch and flexible approach allows the best technical
solutions to succeed in the marketplace, while our
multistakeholder approach to policymaking also ensures that all
viewpoints can be taken into account.
Q.2. The SWIFT network facilitates cross-border payments
through its vast messaging system. If the President wants to
isolate Russia like Iran, is it true that the international
SWIFT payments network based in Belgium can follow Europe and
not unplug banks from those countries?
A.2. We consistently review all components of the international
banking system, including developing payment infrastructures.
We are closely engaged with our European allies in finding a
way forward to end Russia's destabilizing behavior.
Transatlantic unity is the cornerstone of our sanctions against
Russia. Providing the State Department with flexibility in
implementation allows us to engage with allies, maintain unity,
and maximize sanctions pressure on Russia.
We have robust sanctions authorities at our disposal. We
are using these authorities in close coordination with our
allies and partners to impose costs on Russia for the entirety
of its malign behavior.
Q.3. SWIFT and the EU's cooperation are needed to ensure
sanctions involving cross-border payments are fully implemented
(https://www.axios.com/trump-administration-iran-sanctions-
swift
-financial-messaging-8fae6cd6-11c9-42a8-9d5b-
6d3140a7ae83.html). The next generation of payment
infrastructure is likely to involve Blockchain and digital
assets.
How can policymakers support American payment companies
utilizing this technology to ensure this innovation develops
here and aligns with our national security interests?
A.3. The U.S. Government encourages the development of new
technologies by our innovative private sector. Innovation and
creativity are the hallmarks of our private sector and U.S.
industry has continually shown the ability to adopt new
technologies to drive economic growth. Blockchain technology
has potential to help U.S. industry in several areas including
securing transactions, supply chain management, and the
financial sector, just to name a few. We will continue to
monitor the development of and the private sector's
applications of this innovative technology.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF
SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM CHRISTOPHER A. FORD
Q.1. The FY2019 National Defense Authorization Act includes a
reporting requirement in Section 1294(c) regarding executive
branch sanction determinations under Section 231 of CAATSA. Do
I have your commitment that this report will be delivered to
Congress on or before the 90-day deadline mandated in the law?
A.1. The law requires the report to be submitted by the
President. I am committed to providing the President or his
delegate whatever information and support is needed to prepare
and submit the report as required by law.
Q.2. Can you put a dollar amount on the Russian arms deals that
you have been able to turn off as a result of Section 231?
A.2. We estimate that we have so far deterred several billion
dollars in Russian arms deals as a result of our Section 231
implementation efforts.
Q.3. Secretary Mattis was an ardent supporter of the new CAATSA
waiver language with respect to Section 231 that was included
in the FY2019 National Defense Authorization law. Has he also
supported State's efforts to wean Governments from purchasing
Russian equipment? If so, how has he specifically supported
your efforts?
A.3. Secretary Mattis has been a strong voice in encouraging
partner countries to end defense relationships with Russia and
to seek an alternative source of supply. I refer you to the
Department of Defense for any additional details on Secretary
Mattis' efforts.
Q.4. How specifically has the State Department engaged and
coordinated with the Defense Department on discouraging all
significant transactions with the Russian defense industry?
A.4. The Defense Department is an integral part of the
interagency process for implementing CAATSA Section 231. We
coordinate with the Defense Department on our engagement with
partners and allies related to CAATSA Section 231.
Q.5. On August 24, A.A. Mikheev, the Director General of
Rosoboronexport said that contracts were under negotiation with
India on the S-400 air defense system, 48 Mi-17 helicopters,
and joint production of KA-226T helicopters. Do you assess that
these contracts are indeed under negotiation?
A.5. We are aware of the public reporting on this issue but
will not speculate on the status of any deals that may be the
subject of discussions between Russia and India. We have
discussed CAATSA Section 231 extensively with the Government of
India, and the United States is working with all partner and
allied countries, including India, to discourage them from
engaging in major defense purchases from Russia.
Q.6. Do you assess that India and Rosobornexport are
negotiating contracts for other defense equipment, not
mentioned above?
A.6. I cannot speculate on the status of any further deals that
may be the subject of discussions between Russia and India.
However, we are aware that Russia is actively and publicly
seeking to undermine U.S. sanctions, including by continuing to
actively market weapons systems and other military equipment
around the world. With regard to India, our focus is on
discouraging them from engaging in major defense purchases from
Russia.
Q.7. If these contracts and transfers are completed, how do you
assess they will affect U.S. defense cooperation with India,
which the Pentagon reports has increased to significant levels
in recent years?
A.7. Our focus is on encouraging all partner and allied
countries, including India, to not engage in sanctionable
activity, so as to avoid the need for the imposition of
sanctions under CAATSA 231. I cannot comment specifically on
how U.S. defense cooperation with India will be affected if
these purported transactions are completed.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR SCHATZ
FROM CHRISTOPHER A. FORD
Q.1. Is the U.S. Government committed to deterring and, if
necessary, punishing foreign interference in the democratic
election, processes, or institutions of a treaty ally,
political ally, or partner Government of the United States?
A.1. Yes. The Department works closely with partners and allies
to build collective resilience, share best practices, and
respond to Russian attempts to interfere in democratic
processes and institutions. The Administration has made it
clear that such interference is unacceptable.
Q.2. If yes, describe the tools that are available to the U.S.
Government to prevent and punish foreign interference in ally
and partner Governments in Europe and Eurasia, including the
existing sanctions authorities that the U.S. Government can
levy against individuals or organizations suspected of foreign
interference.
A.2. The Department is committed to responding to Russian
aggression, including its malign influence campaigns, and is
committed to utilizing political, economic, diplomatic, and law
enforcement tools in response. Since January 2017, the Trump
administration has sanctioned 229 individuals and entities in
Russia in response to its destabilizing behavior. We are also
focused on leveraging our public diplomacy, foreign assistance,
and diplomatic resources to improve the resilience of our
partners and allies, as well as on sharing best practices and
supporting multilateral efforts to build up our collective
defenses.
Q.3. How does the U.S. Government coordinate with NATO allies
and the Governments of other political allies and partners to
share information about suspected foreign interference in
democratic elections, processes, or institutions?
A.3. We work closely with NATO allies to share information
regarding Russian aggression. This includes discussing best
practices, exposing Russian disinformation campaigns and
tactics, and building collective resilience. Additionally, we
support broader multilateral efforts to share information and
build resilience, such as at the European Center of Excellence
for Countering Hybrid Threats in Helsinki. We also work to
expose Russian malicious cyberactivity publicly, in concert
with allies.
Q.4. What mechanisms exist for the U.S. Government to gather
information from NATO allies and the Governments of other
political allies and partners about individuals and
organizations responsible for foreign interference in
democratic elections, processes, or institutions overseas?
A.4. NATO allies share information on common threats with each
other on a regular basis. At the Warsaw Summit in July 2016,
Heads of State and Government agreed to establish a new Joint
Intelligence and Security Division (JISD), which merges civil
and military intelligence functions in order to improve NATO's
ability to draw on a wide range of intelligence resources.
JISD, led by the Assistant Secretary General for Intelligence
and Security, has improved NATO's ability to facilitate timely
and relevant support to Allied decision-making and operations,
particularly on terrorism, hybrid warfare, and cyberthreat
issues.
Q.5. Describe how, if at all, the U.S. Government currently
makes decisions with NATO allies and the Governments of other
political allies and partners to take actions to punish
individuals or organizations for foreign interference in
democratic elections, processes, or institutions overseas.
A.5. At the NATO Summit in Brussels, we joined our NATO allies
in affirming our shared concerns regarding threats from State
and non-State actors who use hybrid activities that aim to
create ambiguity and blur the lines between peace, crisis, and
conflict. While NATO allies acknowledge that the primary
responsibility for responding to hybrid threats rests with the
targeted Nation, NATO stands ready, upon decision by the North
Atlantic Council, to assist an Ally at any stage of a hybrid
campaign. In Brussels allies announced the establishment of
counterhybrid support teams, to provide tailored, targeted
assistance to allies, upon their request, in preparing for and
responding to hybrid activities.
Q.6. Does the U.S. Government face any limitations with
coordinating with NATO allies and the Governments of other
political allies and partners as it relates to deterring
suspected individuals or organizations from or punishing them
for foreign interference in democratic elections, processes, or
institutions overseas?
A.6. The Department works closely with partners and allies to
build collective resilience, share best practices, and respond
to Russian attempts to interfere in democratic process and
institutions. We utilize bilateral and multilateral engagements
to coordinate efforts and response with partner Governments and
NATO allies. There are no institutional limitations on this
coordination.
Q.7. If yes, what recommendations would you make to Congress to
ensure that the U.S. Government has sufficient authority to
coordinate with appropriate foreign Governments concerning
election interference?
A.7. Transatlantic unity is the cornerstone of our sanctions
against Russia; providing the State Department flexibility in
implementation allows us to engage with allies, maintain unity,
and maximize sanctions pressure on Russia.
Q.8. Describe the U.S. Government's interpretation of its
commitment to protect the political independence of NATO
members, as it relates to the North Atlantic Treaty of 1949.
A.8. Maintaining such independence lies at the core of the
Alliance, and the Washington Treaty obliges all allies to
advance and defend the institutions that guarantee such
independence. Under Article 2 of the Treaty, all allies commit
to ``contribute toward the further development of peaceful and
friendly international relations by strengthening their free
institutions, by bringing about a better understanding of the
principles upon which those institutions are founded, and by
promoting conditions of stability and well-being.'' Article 4
provides that the allies shall consult if, ``in the opinion of
any of them, the territorial integrity, political independence
or security of any of the Parties is threatened.'' And in the
event that such independence is threatened by means of an armed
attack, Article 5 States that ``the parties agree that an armed
attack against one or more of them in Europe or North America
shall be considered an attack against them all.'' In such case,
each Party is obligated to ``assist the Party or Parties so
attacked by taking forthwith, individually and in concert with
the other Parties, such action as it deems necessary, including
the use of armed force.''
The President, Vice President, Secretaries of State and
Defense, and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff have all
reiterated that the U.S. commitment to these treaty obligations
is ironclad. If allies agree that an armed attack has occurred
within the meaning of Article 5, the United States will adhere
to our treaty commitments and respond as appropriate with our
NATO allies.
Q.9. In your view, would NATO's collective defense commitment
to protect the political independence of member States be
better served with an affirmative policy that treats foreign
interference in the democratic election, processes, or
institutions of one member as an effort to undermine the
political independence of all members and their democratic
institutions?
A.9. Article 4 of the Washington Treaty provides that the
allies shall consult when, ``in the opinion of any of them, the
territorial integrity, political independence or security of
any of the Parties is threatened'' in any manner, and the
United States welcomes consultation with allies in such
circumstances. The specific collective defense obligation of
Article 5, however, is only activated in response to an armed
attack. Over the past 69 years since the Alliance was formed,
the allies' understanding of what could constitute an armed
attack has included terrorism, cyberattacks, and hybrid
attacks. A precise determination would depend on the specific
facts at hand, and be made collectively by all the allies.
Q.10. If yes, would the Administration support an effort to
develop a multinational sanctions regime under NATO to impose
punishment on individuals or organizations suspected of
interfering in the democratic election, processes, or
institutions of any NATO member?
A.10. While primary responsibility for this issue within the
Department of State rests with EUR Assistant Secretary A. Wess
Mitchell, the Under Secretary for Political Affairs, and
Secretary Pompeo, my understanding is that, if requested by an
Ally under Article 4, the United States would welcome an
opportunity to consult with allies regarding an appropriate
response.