- FACTORS IMPACTING GLOBAL OIL PRICES
[Senate Hearing 115-525]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-525
FACTORS IMPACTING GLOBAL OIL PRICES
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JULY 24, 2018
__________
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-985 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska, Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
RON WYDEN, Oregon
MIKE LEE, Utah
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
STEVE DAINES, Montana
JOE MANCHIN III, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
Brian Hughes, Staff Director
Patrick J. McCormick III, Chief Counsel
Suzanne Cunningham, Senior Policy Advisor for Oil and Gas
Mary Louise Wagner, Democratic Staff Director
Sam E. Fowler, Democratic Chief Counsel
Scott McKee, Democratic Professional Staff Member
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa, Chairman and a U.S. Senator from Alaska....
1
Cantwell, Hon. Maria, Ranking Member and a U.S. Senator from
Washington.....................................................
3
WITNESSES
Sadamori, Keisuke, Director, Energy Markets and Security,
International Energy Agency....................................
5
McNally, Robert, President, Rapidan Energy Group.................
12
Braziel, E. Russell ``Rusty'', President and Chief Executive
Officer, RBN Energy, LLC.......................................
25
Auers, John R., Executive Vice President, Turner, Mason & Company
34
Bordoff, Jason E., Founding Director, Center on Global Energy
Policy, and Professor of Professional Practice in International
and Public Affairs, Columbia University School of International
and Public Affairs.............................................
42
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
Auers, John R.:
Opening Statement............................................
34
Written Testimony............................................
37
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
107
Bordoff, Jason E.:
Opening Statement............................................
42
Written Testimony............................................
44
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
109
Braziel, E. Russell ``Rusty'':
Opening Statement............................................
25
Written Testimony............................................
27
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
103
Cantwell, Hon. Maria:
Opening Statement............................................
3
McNally, Robert:
Opening Statement............................................
12
Written Testimony............................................
14
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
96
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa:
Opening Statement............................................
1
Sadamori, Keisuke:
Opening Statement............................................
5
Written Testimony............................................
7
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
90
FACTORS IMPACTING GLOBAL OIL PRICES
----------
TUESDAY, JULY 24, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m. in
Room SD-366, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lisa
Murkowski, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI, U.S. SENATOR FROM
ALASKA
The Chairman. Good morning, everyone. The Committee will
come to order.
We are here this morning for a couple reasons. If and when,
hopefully it will be shortly, a quorum is present, we will
proceed with a business meeting to report four of our nominees
for the Department of Energy. But recognizing that we do not
yet have 12 members present, I will go ahead with agenda item
two which is a hearing to examine the factors affecting global
oil prices.
This year has been marked by greater volatility, which has
shown up in the prices being paid at the pump by nearly every
American family and business. Prices are notably higher than a
year ago, so the questions we are here to ask include: why is
that, will it remain this way, and what, if anything, can we do
about that? Of course, that is what everybody really wants to
know, where are we going with this?
When I look at the global markets, I see a number of
factors that are pushing oil prices up but also a few
significant factors that are also restraining them.
On the one hand, global oil prices are the direct result of
strong economic growth. In some ways, this is almost a
tradeoff. Prices were a lot lower when our economy was a lot
weaker, but I do not think that any of us would want to trade
our remarkable pace of job creation and low unemployment to go
back to those days.
Another factor leading to the higher prices is that global
oil demand is rising, not falling. This is, kind of, Economics
101, and the driver on this front is not the U.S. but much of
the rest of the world led by emerging economies such as China
and India.
At the same time, we are dealing with the fallout from
OPEC's strategy of artificially restricting supply from its
members. There is no question that has reduced inventories and
pushed prices higher. We are also seeing the effects of supply
disruptions across the globe, from Libya to Venezuela to
Canada.
On the other side of the ledger, there is somewhat of a
silver lining. We are seeing that while prices are higher, it
is not as bad as it could have been, and that is largely
because of significant increases in U.S. production.
America's Shale Revolution has brought tremendous benefits
to our country and the global economy. As we produce more, we
are creating jobs, we are generating revenues and we are
bringing a degree of stability and confidence to global
markets. We have also made smart policy decisions like lifting
the ban on U.S. crude oil exports that are allowing us to
become a major power on the global stage.
I think it is complicated enough to understand where we are
today, but again, I think most folks are interested in figuring
out what really lies ahead. Where are we headed? Will markets
loosen up as production in the U.S. and countries like Saudi
Arabia continues to rise? Are we accounting for strong growth
in global demand? Where are the geopolitical hotspots where
substantial supply could disappear from the market at a
moment's notice?
Then we have the wildcards that are out there. What will
happen if we fail to build needed infrastructure in the U.S.,
to ensure that energy can be transported from where it is
produced to where it is consumed? What will happen if the U.S.
releases oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, not in
response to an emergency but to manage tight market conditions?
What will tariffs mean for the viability of domestic energy
projects, and our ability to access markets in countries like
China? What will happen as global spare capacity shrinks, and
we no longer have a cushion of production that can be brought
online quickly? Also, what are the looming impacts of
regulations like the International Maritime Organization's low
sulfur standards? Then, of course, front and center, front page
in all the news right now is what will happen with Iran?
I believe our best course is to continue with our efforts
to produce more oil here at home, particularly in places like
Alaska, where we have the will and capacity to do so. That is
why I believe it was the right move to begin to open the
Coastal Plain of ANWR to responsible development and why I
support the new Five Year Program for Offshore Development. I
think there is no substitute for U.S. production, for as long
as we need it, even as we seek to diversify away from oil.
Here to help us understand all of this is a truly
distinguished panel of witnesses from as far away as the
International Energy Agency (IEA) in Paris. We have one
witness, Mr. McNally, who literally wrote the book on crude
volatility. We have another, Mr. Bordoff, who has come full
circle since he testified here in 2016 about the impacts of low
oil prices. We also welcome Mr. Auers and Mr. Braziel, who will
share their perspectives on the North American market.
So, counting, we are not quite to 12 yet.
Senator Cantwell, why don't we turn to you for your opening
statement, and maybe we can get to the business meeting right
after that.
STATEMENT OF HON. MARIA CANTWELL,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WASHINGTON
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for scheduling what is really a very timely
hearing on global oil prices, because every family and business
across America is feeling the burden of higher fuel prices
which is forcing average U.S. households to pay $155 more in
fuel costs this summer's driving season as compared to last
year's. Gasoline and diesel prices are currently around $.60
more than they were at this time last year, and that is the
highest that we have seen in four years. My constituents are
particularly aware of the prices at the pump since Washington
State drivers pay the third highest gas prices in the country.
I believe even more than in some places in Alaska, which I find
hard to believe.
But currently, drivers are shelling out $3.41 per gallon.
That means that every gas station fill-up costs Washington
drivers about $8.00 more than it did last summer. That means
everyone from boaters to people who are moving products that
are key to getting product to market are paying more and making
things more expensive which means less take home pay and higher
retail prices for the goods they transport. Given the profound
impact higher fuel prices have on family budgets and our
economy, we need to take aggressive action on all fronts to
make sure that we are policing these gas prices and markets.
Not only do we have international cartels artificially
constraining price, obviously lots of statements in the last
couple of days are leading to uncertainty in the markets. What
happens if the Iranians do follow through on their threat to
shut down the Strait of Hormuz? About a third of the world's
seaborne petroleum passes through that chokepoint where a
shipping lane is just three kilometers at its narrowest point.
So I hope to ask our expert witnesses about that as well.
We also see, in tight oil markets, the opportunity for
volatility and potential for manipulation. We must continue to
find ways to protect consumers on all of these issues and
continue to make sure that we are breaking monopolies at the
pump--whether that means continuing to aggressively look for
alternatives to fuel markets and solutions or making sure that
we continue to focus on opportunities.
I would like to learn more about why record level oil
production here in the U.S. is not providing any relief at the
pump. Just last week we reached a new production record of 11
million barrels per day, only slightly behind Russia's 11.4
million barrels per day.
Even putting aside the fact that continuing to put that
level of carbon in the atmosphere is unsustainable, America's
increase in fossil fuel production seems to be only padding a
bloated oil economy profit rather than helping the household
budgets of many consumers. In fact, I read just yesterday that
this Friday analysts expect Exxon to post a 62 percent increase
in quarterly profits to $5.45 billion.
The reality is, even as crude oil prices have doubled over
the last two years, oil supplies have been relatively flat
despite the U.S. crude oil production. That is because OPEC and
other producers like Russia agreed to set market supply quotas
starting in January 2017. The more we pumped the harder they
worked to make sure that the prices stayed high.
It is very hard for us to drill our way out of this
problem. The effective way to reduce our fuel costs both
nationally and individually is to beat the OPEC monopoly with
some good old-fashioned competition at the pump. Americans
should be able to fill up with homegrown biofuels instead of
the Saudi-Russian crude, and we should continue to push for
electric vehicles and lower operating costs for our consumers.
Members of this Committee have been instrumental in
increasing fuel economy standards, but now the Administration
is trying to reverse that progress. Reduced consumption of oil
in the United States by 2.4 million barrels per day is where we
were on track for 2030, saving consumers in the United States
$130 billion.
Implementing these policies and reducing oil consumption,
we have learned, has also been creating jobs--it is credited
for more than 288,000 automobile manufacturing jobs and 1,200
jobs across the United States. These alternatives are showing
that we can produce pressure as an alternative to gasoline
supplies and we need to keep moving forward. Unfortunately, as
I said, the Trump Administration seems to be adhering to trying
to tear down these alternatives.
Today I also want to talk to our witnesses about what else
the Executive Branch could be doing using its existing
regulatory and investigative authority to make sure that
untoward things are not happening in our supply chain. Recent
steep, one-day changes in price of crude oil have raised
concerns about the role of speculators with automatic trading
and algorithms.
On July 11th, domestic and international oil futures had
the steepest one-day percentage decline in more than a year and
the sharpest one-day point drop in over three years. These
dramatic changes in one day have caused market observers and
analysts to raise concerns about automated trading. This is
something I will ask our witnesses about today.
Madam Chair, obviously all of these tools should be in our
toolbox to continue to focus on giving the America driving
public the best opportunity to have low fuel prices.
I look forward to asking our witnesses about these
questions.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cantwell.
[RECESS FOR BUSINESS MEETING]
The Chairman. We will now turn to our panel. As I
mentioned, we have a distinguished panel before us and we will
begin with you, Mr. Sadamori.
Mr. Keisuke Sadamori is the Director for Energy Markets and
Security at the International Energy Agency. We welcome you to
the Committee.
Mr. Robert McNally, who I mentioned in my previous
comments, is the Founder and President of the Rapidan Energy
Group. Welcome.
Mr. Rusty--is it Braziel?
Mr. Braziel. Brazil.
The Chairman. Braziel. Mr. Braziel is the President and
Chief Executive Officer of RBN Energy, LLC. Welcome.
Mr. John Auers is the Executive Vice President of Turner,
Mason & Company.
And Mr. Jason Bordoff is the Founding Director of the
Center of Global Energy Policy at Columbia University.
We welcome each of you to the Committee this morning. We
ask that you try to keep your comments to about five minutes.
Your full statements will be incorporated as part of the
record. As you can see, we have a great deal of interest from
the Committee this morning and the words that you have to share
with us.
Mr. Sadamori, if you would like to begin. Thank you.
STATEMENT OF KEISUKE SADAMORI, DIRECTOR, ENERGY MARKETS AND
SECURITY, INTERNATIONAL ENERGY AGENCY
Mr. Sadamori. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Cantwell and
distinguished members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to present the International Energy Agency's view
on the factors affecting the global oil prices.
Let me start by conveying his best regards from Dr. Fatih
Birol, the IEA Executive Director, to members of the Committee.
For more than 40 years since the IEA's establishment, the
United States has played a critical leadership role in the IEA.
Thanks to the Shale Revolution in recent years, the U.S. is
leading global supply growth, both in oil and gas, making
enormous contributions to global oil and gas supply security.
The IEA's role has expanded, but analysis of oil markets
and the oil security system continues to be the core mandate
for the agency.
Global crude oil prices are more than 50 percent higher
than a year ago. This reflects steady oil demand growth and
overachievement of the Vienna production cuts agreement by OPEC
and some non-OPEC producers and some supply disruptions in
other countries.
Commercial oil stocks in OECD countries declined from more
than three billion barrels in January 2017 to 2.8 billion
barrels in May 2018, and they have been below the five-year
average since March. All this points to a tightening market and
the rising prices from the low point of less than $28 per
barrel for Brent in January 2016 to nearly $80 per barrel in
May 2018.
So, going forward, the following factors should be
considered. The global oil demand growth is relatively steady
at the 1.4 million barrels per day, but there are signs of
stress in some countries with oil price increase. Many
developing countries recently reduced or eliminated subsidies
for the oil products, and so higher global oil prices more
directly translates to the higher prices at the pump. With the
stronger U.S. dollar, some countries in their currency terms
have seen sharp rises in their domestic cost of oil. The
current trade tensions, if escalated, could adversely impact
the global economy with a knock-on effect on oil demand.
There are several major supply uncertainties. The first is
Iran. At this time, we cannot know how much Iranian oil will be
removed from the world markets by the U.S. sanction, but the
recent indications point to the shortfall being significant.
Second, collapse of oil production in Venezuela is continuing.
Production currently is only 1.3 million barrels per day and
could be below 1 million barrels per day at the end of this
year. In Libya, the recent strike against the oil
infrastructure resulted in production falling from one million
barrels per day to about half million barrels per day. The
situation seems to be improving but we cannot be sure if the
stability stays there. Disruptions are happening in other
regions including Iraq, Canada, North Sea and Brazil.
Under such market conditions, a decision by the signatories
to the Vienna Agreement to increase the production is welcome
in supporting the stability of supply to oil markets, but it
comes at the expense of the global spare capacity cushion.
The United States is already the single largest contributor
to the supply increase, growing faster than the global demand
growth. The IEA, however, sees little scope to revise it
upwards even with the recent price increase because of the
constraints in pipeline takeaway capacities. The tight supply
situation is not helped by the recent low level of investment
in the upstream oil and gas industry. We should also not forget
that the production from existing fields is declining by more
than three million barrels per day, and that's about the size
of the entire North Sea field each year.
So we are in a very volatile and challenging period.
Geopolitical factors, even more than pure fundamentals, are
important in determining oil price movements. Despite the rapid
growth of EVs, oil will continue to be the dominant fuel for
the transport sector as well as important feedstock for the
petrochemical products in decades to come.
The emergency oil stock system, managed by the IEA and its
members, therefore will continue to be critical to be prepared
for the rainy day and ensure the stable functioning of global
economic systems.
For its part, the IEA is engaged in close dialogue with the
major oil producers and consumers, both inside and outside the
IEA family, and we are monitoring market developments to be
prepared to advise on any support that might be needed to
ensure market stability.
On behalf of everyone at the IEA, I wish to once again
thank you for inviting me before this Committee. I'm happy to
answer any questions.
Thank you, Chair.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sadamori follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Sadamori.
Mr. McNally, welcome.
STATEMENT OF ROBERT McNALLY,
PRESIDENT, RAPIDAN ENERGY GROUP
Mr. McNally. Madam Chairman, Ranking Member Cantwell,
members of the Committee, I'm honored to be back before you
today.
I thought what I'd do in my brief five minutes is focus on
three things: first, the return to authentic boom-bust oil
price cycles; second, factors that are pushing oil prices down
and up in the near term, as the Chairman alluded to; and third,
an oil issue that's been preoccupying us in the industry for
years now and, frankly, it's remarkable how little notice it's
gotten in Washington and that's IMO 2020.
Before delving into the detail about the up and down, let
me just step back and note that these haven't been normal oil
prices in the last 15 years. You just don't see a near
quintupling in crude oil prices without a war in the Persian
Gulf in modern times. That doesn't happen. But it happened from
2004 to 2008. And you just don't see oil prices fall 60 percent
in half a year as we did in 2014 without a recession or sudden
supply surge. This is unusual in modern times. We have to ask
ourselves why?
Since the beginning of the modern oil market, oil prices
have exhibited a proneness to wild boom and bust swings. Now,
when oil was just a lighting fuel in the 1800s, it wasn't so
much of a problem, but when it became the world's lifeblood in
the 20th century, it became a problem. This volatility, not
just for the oil industry, but for you, for governments, for
industry, for airlines, for everyone who depends on oil which
is most of us.
To vanquish oil's wide swings and stabilize prices,
governments and the industry regulated production, and folks
forget the United States was the king of OPEC, specifically,
the State of Texas. The State of Texas exhibited heavy-handed
intervention in a market that would have made, forgive me, Mao
Tse-tung blush.
[Laughter.]
The Texas Railroad Commission met once a month for 40 years
and they set quotas well-by-well, field-by-field. When OPEC is
getting along they meet twice a year and set quotas most of
them ignore. We were the king of OPEC.
Now why did the good folks in Texas, who normally want to
limit government and produce oil, why did they agree to heavy-
handed intervention in the market? To stabilize prices. To
vanquish that boom-bust that we saw from the '20s and the '30s.
Now, some folks thought that OPEC took over from us in 1972
and they lost it in 2008. Now, some folks thought that maybe
shale oil would be the new swing producer and we saw that
failed--$28 Brent, $26 WTI in 2016. So that didn't work out too
well. Others think that this new entity formed by Saudi Arabia
and Russia will be the new OPEC. I have my doubts, but we can
discuss that.
The bottom line is this, and this is very important. It
comes from history, but we haven't really seen in four
generations this type of volatility. No swing producer, nobody
regulating supply, no peace in oil prices.
Now, turning to the here and now, as the Chairman alluded,
we have forces pushing prices down. Supply is growing faster
than demand. The IEA, the EIA, OPEC, we were barrel counters.
All of us see the market loosening up a little bit as we go
into next year.
Strong production growth in the United States, Brazil, now
Saudi Arabia, other places, even with good demand, kind of,
pushing prices down. There's a lot of fear in the market right
now with trade wars and the Fed raising rates and the dollar
being strong which makes oil more expensive around the world.
There's fears about demand. That's putting prices down.
But the concern also is forces pushing prices up and that
is geopolitical disruption risk. And this gets back to the
spare production capacity issue.
When you have a swing producer regulating supply to keep
prices stable, they usually hold back supply from the market.
That doesn't happen normally. We call that spare production
capacity. Now, that spare production capacity acts like a fire
department in a wooden city. Okay? When you get into a
disruption or a war, you want to call on the fire department.
You call on that extra supply that's being held back by
regulators to come in and douse the fire before it burns down
the whole city. Right now, spare production capacity is close
to or near zero. That is dangerous in light of the disruptions
in Libya, Venezuela, Mr. Sadamori referred to and, of course,
Iran.
Iran. Iran exports 2.5 million barrels a day and in a 100-
million-barrel-a-day market, but in the oil market few barrels
make a difference in price. With zero spare production capacity
and commercial inventories, kind of, back to normal, the loss
of 2.5 million barrels a day would be a big problem in terms of
oil price stability.
Now, Iran has threatened over the weekend to interrupt the
19 million barrels a day that flows through the Strait of
Hormuz, which Senator Cantwell alluded to. That is even a
bigger problem, really the biggest problem that those at the
IEA and we in the oil industry prepare for and analyze.
While our military would clearly prevail over the Iranian
military in a conflict, I think we ought not be complacent
about how long that strait, that narrow strait, would be
closed. It's cleaning up the mines. It's ensuring the insurance
companies that they can insure those ships to go through. So
that is a deadly serious issue for the oil market to continue,
to consider.
Oops, I'm on to my last minute, Madam Chairman, so I'll
stop here and perhaps get into IMO in the Q and A.
A final quick statement. I wish I could confidently predict
stable, comfortable crude oil prices. That would be optimal.
In 2012 I had the honor of testifying to your colleagues in
the House Small Business Committee and noted crude oil prices
and therefore pump prices had entered a new ``Space Mountain''
era of boom-bust price cycles. I maintain that view.
We went through a bust recently, and eventually we will go
through a boom. If a new swing producer does not emerge, we
should all buckle up for a continued roller coaster ride on
Space Mountain.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McNally follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. McNally.
Mr. Braziel, welcome.
STATEMENT OF E. RUSSELL ``RUSTY'' BRAZIEL, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, RBN ENERGY, LLC
Mr. Braziel. One of the reasons you have these hearings is
because you want to get different views. We're going to have a
different view.
RBN Energy is a consultancy and market analytics company.
We're based in Houston. Most of our work involves
infrastructure analysis, production, transportation, processing
for both crude oil and gas and natural gas liquids.
You mentioned a few minutes ago that production is up to 11
million barrels a day. In 2011, it was 5.5 million barrels a
day. So we're double, right, over the course of that period of
time and that's why we called it the Shale Revolution.
But this morning, instead of focusing on the magnitude of
that growth, I want to focus on the responsiveness, the
``swingness,'' if you will, Bob, of U.S. production.
What happens when prices go up? What happens when they go
down? It's the nature of this responsiveness that, I think, has
had such a big impact on global markets, and I'll explain what
I mean by that in a few minutes, but let's first talk about a
few fundamentals that, kind of, get me to that point.
The big driver in all of this has been productivity
improvement, productivity improvement that has radically
changed the supply curve for U.S. oil production.
Today, one rig can bring on anywhere between 5 and 11 times
the amount of crude oil that one rig could do in 2011. These
shale wells come on strong. The producers have learned how to
drill them fast.
The result has been a dramatic reduction in the per unit
cost of production, in other words, lower marginal cost. And
over the course for the past seven years, the U.S. now is
shoving about 4.5 million barrels a day of this marginal
production back into the global market and that's precisely why
OPEC and NOPEC found it necessary to reduce their production
two years ago in order to support global prices and, in effect,
make room for U.S. production.
The geography of this production in the United States has
been quite concentrated. Eighty-five percent of the growth over
the last two years since crude oil prices started kicking back
up, comes from five basins: Bakken, Anadarko, Eagle Ford,
Niobrara, Permian, with more than half of that growth coming
from the Permian, by itself. And it's even more concentrated
than that. Almost all of the growth in those five basins
actually comes from only 28 counties, a land area of only about
50,000 square miles, 1.7 percent of the U.S. Lower 48 surface
area, about the size of Louisiana.
But that's today. The land area where crude oil production
is economically viable, what producers call their sweet spots,
expands and contracts with the price of crude oil. For example,
higher prices provide higher revenue per well so smaller wells,
wells that produce lower yields of crude oil, become
economically viable. So the sweet spots get larger when crude
oil prices increase. Of course, the inverse is equally true.
And that's what I mean by responsiveness. It's been a key to
the growing influence of U.S. production now in global energy
markets, and it's going to get a lot more responsive.
Our firm prepares a production forecast several times a
year for the U.S. We just completed a new update. We did one
for prices staying at $70 flat for the next five years. Another
one at $55 flat for the next five years. That $15 difference
means a three million barrel a day change in the forecast
between those two scenarios. So a relatively small price
differential in crude oil prices results in a big change for
the U.S. production.
The implication for U.S. production for the U.S. is now
that we are fully capable of responding in a meaningful way to
increases and decreases in price, enough to have a substantial
impact on the global crude oil market. So if prices increase,
the drilling economics improve, producers drill more wells and
production increases. If prices fall, drilling economics become
less favorable, producers produce fewer wells and production
volumes drop.
But here's the key in this. The oil in the ground didn't go
away. When prices are low, production of those barrels are
simply put on hold, waiting for a price signal in order to
bring those barrels to market. It takes time, but it's almost
like those barrels are in a storage tank just waiting for the
high sign, for a signal to withdraw that oil and move it to
refineries both in the U.S. and throughout the world. The
triggering mechanism, of course, is market price, not a
government edict.
Of course, that's not to say that oil markets are now free
from the intervention of governments. Far from it. But that
power has been at least constrained or limited by U.S. shale
development and, most likely, that constraint will continue
further in the years as shale production in the United States
continues to grow. I think that's a good thing for the U.S. and
for the world as a whole, for that matter.
I appreciate the opportunity to speak to you today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Braziel follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Braziel.
Mr. Auers, welcome.
STATEMENT OF JOHN R. AUERS, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, TURNER,
MASON & COMPANY
Mr. Auers. Thank you very much, and I express my thanks to
all the Senators and Committee members for allowing me to
present my testimony which will focus on the downstream
industry in the U.S.
For decades, the U.S. has set energy independence as a
goal, but the current Administration has more recently upped
that to energy dominance. While that might seem like standard
political posturing, the U.S. refining industry, with support
from the upstream and midstream, has in fact already
established dominance in its own sector of the energy business.
Since 2007, the U.S. has transitioned from being the world's
largest importer of refined products to being the largest
exporter by most measures. In that time, the U.S. net product
balance has moved from a shortage of 2.5 million barrels per
day to a surplus of well over 3 million barrels per day.
The U.S. refining industry's ability to become a global
export powerhouse, and to maintain that position, has and will
be dependent on both things they have and will do well and also
on the failures by their competitors around the world. On the
domestic side of that equation, the free market environment in
which the U.S. refining industry is allowed to operate, which
isn't the case in most other countries, has been a key driving
force. Over the years, market signals have ``thinned the
herd,'' as uncompetitive refineries were closed and the
remaining facilities evolved into the most advanced and complex
set of refineries in the world. This allows U.S. refiners to
run heavier and more difficult to process crudes, turning them
into more valuable products, all at higher yields than refiners
in any other region of the world.
The U.S. also has the deepest, most talented and
experienced refinery labor pool in the world, all the way from
management through the technical ranks and down to the skilled
and hourly levels. Combined with more flexible employment and
work rules than exist in many other countries, this allows U.S.
refiners to run their plants more reliably, safely and at
higher throughput rates. It also allows them to operate the
plants, execute capital projects and perform maintenance
activities at lower costs, despite high wage rates.
A major boost to the competitiveness of U.S. refineries in
recent years has been the Shale Revolution. This event, which
was also facilitated by the free market environment in this
country, has allowed both oil and gas production to soar.
Resulting low domestic natural gas prices provide U.S. refiners
significant operating cost advantages versus many global
competitors, particularly in Europe and Asia. Even more
important has been the boom in oil production, which has
substantively lowered refiner's relative crude costs.
Further advantaging the U.S. industry has been the
difficulties experienced by foreign refiners. Building and
running refineries is a very complex task, requiring not only
experienced and skilled manpower, but efficient and properly
incentivized operating, maintenance, project execution and
planning efforts. Many of those elements have been lacking in
other parts of the world, in large part due to over-regulated
market environments.
The issues our neighbors to the south in Latin America have
encountered have been particularly helpful to the U.S.
refiners. Utilization rates in most countries in the region
average between 50 percent and 70 percent, compared to over 90
percent in the U.S. Despite growing regional demand, regional
capacity and throughput has declined over the last decade. This
hasn't been for a lack of trying, as a significant number of
expansion and greenfield projects have been planned and
initiated. Most have either not gotten off the ground or
encountered significant cost overruns and delays. Much of the
problems relate to the sponsorship of those projects by
government-controlled companies, with the accompanying issues
of confused and conflicted planning, incorrect staffing,
corruption and, in many cases, simple incompetence. Those same
issues have negatively impacted the operations at existing
plants and as a result, U.S. product exports into Latin America
have grown by almost 2 million barrels per day over the last
decade.
The ability to successfully penetrate and grow export
markets has been a necessity for the health of the U.S.
refining sector, considering stagnant domestic demand. Even
with the strong growth experienced over the last three years as
a result of lower prices, total domestic consumption was still
over 900,000 barrels per day lower in 2017 than in the peak
demand year of 2005. Despite this, and while our friends in
Europe and Japan were shutting down over 3 million barrels per
day of refining capacity in a similar environment, the U.S. was
able to increase refining capacity by 1.4 million barrels per
day.
The U.S. refining renaissance has benefited the country as
a whole and consumers of petroleum products at all levels.
Together with the boom in domestic crude and gas production,
the refined product surplus has been a major contributor in
reducing the trade deficit. It has also led to a higher degree
of supply security, and lower prices versus the previous
environment where products had to be imported. This is
particularly important during major supply-disrupting events. A
prime recent example of this, and a true confirmation of the
robustness and resiliency of the U.S. refining industry, was
last year's rapid return of supply after Hurricane Harvey's
devastation at the U.S. Gulf Coast.
Looking to the future, the health of the U.S. refining
industry will be dependent on a variety of factors, including
market forces, geopolitical developments and changes in the
regulatory environment, both domestically and globally.
On the regulatory front, new domestic regulations which
depress demand, increase costs, or limit market or feedstock
access all could negatively impact U.S. refining
competitiveness. More costly environmental rules certainly fall
in this category, but perhaps the biggest threat to refiners
and other segments of the petroleum industry could be more
restrictive trade policies. Tariffs being imposed on steel and
aluminum would have a very direct and negative impact on
critical capital projects in all sectors. As just one example,
three-quarters of the steel used in U.S. pipelines comes from
overseas due to the lack of availability of the necessary
grades domestically. More impactful still could be tariffs on
crude and products themselves, but the biggest threat could be
the potential of an all-out trade war which leads to slowing or
declining global and domestic economic growth and product
demand.
New regulations and policy initiatives can also be positive
for the industry and consumers. Certainly, the cut in corporate
taxes has and will lead to more capital investment in every
segment as more projects move above the hurdle rate. Also, as
countries around the world move toward lower sulfur
transportation fuels and more stringent environmental rules,
U.S. refiners who have already had to make those investments
will further their relative advantages. The International
Maritime Organization mandate to decrease bunker fuel sulfur in
2020 might be the single biggest event on the horizon and while
it will advantage many U.S. refiners, especially the most
complex facilities, it could be a major challenge to others.
To close out my prepared remarks, let me just say that a
thriving refining industry is a critical resource for any
country. It provides not just major benefits to both the
economy as a whole and consumers, but it is also an important
national security asset. Nations around the world have targeted
self-sufficiency in product supply and spent billions in an
attempt to achieve this goal. But it has been the U.S. whose
refining system has risen to the top, not through government
involvement or subsidization, but by being allowed to develop
and grow in a true free market environment. I believe it is
incumbent on policymakers to remember this and thoroughly
examine the impacts on the health of this vital industry and
the resulting effects on consumers in any legislation that they
consider.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Auers follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Auers.
Mr. Bordoff, welcome.
STATEMENT OF JASON E. BORDOFF, FOUNDING DIRECTOR, CENTER ON
GLOBAL ENERGY POLICY, AND PROFESSOR OF PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE IN
INTERNATIONAL AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF
INTERNATIONAL AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS
Mr. Bordoff. Thank you.
Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Cantwell, members of the
Committee, thanks for the invitation to appear before you again
today.
As the Chairman noted, I was here last in April 2016 to
testify about low oil prices at a time when prices had
collapsed from about $115 a barrel in mid-2014 to the high $20s
in early 2016--and they've since surged back to around $80.
So let me explain the factors that have driven those swings
and then offer three observations about the policy implications
of them. Key factors in the 2014 oil price collapse included
surging U.S. shale production, which you've heard about, and
the decision by OPEC countries led by Saudi Arabia not to cut
production in November 2014, widely condemned by many at the
time as a war on shale.
In 2016 after oil prices had fallen below $30 a barrel,
OPEC, along with several non-OPEC countries, notably Russia,
came together to cut production and prop up prices, oil prices
recovered into the mid-$50s for much of 2017 and then they
began to surge again for several reasons. One, the OPEC cuts
worked and brought down excess inventories; second, oil demand
growth has been exceptionally strong, above its 10-year
average; and then, we've heard from the IEA about Venezuela's
production collapse in light of its tragic economic situation.
More recently, several additional factors pushed up prices
even further. President Trump pulled the U.S. out of the Iran
Nuclear Agreement, raising concerns about additional oil supply
loss; Libyan production fell by half due to political unrest;
there were short-term outages in Canada and elsewhere; and then
all of this was exacerbated by fears about the historically
small buffer of spare capacity, as my colleague, Bob McNally,
has explained so well in his book for our book series at
Columbia.
In the last few weeks then prices fell again as OPEC
countries announced they would put more supply in the market.
Libyan supply came back online and the Trump Administration did
three things. First, it signaled a softer approach toward the
implementation of Iran sanctions; second, it raised more fears
about the potential for a global economic slow down as a result
of an escalating trade war; and third, it was reported to be
considering tapping the SPR.
So, what does all this mean for policy?
First, it is impossible to predict future oil prices and
few policy actions we have at our hands today provide relief at
the pump in the near term. So I think energy policy decisions,
whether it's to increase production or reduce consumption or
anything else, should largely be made independent of today's
oil price. One policy action that would reduce oil prices,
possibly, albeit temporarily, could be a release of the SPR. I
do not believe current conditions warrant that and there are
better ways to mitigate the potential price impacts of re-
imposing sanctions on Iran. There are a few signs of shortage
in the oil market today, significant geopolitical risks still
loom and, as I testified before this Committee before, I think
Congress should avoid further selling off this important
national security asset to pay for other priorities.
Second, the shale revolution has been transformational for
the U.S. energy outlook delivering enormous economic and
geopolitical benefits, but gasoline prices are still based on
oil prices and oil prices are still set in an integrated
market. And so, that means when global oil prices spike,
consumers feel it at the pump regardless of how much less
import dependent we are. Shale can be ramped up and down more
quickly. I do not think it is true swing supply. Geopolitical
influence in the global market comes less from how much you
produce than from that buffer of spare capacity you might
choose to hold. And so, when oil prices fell below $30 two
years ago and then soared to $80 this year, shale could not
stabilize the market. That job fell to OPEC, mainly Saudi
Arabia which is the only country that chooses to hold a
meaningful amount of spare capacity.
Third, the best way to reduce the exposure of consumers to
inevitable future oil price shocks is to reduce how much oil
our economy uses in the first place, continuing with planned
CAFE increases is one good way to do that, not to mention to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
While increasing production does not insulate consumers for
higher pump prices, it is important to note that more supply,
along with the potential for reduced demand, can reduce the
harm to the economy overall from higher oil prices by lowering
import dependence because more of the increased consumer
spending on fuel circulates within the U.S. economy rather than
flows overseas.
The converse of that is why the U.S. economy saw much less
benefit from the oil price collapse of 2014 and '15 than would
previously have been the case because the consumer savings at
the pump were offset by reduced oil-related investment which is
a bigger share of the economy now as a result of the shale
boom.
We've heard about the infrastructure bottlenecks. I think
policymakers can facilitate responsible production by
efficiently permitting infrastructure without undermining
needed environmental reviews and by avoiding a trade war that
threatens to raise material costs like steel or aluminum or
possibly lead to retaliatory tariffs on U.S. energy exports.
Members of the Committee, thank you again for inviting me
here today, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bordoff follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Bordoff.
And thank you all--very, very interesting testimony this
morning.
I want to start off with, again, the subject that everyone
has been talking about this week and that is Iran. We have
heard several of you mention the supply disruptions, the global
disruptions, that we have seen in Venezuela and Libya and
certainly with the potential for Iran going offline.
The question, and I think I will direct this to you, Mr.
Sadamori and Mr. McNally. We have a 100 million barrel per day
oil market, so where does this supply come from in this short-
term to meet the potential for a shortfall? Then, if I could
have you both discuss this issue of spare capacity? This is
something that I have raised over the years, and I am trying to
get a real handle on what we truly understand to be spare
capacity right now within OPEC, within the non-OPEC countries.
Mr. Bordoff, you had mentioned that, really, it is only
Saudi Arabia that has true spare capacity. You suggested that
U.S. shale oil is not necessarily spare capacity or that swing
supply that is needed.
So can we have a conversation about this? Where do we go if
we do have this severe disruption that Iran can clearly
contribute to in addition to what else we have seen, and how
does the global spare capacity factor in and to what assurance
do we have that we have enough to take us through?
Mr. Sadamori.
Mr. Sadamori. Thank you, Chair.
So the question about where the additional supply can come
from in the very short-term. We have to take note of the fact
that the Vienna Production Cuts Agreement by the OPEC and some
of the non-OPEC oil-producing countries, they are still
maintained. And, of course, they are producing a lot less than
their target and also they are coming from the unintended
production declines in countries like Venezuela, but the
fundamental agreement, we understand, in the last June meeting
was that they would recover the oil, increase the production
and lower the level of compliance to 100 percent.
That means that there are some countries in that group who
are producing less intentionally, a lot less than their
capacity. The normal expectation is that those additional
barrels should come from them.
The Chairman. To what extent should the U.S. increased
production play?
Mr. Sadamori. Yes, and also in terms of the numbers, in our
most recent oil market report, we expect that those, the OPEC
members along the Gulf Coast, the Saudi, UA and Kuwait,
together they should have a bit more than 2 million barrels per
day over spare production capacity. Also the other producer who
can increase production will be Russia. Indeed, we are already
seeing that today. I mean, the Saudi and Russia, they already
started to open taps in June, so the increase is already
happening. That is about the OPEC and some non-OPEC side, the
participants to the production cuts agreement.
On the other hand, in the United States, of course, the
U.S. is increasing the production at a very fast pace. The 1.7
million barrels per day, in one year, in 2018 and we expect
that to continue a bit slower, but still 1.2 million barrels
per day in 2019.
But in a sense, we, I mean, the market participants already
incorporated that very fast production growth in the United
States. What we are seeing right now is the, as I said, there
is the pipeline takeaway capacity which is somewhat preventing
the further growth.
In the short-term, of course, we understand that many
projects are going on in regions like Texas and those pipeline
projects will be completed sometime in 2019, but before that,
in the very short-term, it is really hard to expect U.S.
production to grow significantly before the pipeline takeaway
infrastructure issues are solved.
The Chairman. Mr. McNally, do you have anything to add to
that?
Mr. McNally. Yes, Madam Chairman, this is something I have
thought about and worked with when I was on the White House
National Security Council, like my colleague, Jason Bordoff,
under President Obama, working for President Bush when we
liberated Iraq and we thought very much about this.
The problem, the policy problem again is, even though it is
100 million barrels and we are only talking about a couple-
million-barrel disruption, a small disruption can mean a big
price spike and a problem for our economy.
So where do you go for quick supply because you cannot
bring on an oil field really fast? The first place you want to
go for something like that, if you suddenly lost 2.5 million
barrels a day or 3 or 4, you go to spare production capacity
held by, mainly, Saudi Arabia. We went there in 1990 and '91.
They were a little late in getting there. Saudi Arabia provided
that before we liberated Iraq in 2003. That is the first
resort. That is what the fire department is for. You call the
fire department. The problem is there is no fire department
today.
Mr. Sadamori mentioned the Saudis are going up. I want to
have a word about defining spare capacity in a second, but
spare capacity, we all must agree, is at least very tight, if
not completely absent.
The next place you go is commercial inventories. Now, back
in the last two years we had this glut. We had this glut and we
had extra inventories. If we had to work it off a little
faster, that would have been okay. We wouldn't have had to have
higher prices. But commercial inventories, and we could only
see them in the rich world, now the growing part of the world
in Asia and Africa, we don't see those inventories. So the rich
world's inventories are normal. The rest of the world is
probably a little tight on inventories. If we were to draw down
commercial inventories right now by that 2.5 million barrels a
day, it would put upward pressure on prices.
That leads to our last resort which is strategic stocks,
held in the United States and in other IEA countries,
principally Germany and Japan. We, unfortunately, decided to
sell off our strategic stocks to pay for budgetary expenses so
our protection is being reduced, but that is where you would
want to go and frankly, in my view, were we to lose Iran's 2.5
million barrels a day later this year or next and, certainly,
were there to be an interruption in the Strait of Hormuz of 19
million barrels a day, that would constitute a legitimate use
of strategic stocks.
Final word on defining spare capacity because folks do
define it a little differently. The IEA has a higher number for
spare production capacity. They have, I think it is above 3
million barrels a day because they count oil that Saudi Arabia
could bring on but in several months.
In history and the EIA, we have a little stricter
definition. It is oil that you can get in weeks, four weeks to
be exact, and on that definition the EIA has a little lower
definition of about 1.5 million barrels a day. The way we count
it, it is even lower than 1 million barrels a day, but however
you count it, it is really tight and relative to the risk we
face.
The Chairman. Thank you. Thank you both.
Senator Cantwell.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thanks to the
witnesses.
You have painted, all of you collectively, a picture of
what the roller coaster looks like for the future. I think that
is the most challenging thing for us to get our minds around is
that the roller coaster is going to continue.
For consumers at home it, obviously, can be very, very
devastating and so, to me, I think, Mr. Bordoff, you said it
best that the best thing we can do is diversify off of oil just
because of that integrated market and now, spare capacity
issue. That even though we have upped production, we are not
going to avoid still being wrapped around that global market
and the challenges of that global market.
One thing I wanted to ask about, obviously we talked,
everybody has talked a lot about Iran. When we were focusing on
high prices a decade ago, one of the issues that people put or
at least a lot of the oil executives would say there is a
terrorist premium, a threat of terrorism activity disrupting
supply. They would say that there is something between a 15 and
20 percent increase in price just based on that fear factor.
Do you have some sense of what the Iranian issue might be
causing in the market today?
Yes, Mr. Bordoff.
Mr. Bordoff. It is hard to put a dollar figure on it. We do
see oil prices move in response to signals from the
Administration that it will take a harder or softer line toward
implementing sanctions a few weeks ago when an unnamed State
Department official was giving an anonymous briefing and said
there would be no exceptions for significant reductions in
Iranian oil purchases. So countries had to go to zero by
November, we saw oil prices spike several dollars a barrel, I
do not remember how much exactly, and then the Administration
seemed to walk that back a little bit.
So I do think that tool is an important one we should
remember. I think that the Strategic Petroleum Reserve is
designed to deal with short-term, temporary, severe supply
disruptions not the potential for a long-term supply loss from
implementing sanctions against any country, against their oil
supply.
The Iran statute was written with a mechanism built into it
to try to take account of conditions in the global oil market
and make sure we were imposing pain on Iran without imposing,
shooting ourselves in the foot at the same time.
Senator Cantwell. But you are saying both trade wars and
this issue are causing some level of increase in price.
Mr. Bordoff. Well, I think recently it has had a little bit
of the opposite effect because the new sanctions that were
announced against it, sorry, the new tariffs that were
announced against Chinese goods, raised fears that the trade
war could be worse and that might have a negative effect on
global economic growth. The rate of GDP growth is one very
important factor in how strong oil demand growth is which could
push up prices in a tightly-balanced market.
So there are a lot of geopolitical risks out there.
Obviously, Iran is one. Libya is another. Venezuela is another
and there is general potential for increased tensions or
conflict in the Middle East or elsewhere as we have seen on
social media and other places in the last few days.
Senator Cantwell. What did we get out of the $4 billion tax
break, the new tax break in the tax plan that we gave oil
companies? What did we get out of that? You know, in the
context of here we are months later. We gave a $4 billion tax
break, a new one in addition to the lowering of the corporate
rate. We gave them additional foreign investors, yet here we
are paying higher gas prices. So what did we get out of that?
Mr. Bordoff. Well, it is hard. I do not know that I can
comment specifically on what was in the tax bill.
The general point about increased production and to what
extent it helps consumers at the pump, I think in your opening
remarks you made the comment about how we have increased
production, yet prices have still gone up. That's partly
because prices are set in a global market. There is a limit to
what shale can do, as extraordinary as doubling oil production
has been, I mean, this is the largest five-year increase of oil
production of any country in history. That is a staggering
turnaround from what the outlook was not long ago. And I think
it is fair to say that if that had not happened, we would be
facing a different oil price outlook right now.
Senator Cantwell. I guess I would say I do not think that
is a fair use of the taxpayer money to give these oil companies
a huge tax break and now we are seeing a spike in prices. I
would have preferred us to think about this issue of what can
we do on the spare capacity side.
What more can we do if the SPR has infrastructure issues?
The Chair and I were both very interested in making sure that
we worked with Secretary Moniz at the time to increase the SPR
infrastructure so that it was robust enough.
What about the way Europeans look at jet fuel? Why not look
at creating more mechanisms for industry to have more spare
capacity? They have a reserve as it relates to--we are not at
that point yet, but definitely the last decade was a huge
roller coaster for the airline industry because of high fuel
cost. A lot of people lost their jobs, lost their pensions,
lost everything because of that spike.
What can we do now if spare capacity is such a big issue
that is controlled by somebody else, the Saudis, not us? What
can we do?
Mr. Bordoff. We do not have the ability that a company that
controls its national oil production has to hold back spare
capacity. The responsiveness of shale and the extent to which
shale grows is determined by the individual economic decisions
of thousands of independent actors throughout the United
States. Companies hold some level of inventory that makes sense
for them.
We have government held stocks which, I think, are more
responsive than privately held stocks, when they are used by
the government. But that is, again, sort of extraordinary
circumstances.
So it raises the question of whether government's role is
actually to provide oil price stability moving forward and
whether there are other actions we can take to reduce how
exposed our economy is because of how dependent we are on oil.
I will just make one--oh, sorry.
Senator Cantwell. Go ahead.
Mr. Bordoff. I was just going to make one other point which
is we are, sort of, talking about to what extent shale can be a
swing supply source and ramp up and down quickly and if it can,
it can, sort of, vanquish the role OPEC or others could have.
That comes at a cost, and I do not need to tell Senators here
from oil-producing states, to U.S. communities. I mean, when
truck drivers are making six figure salaries and then they lose
their jobs, when the school funding base soars and then
collapses. The volatility in oil output can be different for
communities to manage even though it may have a benefit in
stabilizing global prices.
Senator Cantwell. My time, I am way over.
I would just say, yes, I endorse your statement that the
best thing to do is get us off the roller coaster by
diversifying off of oil. I endorse that.
In the meantime though, I do think we should be--I will
write something for a question for the record, Madam Chair, on
this issue. But I do think that Europe has looked at jet fuel
as a specific way of increasing supply, so we will ask that for
the record.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Great.
Senator Gardner.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you to the
witnesses for being here today.
I wanted to talk a little bit about--I think the tax cut
conversation is a fascinating one because, I think, in the
context of other energy costs, if you look at utility rates,
for instance, 101 utilities have cut their rates as a result of
the tax cut. That is $3 billion in savings to the American
people as a result of those utility rate cuts. I think it is
important to talk about all the ways that the economy has grown
as well as people saving money because of the tax cuts in every
Congressional district.
I wanted to ask you, Mr. McNally, a little bit about the
concerns I have on state policies. There may be some efforts in
Colorado this year to, once again, try to ban oil and gas
production. The EIA estimates that in August we could have
about 611,000 barrels of oil being produced in the State of
Colorado. This is an incredible number. What happens if you
were to see success in banning oil production in a state like
Colorado with that level of production?
Mr. McNally. Thank you, Senator Gardner.
What we would do in that case is forgo an opportunity to
avoid a real problem. If you look back to 2011 and 2012 when
crude oil prices were $100, gasoline prices were $4.00 a
gallon, we lost Libya and then we put sanctions on Iran. Spare
capacity was really tight. The reason we didn't go back to $150
a barrel in 2012 and '13, like we were just almost at in 2008,
is because shale oil production, kind of, galloped over the
hill and started ramping up just in the nick of time.
Now, even though shale is much more responsive and does act
more quickly in response to prices, you have to have states
that are open to the permitting. You have to have openness to
the resources, to the takeaway capacity. It has to be well-
regulated because shale oil, like all energy production, needs
social license to operate.
But you don't want to have across-the-board bans. Had we
had anything like that, we not only would have not had the
cavalry save us in 2011 but maybe double-dipped into a
recession, but we wouldn't have had the gas boom earlier which
changed things in the Atlantic and made Russia, a force then,
to loosen their price and power in Europe and so forth. So
across-the-board bans would have deprived us of some of the
biggest wins we've had geopolitically and economically in the
last 20 years and, going forward, one would hate to think about
what we would lose by doing something like that.
Senator Gardner. Thank you.
Mr. Sadamori, if you could just talk about, perhaps a
little bit, your take on the Nord Stream 2 pipeline and what
effect that has on geopolitical security, particularly security
in Europe, and what it could mean for Ukraine.
Mr. Sadamori. I think I would like to refrain from making
comments on the specific projects, but in general terms, we
think that the gas supply security would be a very crucial
issue for the European countries.
The fundamental question is how they can really diversify
the supply in the real sense. Of course, that also comes to the
issue of, kind of, transit routes. So whether they can secure
the, kind of, a diverse supply security in that sense. I
understand that the various discussions are going on at the
various levels, so we would like to monitor the development.
Senator Gardner. Does your organization take a look at the
concerns that Russia may pose when it comes to energy
deliveries to Europe and what that could mean for European
energy security?
Mr. Sadamori. Well, it may not be appropriate to talk about
the kind of hypothetical, kind of, the situation but IEA
recalled that in the G7 Energy Ministers Meeting there was an
agreement by the Energy Ministers of the leading countries of
G7 that the energy resources, energy should not be used as a
weapon. And so, kind of a diverse, secure supply needs to be
secured. I think that would be a very important issue for the
global economy as well.
Senator Gardner. I agree with that.
Has Russia used their energy as a weapon?
Mr. Sadamori. So, I'm not talking about the specific
behavior of a specific country. What I'm talking about is the
kind of general agreement made by the----
Senator Gardner. Would you consider shutting off a pipeline
to a country, perhaps in the middle of winter, shutting down
that supply, is that utilizing energy as a weapon?
Mr. Sadamori. Well, the--I don't mean to talk about the
real, the use of energy as, kind of, a weapon, but the recent
history, back in, I recall, that was 2008 and '09 and then
again 2014, that there were serious concerns on the European-
consuming countries about the stable supply of their natural
gas and that was in the middle of winter.
The gas was intensively, a lot was used for their purposes
of heating the buildings and unlike the electricity who has
other generation sources like the coal or other sources when it
comes to, kind of, a heating based on the, kind of,
infrastructure setting, it's really hard to find a replacement
for other fuels. So in that respect there are, kind of, serious
concerns on the European side and that led to the, kind of,
intensive discussions inside Europe about how they can secure
the gas supply security in the countries.
Senator Gardner. Well, thank you.
I'm just--I am out of time, but I am concerned about the
security of energy and I think we have seen one country use it
as a weapon. That is Russia. To see Europe become more reliant
on that is a concern.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Gardner.
Senator Smith.
Senator Smith. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to all
of you for being here today, very interesting testimony.
As I listened to you it is really clear that we can see
that production in this country has grown tremendously over the
last decade and yet, obviously, we are still susceptible to
rising prices because this is essentially a global market. You
are talking about the issues around what we can do to effect
prices on the supply side and then what we can do to effect
pricing on the demand side.
Mr. Bordoff, at the end of your testimony, as Senator
Cantwell remarked, you make a point that I think is really
important. The best way to reduce our exposure to future oil
shocks is by reducing our oil consumption in the first place.
This seems to be such a timely observation given that we are
wondering what the Trump Administration is going to do, their
anticipated move to roll back fuel efficiency standards.
In Minnesota the strong efficiency standards that were put
in place by the Obama Administration are estimated to have
saved Minnesota consumers about $650 million. In 2030, if those
standards are left in place, the average Minnesota household
will be almost $3,000 richer. So it has a real pocketbook
impact. Of course, it also creates jobs in Minnesota, because
our state is a biofuels producer.
Could you just talk a little bit more, Mr. Bordoff, about
the role that these vehicle efficiency standards can play in
our ability to cope with higher prices?
Mr. Bordoff. Yeah, as I said in my testimony--thank you for
the question, Senator. The gasoline prices are set in a global
market so whether, regardless of how much we are producing in
the United States, consumers are still going to face prices at
the pump based on what is happening in the global oil market.
U.S. shale production can help as an additional source of
supply and putting another 5 million barrels a day on the
market certainly has. But fundamentally, reducing the energy
intensity of the economy, I think, is what makes it most
resilient to oil price shocks which are inevitable. That will
happen. Bob wrote a whole book about it.
We are going to see prices go up and down and that is
difficult for consumers to manage. They do not have the same
ability to hedge prices the way airlines and large companies
do. They do not have those tools available and that's
difficult.
So I think policies that help reduce the energy intensity
of the economy and improve energy efficiency are good for those
reasons, economic reasons, as well as for the problem of
climate change.
Senator Smith. Thank you.
Does anybody else want to comment on that? On that question
of what else we can do? Thinking about, particularly, the
opportunities around keeping vehicle efficiency standards in
place in order to help protect consumers from price increases?
Mr. Auers. Well, I will say a few things on that.
I mean, efficiency standards are good, but as I made a
point in my remarks, the free market and taking leases off of,
you know, this wonderful thing that is the free market, allows
them to innovate and increase efficiency. And they will do that
on their own given the proper price signals.
The problem with having efficiency standards that are too
regimented and too fixed, it can cause situations where we are
not creating the optimal environment to make the most efficient
decisions on, whether it is on fuel efficiency or anything
else. So, you know, it is important to keep in mind to provide,
to allow the market to do its thing.
I always look at how a football game or a basketball game
is officiated. You know, government should play the role of an
official, an official that is not flag happy or calling ticky
tack fouls, but an official that keeps the game moving and
allows the teams to become as, you know, let them make the
decisions, sometimes--and not play the role of coach.
Senator Smith. I am hearing your point, but I think the
challenge is that the way the prices are set do not always
include all of the externalities that are involved in the full
cost of that price. So in your analogy, the market is not
including all of those things. At first, this is an issue in
Minnesota, at first glance, biofuels appear to be higher cost
than oil, but if you consider the low-carbon fuel standard
shows that if you look at these, if you account for all of
those costs, the price is actually competitive. Of course,
those costs are assigned to the market.
I don't have too much more time, but I think that is a
really important point here.
Mr. Bordoff, I would love to follow up with you on this, I
mean, what are the benefits to consumers and the environment if
we adopt a California-style, low-carbon fuel standard in order
to consider all of those issues?
Madam Chair, I know I am out of time, but I want to just
note I am going to be leaving to go to the Agriculture
Committee where we are going to be discussing how speculation
is affecting oil prices and what we need to do to take a look
at that. The Agriculture Committee is holding a hearing right
now on the nominee of the CFTC Commissioner, and it is going to
be one of the issues that we are discussing, so I appreciate
that being raised here as well.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Smith.
Senator Cassidy.
Senator Cassidy. Gentlemen, I just enjoyed your testimony,
all of you.
A couple things just for the record.
In terms of selling the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, one of
you mentioned that we have already sold off a portion of it. We
have not sold it yet. Ed Markey and I have an amendment that
allows the government to time the market to sell at high and
replenish back low. Theoretically, I think it is 2023 that they
currently plan to sell, but they can move it up now to take
advantage of high market prices and kind of, if you will, win-
win. A win for the taxpayer, but also to get the higher price
now to do the repairs to the infrastructure that Madam Chair
was able to put in.
Secondly, I also want to point out that Senator Cantwell
asked what has the Tax Cut and Jobs Act bill done for this? I
have been told by folks that companies have accelerated their
pipeline construction that was planned for the early '20s into
these current years because of the five-year depreciation. They
are taking advantage of the Tax Cut and Jobs Act bill just to
move these projects now, and so midstream is responding to our
tax bill--so that would be one answer to Senator Cantwell's
problem.
The other thing I want to point out is that the delay that
occurred in the last Administration on the construction of the
Keystone XL pipeline has definitely created a supply
constraint. My Gulf Coast refineries use that oil from the
Canadian tar sands and from the Bakken. The last Administration
put in constraints, and now we are complaining about higher gas
prices when it was the previous Administration's policy which
has contributed to that. I also wish to point that out and we
would not be talking about midstream constraint had there not
been some of the strategies of the previous Presidential
Administration. With all that said, I have used up two minutes.
Let me just explore something. I will note that when prices
fell, part of the reason they fell is that overextended shale
producers had hedged future production. They continued to
produce even though prices were $30 because they had hedged to
sell, let's say, at $60. And that, kind of, drove prices down.
We have now shaken out the production market--knowing that
you know this, but just for context--we have shaken it out so
the more efficient, those who had the cash cushion to get
through the low price period, survived.
But in a sense, shale will respond as a swing producer
because now that prices are up more fields will be developed,
inevitably there will be some who will again hedge, but they
will bring out--
Somebody mentioned or I read in my state, Austin Chalk,
which is coming online and is going to be, at least in the
near-term an intermediate, a new source of production which
probably will, maybe, over-produce a little bit.
Any comments on the role of things like Austin Chalk and
the OCS and these other fields coming online to lease in the
intermediate, maybe six months from now, making some impact
upon these high prices?
Yes, sir.
Mr. Braziel. Well, Austin Chalk certainly will and the
reason why Austin Chalk works is exactly the reason that you
said is because the economic support in drilling in Austin
Chalk and support drilling in Eagle Ford and Permian and all
the other basins that I mentioned a few minutes ago too.
So, what is happening in the market is, in fact, giving us
the response that we would expect.
Now, shale in the United States is not going to be a swing
supplier getting to your four weeks, whichever one of you guys
said four weeks has got a hit. Austin Chalk is not going to
happen in four weeks.
Senator Cassidy. Well, we really cannot expect relief,
after say, Labor Day, because not only will the summer driving
season be over, but the Russians going into winter, I
understand, have to keep full production or else they freeze
in. And then, some of these things like Austin Chalk will be,
perhaps, hitting their stride. Is that a fair statement that we
can expect after Labor Day some relief from this?
Mr. Braziel. That is a fair statement.
And one of the things that has not been mentioned in this
hearing so far is the forward price of crude oil at West Texas
Intermediate and in Cushing, Oklahoma. That is the price that
we have been talking about here, for the most part.
That price in five years, in 2023, is $55. So going back to
Senator Cantwell's question a few minutes ago of what's the
price premium in the market for all these various uncertainties
that we're seeing right now in the marketplace? I could make an
argument that all of the uncertainties added up are a $15
premium because if somebody wants to sell or buy crude oil
right now in 2023, they will do it at $15. Keep in mind then,
back to your decision that you have to make about when you want
to do something with the SPR, I tend to think SPR ought to be
saved for some real crisis.
Senator Cassidy. Well, we have only made the commitment to
sell it. It has just not been sold if the Markey amendment and
the Cassidy amendment has been adhered to.
Mr. Braziel. My only point would be the price right now is
$70. The price in 2023 is $55 on the futures markets.
Senator Cassidy. So, now----
Mr. Braziel. I was a trader for 15 years of my career. I
would sell now.
Senator Cassidy. You mentioned, Mr. McNally, that we are
going to always be in boom and bust. On the other hand,
plausibly, we can say that with the Keystone XL pipeline being
built, the intermediate being built from the Permian and
elsewhere, the midstream, and then I am told by the super
majors that they are going back out into the Outer Continental
Shelf, that we are going to have significant production supply
over the next one to four years which may account for the $55
barrel but we may see some leveling off. Is that a fair
statement?
Mr. McNally. Certainly, Senator Cassidy, that is a fair
statement. I believe the IEA and others believe that the United
States is going to be half or more of non-OPEC supply growth.
So we took the lion's share since 2009, and we are going to
take the lion's share as we build out this midstream
infrastructure and connect it. Again, as long as we remain open
to production and permitting, we can expect that to expand.
But if I may, on the SPR. I was never a trader. I worked
for a hedge fund for 12 years and I never traded, but I am a
student of history. In 1996, Congress and President Clinton
last sold SPR crude for budget expenses in '97. At that time
oil prices were on the high end of the range. They thought they
were selling high, about $26 a barrel. I was in the White House
on the National Security Council after 9/11 and oversaw the
refilling of the SPR at much higher prices.
I will predict and I predicted before--I am afraid, sir,
that we may think we are selling high, but I predict we will
put those barrels back in. We may have to buy them from the
Chinese at higher prices after the next Gulf emergency. So I
agree with Mr. Braziel, I think, not on the selling now. I
think we should hold it for emergency, with respect.
Senator Cassidy. Well, again, that decision to sell has
already been made. It is just a question of timing of the
market.
Mr. McNally. Right, right.
Senator Cassidy. I have more questions but I am way over
time, and I yield back.
The Chairman. Yes, some of us did not think that we should
have sold.
[Laughter.]
Senator Manchin.
Senator Manchin. I agree, Madam Chairman.
I just want to make it as simple as I can. We are producing
more oil than we have ever produced in the United States on a
daily basis and that is an accurate statement, correct? Then
for 40 years we froze our exporting ability of oil from '75 to
2015. We have opened that up since 2015 with twice the
production that we have ever had.
The people back home in West Virginia are asking, how come
our prices are going up if we are so enriched with all this new
technology and all this oil and surplus? I have heard all the
comments today. It is hard to go back home and talk to somebody
in Maine or West Virginia and explain we are doing better than
ever, we are producing more. Are we producing more to stabilize
the global market of oil or are we producing for the benefit of
the United States' market? Which one do you think is getting
the best play on this?
Either one? Both of you all, yes.
Mr. McNally. Senator, as Jason Bordoff said, our pump
prices in Montana or West Virginia are all set in a global
market. So to answer your question, I would say we are
exporting to stabilize the global oil market so that we may
stabilize our own market.
It is all----
Senator Manchin. We tried to put an amendment on that. I do
not know if you knew that, Mr. McNally. We tried to put an
amendment on that that said if the prices spiked in the United
States, our main customer and our main purpose, our
constituency, is the United States and West Virginia, Maine,
all of us here and Alaska too.
Where would you predict a spike that would concern us that
the Americans are paying to stabilize the global market,
Americans are paying a higher price than normal?
Mr. McNally. Which price spike led----
Senator Manchin. Yes, I mean is there a ceiling do you
think we could break?
Mr. McNally. There is and when I think about the roller
coaster and Space Mountain we are on, I am very worried about
how we diagnose the price booms and sometimes the misdiagnoses.
And I am concerned that if we, when we go back to $4.00 or
$5.00 a gallon, we will say it's exports, but sir, with
respect, I believe if we were to close that ban and ban
exports, I think we would have less production and higher
prices.
Senator Manchin. We are not saying ban it. We are saying
basically when it hits a critical mass that concerns us that
the Americans are carrying this load.
Mr. McNally. Right, yes.
Senator Manchin. And we are producing twice as much. We are
asking people to accept the new in technology and production
and more pipelines and everything that is going to benefit our
economy.
Mr. McNally. Right.
Senator Manchin. And they do not see a benefit to them.
Mr. McNally. Yes, sir.
Senator Manchin. That is why we get to push back. We are
very much concerned about that.
I want to move on to something very quickly on natural gas.
In West Virginia, I think you know about the Marcellus, Utica,
and now we have Rogersville that will come on. We have hit some
pretty good opportunities and we are producing an awful lot of
liquids. Those liquids are extremely valuable.
We also know that we are vulnerable down in the Southwest.
Rick Perry and I were Governors together, and we were talking.
He said, ``Joe, I have seen a model with a horrific hurricane,
a class five, moving up the Houston Channel, what it does and
disrupts the energy chain and energy markets in America.''
We are trying to get what we call a mid-Atlantic energy
hub, storage hub, strategically. Do you all know enough about
that? Have you looked into it enough, Mr. Braziel?
Mr. Braziel. I have looked at it some, particularly in
terms of ethane. I am generally familiar with what is going on
with the ethane side.
Senator Manchin. Well, do any of you want to comment on
what it would do to stabilize the energy markets in America,
because we are very vulnerable and you know that every time we
have weather hit down in the Southwest--we are not too prone to
hurricanes in West Virginia, we have been blessed.
Mr. Braziel. Anything that creates the optionality in the
transportation system, the ability to go multiple directions
with any particular hydrocarbon is a good thing. That is what
the hub is going to do.
Senator Manchin. Yes, with all the natural liquids that we
have, if we are able to help with the global supply even,
because we are exporting that too and there is more and more
coming on terminals where we can send the liquids out. Is that
a benefit?
Mr. Braziel. It is a benefit.
There is a new pipeline that is being built over in the
Philly area that they are having a little trouble getting
finished right now. So you want that pipeline to be finished
relatively soon.
Senator Manchin. Yes, but we want to keep some of that
product in our central states, in West Virginia, Ohio and
Pennsylvania because we become the back-up, strategically, for
our national interest and concerns, but also, we can create a
whole new energy hub in that, chemicals, cracking and all these
things that need to go in line with downstream.
Mr. Braziel. It will all be. It will be a good thing.
Senator Manchin. You all----
Mr. Braziel. The more storage you have is good and that is
better----
Senator Manchin. We have all our eggs in one basket right
now. Do you all agree that most of our energy eggs are in one
basket as far as production, refineries, everything down in the
Southwest?
Mr. Braziel. Well, no. You are moving a lot of ethane down
to the Gulf Coast right now on the Enterprise pipeline. So you
have, that is one basket. You are moving a lot of ethane up to
Canada right now.
Senator Manchin. Right.
Mr. Braziel. So that is another basket.
You have some supply diversity, some demand diversity, I
guess you would say.
Senator Manchin. If you all could, if you would look into
the storage hub that we have been talking about and see how you
think it would stabilize the markets and, I think, help the
resilience of the United States' markets also.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Manchin.
Senator King.
Senator King. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for
calling this fascinating hearing and thank you all.
The most profound observation I ever heard about oil prices
was back in the '80s from a professor at the University of
Maine that said, ``Oil prices in the future will always be the
opposite of what you think today.''
[Laughter.]
That has proven true, if you think about it. If we think
prices will be high then two things happen: we have more
drilling, and we have more conservation. If we think they will
be low, we have less drilling and less conservation. People buy
trucks instead of Priuses and that seems to be the dynamic. I
remember that from 35 years ago and it has, sort of, carried
through over the years.
A couple of very specific questions and we have a limited
time, just like you did in your statements, so try to be as
brief as you can.
One is, what is Saudi Arabia's cost of production? Anybody
know?
Mr. McNally. Senator, I believe that would be, the cost of
production, it would be in the single digits, $5, $10, $12.
Senator King. So they can sell oil at $30 a barrel and make
money? They just don't make as much?
Mr. McNally. Their budget revenues--their budget couldn't
handle it. Their country would fall apart. They could cover
their production costs at that, but they couldn't meet their
social spending at that level.
Senator King. But their cost of production is a lot lower
than, for example, shale.
Mr. McNally. Yes, sir. Yes, sir.
Senator King. Second question. Is there----
Mr. Auers. I want to add something to that, though. That is
true on existing production but on incremental new production,
it is much higher.
Senator King. It is higher?
Mr. Auers. It is totally, you know--yeah, which is not
different.
Senator King. Are there estimates? Is there a limit to the
shale oil production that we have or is it, sort of like,
producible reserves? Is there any upward limit? Is there a
finite capacity here?
Mr. Braziel. Depends on the price.
Senator King. Okay.
Mr. Braziel. The higher the price, the more you can
produce.
Senator King. The more you can produce because less
economic wells suddenly are economic.
Mr. Braziel. That's exactly it.
And so, if the price does go to $75, we'll produce more
than if the price stays at $68.
Senator King. Okay, next one. Mr. Bordoff, maybe you can
try this one.
Is taking Iran out of the market through sanctions priced
into the market today or will it increase prices later on? Is
the threat already priced in?
Mr. Bordoff. To some degree, pulling Iranian oil off the
market, I think, is priced in, but there is a wide range of
views out there about how severe the impact of re-imposed
sanctions will be from maybe half a million barrels a day up to
1.5 or 2 million barrels a day and that's why the signals from
the Administration about how strict it will be in the
enforcement of sanctions has an impact on the market.
Senator King. But the testimony was there is very limited
spare capacity so 2 million a day out may only be two percent
of world supply but it would be significant in terms of price.
Is that correct?
Mr. Bordoff. If the re-imposed sanctions were to actually
pull 2 million barrels a day off by the end of this year or
next year, that would have a very big impact on global oil
markets.
Senator King. I think we can all agree that a disruption in
the Strait of Hormuz would be a catastrophe of the level that
we are talking about the Strategic Petroleum Reserve being
important. Is that correct? That is 19 million, I think one of
you testified.
Mr. McNally. Yes, Senator.
If prolonged beyond a few days, it would be a genuine
catastrophe.
Senator King. What is the size of the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve? How many million barrels?
Mr. McNally. I'm going to look back to smarter colleagues.
I believe it's, 670 million barrels is the latest, 670 million
barrels in the U.S. I do believe we have sold off a little bit
of that over the past few years. We were a little over 700 at
the top, so we're just down about 670 million barrels.
Mr. Bordoff. I think it's, yeah, about 650 million in the
recent GAO study that was commissioned with sales projected to
bring it down to just over 400 million in a decade.
Senator King. So Strait of Hormuz, I am just doing the
arithmetic, would be about a month.
Mr. McNally. Senator, if we think about that, though, it's
not the stockpile, it's the flow rate. So Strait of Hormuz is
19 million barrels a day. We average, DOE says it can flow at 4
million barrels a day. So there are questions we can do that.
We can't cover the Strait of Hormuz.
Senator King. So even the Strategic Petroleum Reserve is
not instantly fully----
Mr. McNally. No, no, sir. Not even with the IEA, Japan and
Germany coming in, we could not cover the Strait of Hormuz. We
could cover Iran at 2.5 million barrels a day, but not the
Strait of Hormuz at 19 million barrels a day.
Mr. Bordoff. And if I may, I would just say that is part of
the reason the modernization of the SPR for which a little bit
was sold and funding has been made available is important to
increase that flow rate.
Senator King. And the flow rate is a technical constraint?
Mr. McNally. It is technical, yes. We built the reserve and
we pointed the pipes north because we thought we would be
taking oil off. We would be blockaded or embargoed from the
water, and we would have to feed our refineries.
Now we need to export that oil mainly and get it out. So we
have to move the pipes around, but there has also been
degradation in the logistics and so forth, so that gets into it
as well.
Senator King. Now when we are projecting global demand,
what do we think about electric vehicles and conservation? I
mean conservation and electric vehicles have moved faster than
people thought they would. I think, as you mentioned, the
principle use of petroleum is transportation.
Mr. McNally. Yes, sir. We have our eggs all in one basket,
and transportation--it is all about oil.
Jason Bordoff's Center on Global Energy Policy just came
out with a fabulous study done by Marianne Kah that looks at 15
forecasts from government and others about electric vehicle
penetration and it casts some--I'll let Jason perhaps speak to
it as well, but there is some skepticism about maybe we are
being a little too optimistic about how quickly batteries will
fall and consumers will take them up.
You know, folks say that if you took a picture in 1910 and
1912 in Manhattan you would see horses in one and cars in the
other. Why can't we do that? Well, the reason was we developed
an energy source and a technology that consumers found
affordable and took up really quickly and EVs are not there
yet. They may be, but they are not there yet. So there may be a
little bit too much optimism in some of our official forecasts.
We all hope we get there, but I think we should be pragmatic.
We were on horses for 5,000 years. We may be on oil for a
little longer than folks think.
Senator King. Mr. Sadamori?
Mr. Sadamori. As for the contribution for the EV, the
central scenario of the World Energy Outlook last year, 2017,
assumes that the EVs will expand rapidly to 300 million
vehicles by 2040. But the displacement of oil will be limited
to 3 million barrels with that per day, with that.
So we expect a lot more contribution----
Senator King. Going to 300 million in electric vehicles
would only result in a diminution of 3 million barrels a day of
oil?
Mr. Sadamori. Exactly.
And also, I need to point out that so, all in all, the
personal duty, light duty vehicle oil consumption may decline a
bit, but the heavy-duty trucks, ships, airplanes and also
petrochemical feedstocks, all in all, we expect that it's
really hard to see the oil demand peak before 2040. That's the
conclusion from the real central scenario.
Senator King. I am out of time, but just one more question.
What is the proportion of transportation versus
petrochemical feedstocks in the use of oil today?
Mr. Sadamori. At this moment, transportation is, by far,
the largest demand in oil and----
Senator King. Petrochemical, 70 percent, 80 percent, 60
percent?
Mr. Sadamori. Excuse me, I need to go back, but it's
something like 60 percent in the transportation sector and the
30 percent also in the petrochemical feedstock. I will get back
to you the precise number.
Senator King. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Daines.
Senator Daines. Thank you, Chair Murkowski and Ranking
Member Cantwell. Thanks for having this hearing.
In Montana, the average price of fuel is around $2.70,
$2.80 a gallon which is similar to, probably a little lower,
than the national average. For most Montanans, fuel prices are
their main interaction with global oil prices and when you are
in an ag-rich state like Montana, our number one economic
driver. We talk with farmers and ranchers about inputs and
outputs, fuel price is a very important input, not to mention
impacts on fertilizer and so forth as well.
For Montanans working at oil fields in the energy sector,
global oil prices can determine if they are coming to work
tomorrow or not. So this is an important issue for a state like
Montana.
I am very thankful for the work of this Committee and my
colleagues in the U.S. Senate as we were able to lift the crude
oil export ban, finally approve leasing area 1002 in Alaska,
working to reduce some burdensome and only-adding-costs kind of
regulations, as well as tax reform. All of this has led to an
important boost in U.S. oil and gas production and this is
moving us to a very aspirational kind of goal which is not just
energy independence, but truly, global energy dominance.
As I travel around the world in the capacity I have today,
as well as I used to do in the private sector, I really believe
there are three long-term, competitive differentiators to allow
the United States to win when we think about competition with
China, Russia, the EU, and other nations as it relates to
global economic competition. We win because of the rule of law,
we win because of freedom, and we win because of energy.
It is a unique differential we have here where we really
can be not only self-sufficient, but isn't the world going to
be a much, much better place if we reduce the dependence on the
Middle East and reduce the dependence on Russia where we see 30
percent of their energy needs for Europe coming from Russia, 50
percent of Germany's?
The U.S. and our European allies should not be dependent on
oil from Russia. It is not a good thing that China is dependent
on oil from Russia and the Middle East when we are able to
produce it right here in the United States and even in places
like Montana. This not only will stabilize prices, it makes the
U.S. and our allies more secure.
Many of us remember growing up in the early '70s and the
Arab oil embargo and what that did in shocking our economy,
shocking the world's economy, to having that insular removal
from those shocks because of our significant, revolutionary
increase in oil production. This is a very good thing for our
economic and our national security.
This hearing is focusing on the impact of global oil
prices. As I look at it, I see this as more of a supply and a
demand issue. We are seeing a robust economy. We are seeing
more Americans traveling. They are spending more money, and
that is a good thing. They have more money in their
pocketbooks. This leads to more demand, and the best way to
check a rising price is to produce more.
The U.S. WTI crude price is already lower than the global
Brent crude price. With increased U.S. production we can
continue this trend creating lower prices at the pumps for
Montanans.
Mr. McNally, I am particularly interested in how the U.S.
can play a larger, more beneficial role in lower oil prices, as
well as geopolitical trends. Many oil-producing countries also
tend to be less stable, more volatile or have ulterior
political aims, sometimes adversarial aims. This can cause
dramatic shifts in prices as we saw, as I mentioned earlier, in
the '70s, in the '80s and even the early 2000s.
Mr. McNally, do you believe that with a more active U.S.
production and exporting of oil to our allies the U.S. can play
a stabilizing role in global oil prices?
Mr. McNally. Senator, thank you for that question.
Absolutely. The history shows, again, our windfall in
natural gas which is where the shale boom first started,
utterly turned around what we were looking at when I was in the
White House in 2003, becoming dependent on Qatar, becoming as
dependent on the Middle East foreign gas as we were oil.
That changed completely to where now, it is unfortunate
that the Germans are becoming more and more captive to Russian
pipeline gas, but at least our gas exports or our refusal of
those imports and making them available to Europe has weakened
Moscow's ability to impose prices on Europe and that is
unambiguously a good thing.
Lithuania and other countries and the Obama Administration
were quite powerful on this, and the Bush Administration and
the Trump Administration seized those geopolitical benefits.
Same thing with oil. Again, the galloping of shale oil over
the horizon in 2011-12 prevented a return to $150, in my view,
because the market was getting really tight and disrupted at
that point.
And we can expect those types of things going forward as we
look at confronting a dangerous actor like Iran or Russia. Our
allies are more likely to support the United States if they can
be reassured, not just that we have a strategic stockpile, and
I hope we do not sell all that off, but that we have and we
keep open a production ability and export facilities that we
supply that diversity which is the key of energy security.
Senator Daines. Thank you.
I have a quick question for Mr. Braziel.
In order for the U.S. to meet global demand I believe we
need to invest more in energy infrastructure, including
pipelines and refineries. Having spent a career, I studied
chemical engineering and I have been involved in manufacturing
and operations most of my life.
Back to constraints--you are only as good as what the
constraint is as you look at a supply chain. What do you
believe we need to do to get these projects up and running and
relieve any of these bottlenecks that stop us from getting oil
to markets, both refined and crude?
Mr. Braziel. Most of the bottlenecks that exist right now
actually exist for commercial reasons. There certainly are
regulatory issues that could be addressed, but in fact, what
really happened is that the crude oil market did not look to be
nearly as strong as it turned out to be over the last two
years. Remember, two years ago when we would have had to start
building those pipelines, crude oil prices were a lot cheaper.
So, what happened was a lot of producers just did not sign up,
a lot of shippers did not sign up for those new pipelines. They
did sign up, those pipelines are now being developed as we sit
here today, but like in the Permian where the biggest
constraints exist, it is still going to be about a year or so
before those pipelines get built and there is very little that
the federal or the state government can do in order to expedite
that.
What we can do in the future is make sure we do not get
caught in that situation again and make sure that the companies
involved have the right tax incentives, have the right
regulatory structure in order to be able to build pipelines as
fast as possible.
Senator Daines. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Daines.
Senator Hirono.
Senator Hirono. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Earlier in this hearing there were references to the
positive effects of the huge tax cuts for the richest one
percent of people and corporations in our country. It was noted
that most state utilities have cut costs to consumers, but they
did so because they were required by the regulators to pass on
the benefits of the tax cuts to their consumers. Whereas in the
non-regulated entities, i.e., corporations, they have not done
anything of the sort. They have not raised wages. They have
bought back their stock, et cetera. I just wanted to make that
note.
This is a question for Mr. Bordoff. Hawaii has the highest
gasoline prices in the country. It is around $3.78 a gallon in
contrast to what Senator Daines said about the cost in his
state.
I am particularly concerned with proposals to stop progress
on fuel economy standards that can save drivers $8,000 over the
lifetime of a new 2025 vehicle. However, according to press
reports, later this week the Trump Administration will propose
to freeze vehicle fuel economy standards at the 2020 level and
seek to revoke California's authority to set automobile
emissions recognized in the 1970 Clean Air Act.
Mr. Bordoff, what effect would freezing fuel economy
standards have on consumers in the U.S. and the overall effort
to find alternatives to our national dependence on oil that you
called for in your testimony?
Mr. Bordoff. Thank you for the question, Senator Hirono.
It would slow those efforts. Rising fuel economy standards,
I think the evidence to date shows, can be achieved without
significant economic harm and driving up the price of vehicles
beyond the benefits, both to consumers and the social benefits
of reducing oil demand and greenhouse gas emissions. So it
would slow that transition.
I also would just observe that I think this is, I do not
think it is good for consumers, making decisions about long-
term investments in where they live and what kind of car they
are going to buy. These are things they think about in the
long-term, not to mention automakers who need to plan for the
long-term.
So we are going to move to a position where, potentially,
we try to remove California's authority. I think 12 or 14 other
states have joined California. There is going to be a period of
litigation about the authority to do that. This creates several
years of uncertainty for consumers----
Senator Hirono. Yes.
Mr. Bordoff. ----and for the industry about what these
standards are likely to be and whether there may be two
different standards across different parts of the country.
I think it would be more constructive to bring everyone
together as the last Administration tried to do and try to find
some compromise to figure out how, in a cost-effective way, we
could continue to help reduce the oil intensity of the economy
and encourage options and alternatives.
Senator Hirono. So you would say that the Administration's
proposal to freeze these standards, that's really not getting
us to where we need to be?
Mr. Bordoff. I think it is--I don't think it is a
constructive course forward to roll back the fuel economy
standards that have been planned.
Senator Hirono. This is a question for the panel.
I realize that oil prices are set on the world market so in
an interview with CNBC, aired on Friday, President Trump stated
he was willing to place tariffs on all goods imported into the
United States worth some $505 billion last year. I think that
you all have recognized the geopolitical effects of these kinds
of trade decisions.
But my specific question is, what impacts would such
tariffs have on the cost of construction in the oil and gas
industry, the willingness of the industry to make new
investments in the United States and the price faced by
consumers at the gas pump? Any of you care to respond?
Mr. Auers. I mentioned, again, as an example you mentioned
on the midstream side, three quarters of all of the steel that
is used comes from overseas, primarily because it is not
available locally. And the refining industry is the same way,
if you have a direct negative impact on project viability from
tariffs on imported steel.
But the worse thing, as I mentioned, was if this led to a
world trade war, you know, that carries very negative
implications for economic growth both domestically and
internationally and that's the biggest threat. So, yeah, it is
bad news--to try to do what we can to get others to play fair
but we have got to be careful on how far we go.
Senator Hirono. Would the rest of you agree with that--that
there are unintended consequences to these kinds of comments
and pronouncements from the President?
I think what I get from what all of you are saying is that
we are trying to go for stability here in this market as well
as what is going on in our own country and that is not really
what is happening now.
Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Hirono.
Mr. McNally, Mr. Braziel, both of you mentioned the IMO
2020. In fact, Mr. McNally, you said that was a whole section
of your talking points that you were not able to get to due to
time constraints. So I will give you that opportunity now.
I also referenced the IMO, International Maritime
Organization's, low sulfur standard. This is set to take effect
in January 2020. The standard will reduce sulfur limits in
marine fuels, and we certainly look to the environmental
impacts, the positive impacts on health. But I think the
concern that is out there is that compliance is not moving
along at the expected rate which could pose a burden going
forward.
Since we are talking about where do we go from here, those
unknown factors or perhaps those things that are out on the
horizon that may have some unintended consequences--I would
like an opportunity to talk a little bit about them this
morning.
Can you walk us through the IMO 2020 standards, the options
for compliance and what it might mean for the middle distillate
markets? And then whether you share the concern that I have
raised that we could potentially see some price impacts,
increases where we, perhaps, might not expect it whether it is
in my state, for those who rely on diesel for heating or power
or transportation, or the folks in Pennsylvania that rely on
home heating fuel. Can we have a discussion about this IMO
2020?
Mr. McNally. Thank you, Senator.
Yes, the oil industry and market has been preoccupied with
this issue for the last several years. A subject for a whole
afternoon's discussion, but in January 2020 the limit on sulfur
emissions, for what we call marine bunkers, so fuel used in
heavy ocean-going ships, this is across the ocean now, will
fall from 3.5 to 0.5 percent sulfur, so very, very clean. There
are two options to comply, really.
One is to put a scrubber on your ships. So you could still
use the dirty stuff, but you scrub away the sulfur emissions.
Folks agree the shipping industry has not nearly installed
enough scrubbers, and it is too late to put on scrubbers. A
small fraction of the ships are going to have scrubbers.
So the most likely compliance option is to get cleaner fuel
in your ships. We are going to see a scramble away from what
they call heavy fuel oil, what they have been using now, that
bottom of the distillation column, that heavy, gunky fuel oil,
3.5 percent sulfur, 2.5 percent--they are going to stop using
that and they are going to go and they are going to put
lighter, much lower sulfur diesel, mainly diesel fuel, in their
ships to comply. There is no phase-in. There is no credit
trading. It is overnight. You have just got to comply in
January 2020.
There is a concern, and I know the IEA has raised this
concern in their reports, that the industry is unprepared. We
have not seen the scrubbers being built and we do not have, at
the global level, the equipment to make enough low sulfur fuel.
So part of the solution, unfortunately, will be the
shippers coming to the folks who are currently using low sulfur
distillate, home heating oil consumers, road diesel users,
farmers and their tractor equipment, railroads, airlines--this
is all the same kind of fuel. We have already gotten that to be
really clean. And they will say, you know what, we do not have
enough. We have got to comply. We need to bid it away from you,
and that will cause price increases.
I think the IEA has indicated they expect a 20 to 30
percent increase in the price of distillate next year. Others
have raised the concern that the actual crude price could go up
because the refining industry will, sort of, scramble to run
more crude through the refineries and they are already working
pretty hard to make more distillate.
So while the environment will benefit, while human health
will benefit from getting this sulfur off of these ships, and
our complex refiners in the Gulf Coast especially, they are
going to do very well because we specialize at making this high
quality, low sulfur distillate.
Some folks are going to do very well. But for consumers, I
think there is a real risk that for a period of years now the
lack of preparedness for a January 2020 start date will lead to
a substantial spike in the price of consumer fuel onshore.
The Chairman. So potential for 20 to 30 percent increase.
You factor this on all of the other global uncertainty, the
potential for disruptions, that is not a very cheery way to end
this hearing.
Mr. Braziel or Mr. Sadamori, do you want to comment in
terms of what we might be able to do to avoid these increases?
Mr. Braziel. The problem is exactly as Bob mentioned. It is
the fact that we are going cold turkey on a particular day. If
this had been phased in, both the shipping industry and the
refining industry would have been able to accommodate things.
So I think what has everyone concerned right now is they
are going to wake up on January 1, 2020, and the rules are all
going to be changed. If there was some way to be able to
mitigate that and, frankly I think there probably will be a way
to mitigate that, there is probably going to be so much non-
compliance that there will have to be some sort of
accommodation made.
I think that is likely, and John and I have talked about it
some. I think John has numbers figured in like 25 percent non-
compliance into the plans that Turner Mason has put together.
We think the same thing is going to happen.
Ironically, what it does is it makes light crude, shale
crude, more valuable and heavy crude, like Canadian crude, less
valuable. So it is actually a good news story for U.S.
producers.
The Chairman. So it helps us in the United States.
Mr. Braziel. In the United States, for producers, it
actually helps us.
The Chairman. Helps the producers?
Mr. Braziel. Helps the producers.
The Chairman. Not necessarily helping the consumers.
Mr. Braziel. If you have folks in your state driving
diesel, you need to be prepared for what you need to say to
them because their diesel prices are going up on January the
first.
The Chairman. Well, and that is my state. People in Alaska
would look at this and say, well, wait a minute, this is July
2018. You guys have plenty of time to figure it out. Figure it
out.
Mr. Sadamori?
Mr. Sadamori. I agree with the other witnesses' views. So
we also understand that not enough investment is happening on
the kind of ship, the scrubbers.
There is another option using LNG as the fuel for the
maritime, but it takes time and also requires an enormous
amount of infrastructure investments.
What will probably happen at the start of this new
regulation will be, kind of, the industry of the world will
rush for a limited amount of low sulfur fuel oil and also the
maritime diesel.
By the way, this low sulfur fuel oil will probably have to
depend upon the, kind of, same molecule as the maritime diesel.
So there will be, kind of, a mismatch in terms of the
refineries procurement of the certain types of crude.
There will be--so we expect that even though we have not
come up with any specific kind of numbers, percentage of oil
price increase, that we don't do, but we expect that there will
be a very, kind of, tight supply-demand situation on the very
specific types of the crude fuel. That is what we are, kind of,
concerned about and we try to keep track of it.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Well, coming from three maritime states here,
Washington, Maine and Alaska, we will clearly pay close
attention to this.
Mr. Auers, did you want to add anything to this? You were
referenced earlier?
Mr. Auers. Yeah, I agree with what Rusty said and what the
other panelists have said. I mean, we are definitely going to
have a bump in distillate prices. It will cause a bump in crude
prices, but then there's headwinds that will potentially bring
those crude prices down. So where crude price is at is
difficult to say.
Our view and, you know, it's purely a guesstimate as to
what's going to happen in 2020. This is really the first,
global-wide product specification change. We have had low
sulfur gasoline, low sulfur diesel in the U.S. and Europe and
other countries in Asia and other places. This is a global-wide
specification change that is impacting 4 to 5 million barrels a
day of bunker fuel. And so, it is going to have a huge impact
on the market and there are provisions for waivers. I do agree
with what Rusty said that the market will work itself out when
they see the problems that are going to happen, I think we are
going to see use of some of that. I mean, the IMO is the one
that has to, obviously, take action. And we will probably see
some steps taken by the IMO. And the U.S., as a member of the
IMO, certainly can have a voice in that, to help provide some
sort of way of phasing this in because there is going to be a
disruption unless something is done.
And some of it is going to come and, our number at 25
percent reported on non-compliance, that is a guess, you know,
it could be higher, it could be a bit lower, but it is going to
be substantial because there is not a real uniform enforcement
mechanism in the open water.
The Chairman. Yes.
Mr. Auers. Every country will need to enforce it on their
own. It is going to be enforced by the U.S. and Europe, but who
knows what is going to happen everywhere else.
So that----
The Chairman. My time is well over but, Mr. Bordoff, you
wanted to jump in here real quick?
Mr. Bordoff. Well, if I may, I was just going to say I
agree in part. I think there are a few mitigating factors.
First, we should not forget the significant public health
benefits that come from reducing SO2 emissions. The increased
demand for diesel is coming at a time of some headwinds for
diesel demand globally as cities move away from diesel. And
third, the industry has known about these rules for many years.
Some have taken further steps than others to prepare, including
many U.S. refiners and U.S. shippers. I think injecting an
element of uncertainty about delaying them now could hurt the
companies that have taken steps to prepare and just injects an
element of uncertainty now where people are starting to get
ready for this and then maybe they should wait and maybe they
are not sure. That could actually worsen the transition period.
As Rusty said, if it is not the case and the rules are far
more disruptive than we think, the IMO has the authority to
issue waivers in case of lack of availability of low sulfur
fuels. And, you know, like with new pipelines being built in
the Permian, it takes a year or two so there will be a period
of adjustment, but I think history suggests that these often
resolve themselves in response to price signals more quickly
than we think they will.
The Chairman. Hopefully.
Senator Cortez Masto, we have done a full round and we are
starting round two, but we can interrupt and go to you.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you, thank you so much, Madam
Chair and Ranking Member, for this incredible discussion.
I am bouncing between two hearings, so I appreciate the
opportunity to read your comments beforehand as well.
Let me jump back to Mr. McNally. I know there was some
discussion of this. In your testimony you discuss the energy
impacts of widespread usage of automated vehicles with
estimates ranging from a 60 percent decline in energy use to a
200 percent increase and that largely depends on which fuels
AVs would use, oil or electricity. Could you elaborate on what
factors contribute to such a large estimate range, and what
policy recommendations would you make in this situation to keep
energy costs on the low end?
Mr. McNally. Sure and thank you for that question.
So when we think about, sort of, robo cars or automated
vehicles showing up, I think in the first instance we have to
realize this will provide transportation services to people who
do not have them or do not have them easily. People who are
housebound who do not want to walk to the bus and so forth. It
will vastly expand, probably, demand for transportation. Now it
will be more efficient transportation, it will be wired, but
there will probably be a big increase in demand.
So the ease and the convenience and the lower cost of
travel, remarkable, I do not have it at my fingertips, but
the--if you ever took a look at a chart of the percent of
Americans who are of driving age but do not have a driver's
license--I do not have it off the top of my head, but it is a
big number. And so, we have to imagine that will be opened up.
Now the question then becomes, what will fuel these
vehicles? Will they be electric, which I think most people
think or hope, in which case we can expect big climate and
environmental benefits as long as we are producing that
electricity cleanly. But there is the real risk, and some of
the researchers at NREL and other government labs and academics
have looked at this and said, well, it is not a guarantee that
we will figure out EVs before we figure out AVs. So if that
robo car, showing up in front of your aunt's house or my aunt's
house, which she's delighted to get in, is a diesel or a
gasoline car--remember the oil industry and the car industry is
always getting more efficient, they are not standing still,
they are getting more and more efficient--then we could see
that 200 percent, that explosion in fossil fuel demand. And
that would, sort of, upend our consensus forecast of the, sort
of, decline in oil demand and it could actually go like this
because once again, like back in 1912, we discovered a new
technology that made the blessing of transportation even
cheaper and easier for people.
I would be happy to point some studies your way, and others
on the panel may have them as well, that go into more detail on
this.
Senator Cortez Masto. You have talked a lot, and I think
all of you have, about the geopolitical risks. To lessen the
geopolitical risk, is it fair to say that if we were to go down
the path of electric vehicles more so than anything else, that
would lessen our dependence and address some of the
geopolitical risk we are seeing?
Mr. McNally. I don't think so, near-term. There is not a
lot we can do in terms of energy transformations near-term,
meaning the next weeks, months, years, unfortunately, probably
decades. Energy transitions just take decades, unfortunately.
So, I think as we, for our lifetimes, in the foreseeable
future, I think we have to look at other things, strategic
stocks, removing----
Senator Cortez Masto. But I am talking long-term. I get
today.
Mr. McNally. Oh, long-term.
Senator Cortez Masto. What we are talking about here is
long-term.
Mr. McNally. Long-term, I'm going to bet that we will be
off of oil. We will have that transformation, like we had from
1908 to 1915, but it will not be because of government policies
or a winner that government picked. It will be because
ingenious inventors will have figured a new energy source. It
could be hydrogen, which is what we worked on in the Bush
Administration, it could be electric, it could be biofuels, it
could be something we have not thought of yet, and a new
technology that will give us that transportation in a better
way. When that happens, government will just stand out of the
way, and it will flower very fast. I am not smart enough to
know what it is though.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Cantwell.
Senator Cantwell. Mr. McNally, did you want to put a date
to that?
[Laughter.]
Mr. McNally. I hope my grandchild sees it, Senator.
Senator Cantwell. Okay.
Well, I think the issue for us in Washington, since we are
paying, I think, $452 million more this year than last year, is
the roller coaster that you have all described and how we
continue to diversify from our fuel sources and get off of it.
So for us, because we have very affordable electricity as
it is today and a very high percentage of our consumers driving
electric cars, I think we see the transition in the Northwest,
some great companies, even in the trucking industry, like
PACCAR, making great energy efficiency moves. So we are
definitely going to go as fast as we can.
I wanted to ask Mr. Bordoff--I asked in my opening
statement about the high volume of trading that is going on and
whether that is something we need to take a look at.
I think the volume of West Texas Intermediate trade has
dramatically increased over the last five years. I think they
have seen something like a 276 percent increase in the number
of trades per minute.
Is this something that the CFTC should be looking at and
just making sure that the automatic trading process is not
creating some spikes in or distorting the market from true
supply and demand fundamentals?
Mr. Bordoff. Thank you for the question, Ranking Member
Cantwell.
So this is not an issue that we have studied carefully. I
will caveat with that. It is true that algorithmic trading
activity has increased significantly in commodity markets,
commodity derivative markets, since 2008 as in many other
financial markets. I think the behavior of this type of trader,
the implications of this type of market participation certainly
merits further research. I think it has been limited to date,
in part by poor data transparency. I am not aware of studies on
this issue.
Anecdotally, I have heard market participants suggest a
view that algorithmic trading may lead to sharper commodity
price swings and volatility. There was a research note from
City Group just a week or two ago noting that some of the
recent sharp sell-off in crude the week before seems to have
stemmed in part, at least in part, by some element of machine
trading.
I will note, I think it is important to recognize that even
if algorithmic trading leads to greater, very short-term price
swings in traded benchmark crude prices, my colleagues may have
a view on this too, that does not necessarily mean those price
moves affect the price of physical barrels paid by refiners
and, therefore, the price we are paying at the pump. So I think
that, too, would be a question worthy of further study.
Senator Cantwell. Well, I was just going to say before Mr.
Braziel raised his hand, I will bet you he does have something
to say about this because I think those who have been in the
business have seen the unbelievable actions of the financial
markets have grave impacts.
Mr. Braziel?
Mr. Braziel. Yes, I mentioned earlier I spent 15 years as a
trader, so I have kind of been on the other side of this thing.
More trading volume in a futures market in any kind of
electronic market is actually a good thing. It is because it
creates more liquidity in that market, so the market becomes
more responsive to supply and demand.
And getting back to what Jason was talking about, you want
your financial markets to be reflective of what goes on in the
physical markets. The higher level of volatility, the higher
level of trading that you have, the more likely that will be.
The volatility comes from what is going on the supply-demand
scenario itself that we've been talking about all morning.
In terms of the electronic trading, the algorithmic
trading, the changes that happen, happen in seconds. So
whenever EIA kicks out a new statistic, the price might jump a
few dollars because of the algorithms getting in there, but
that impact goes away very quickly. From the CFTC's
perspective, they certainly may need to look at it; but from a
market perspective, like what we have been talking about this
morning, it's pretty much a non-event.
Senator Cantwell. Okay.
We will definitely follow up with the CFTC. I know they
have had one case already where they had a settlement where
they were concerned about somebody impacting that. I think the
thing that we have learned is the tighter the markets, the more
you want to have transparency to make sure that they are not
affected.
Madam Chair, thanks for the hearing this morning. I
definitely think there is a lot to do to continue to focus on
this issue. We certainly need to make sure that we are having,
I think, our colleagues have done a good job of bringing up
these other issues of investment for the future. So I hope that
we will look at that, maybe as a follow-up hearing.
The Chairman. I appreciate that, Senator Cantwell.
Senator King, you had a follow-on?
Senator King. I wanted to, sort of, bring it back to why we
are here.
In Maine, a $1.00 change in oil and gas prices is $1
billion out of our economy, and we are a relatively small
state. Those are the kind of numbers that we are talking about
that are really, really significant, and I just think it is
important to remember that.
And I thought it interesting, Senator Daines said if the
price is going up, the only thing to do is to produce more. No,
actually there are two things: one is to produce more, the
other is to use less and that will affect price just as surely
as an increase in production. So I think that is something we
need to keep focusing on.
What worries me is the roller coaster that we started with.
I am not a great believer in government intervention in these
things, but I think we do need to think about the policy
implications and the long-term price implications of the things
that we do that increase the volatility because that translates
to people's ability to buy groceries rather than gasoline. I
just think it is important to continue to ask those kinds of
questions.
I thank the witnesses. This has been a very informative and
important hearing.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. I thank you for that add-on, Senator King.
I think we recognize that there are some things that we can
control and some things that we cannot control. You cannot
control some of the volatility that you see with political
issues in other nations.
There are some things that are well beyond our control,
natural disasters that bring about shortages that you could
never predict, but there are policies within our own government
that we can look to critically.
While sometimes we are not able to accurately predict all
of the consequences that are unforeseen, or unintended
consequences that are out there, I think that that is part of
our job to try to reduce the volatility to the extent that it
is possible. Being cautious and careful and, perhaps,
thoughtful and moderated in our policies is not a bad approach.
Gentlemen, thank you for your contributions this morning. I
think that this has been a very informative hearing. You have
helped round out our thoughts here as members of the Committee,
and I appreciate what you are doing in this broader and more
global discussion that has such immediate impact on our
constituents, whether from Maine or up to Alaska.
With that, we thank you.
The Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:07 p.m. the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]