- AMERICA'S WATER INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS AND CHALLENGES
[Senate Hearing 115-189]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-189
AMERICA'S WATER INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS
AND CHALLENGES
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON
ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JANUARY 10, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
28-873 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001
COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming, Chairman
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
JONI ERNST, Iowa
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
Richard M. Russell, Majority Staff Director
Gabrielle Batkin, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
JANUARY 10, 2018
OPENING STATEMENTS
Barrasso, Hon. John, U.S. Senator from the State of Wyoming......
1
Carper, Hon. Thomas R., U.S. Senator from the State of Delaware..
2
WITNESSES
Robinson, Scott, Port Director, Muscogee City-County Port
Authority......................................................
10
Prepared statement...........................................
13
Cassidy, Hon. Bill, U.S. Senator from the State of Louisiana.....
47
Ufner, Julie, Associate Legislative Director, National
Association of Counties........................................
48
Prepared statement...........................................
50
Responses to additional questions from Senator Sanders.......
64
Friedman, William, Chairman-Elect, American Association of Port
Authorities....................................................
66
Prepared statement...........................................
68
Carter, Nicole T., Specialist, Natural Resources Policy,
Congressional Research Service.................................
73
Prepared statement...........................................
75
Responses to additional questions from Senator Barrasso......
100
Response to an additional question from Senator Carper.......
102
Cochran, Steve, Associate Vice President for Coastal Protection,
Environmental Defense Fund, and Director, Restore the
Mississippi Delta Coalition....................................
105
Prepared statement...........................................
108
Response to an additional question from Senator Carper.......
137
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL
Letter to Senators Barrasso and Carper from the National Audubon
Society, January 10, 2018......................................
157
Letter to Lieutenant General Todd T. Semonite, Commanding General
and Chief of Engineers, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, from the
State of Louisiana Coastal Protection and Restoration
Authority, October 18, 2017....................................
166
State of Louisiana Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority
White Paper: Environmental Review and Permitting Process
Challenges for Louisiana's Coastal Program.....................
191
AMERICA'S WATER INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS AND CHALLENGES
----------
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 10, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Environment and Public Works,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 11 a.m. in room
406, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. John Barrasso
(Chairman of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Barrasso, Carper, Inhofe, Capito,
Boozman, Wicker, Fischer, Rounds, Ernst, Sullivan, Whitehouse,
Merkley, Gillibrand, Markey, and Van Hollen.
Also present: Senator Cassidy.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN BARRASSO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING
Senator Barrasso. Good morning. I call this hearing to
order.
Today we are holding a hearing to highlight the importance
of passing a new Water Resource Development Act, or WRDA,
during the 115th Congress. WRDA is the bill that authorizes
funding for the Army Corps of Engineers' Civil Works Program.
In order to write good legislation, we must consider the
effectiveness of past WRDA provisions, the status of their
implementation, as well as our country's future water
infrastructure needs.
The Senate Environment and Public Works Committee has
jurisdiction over much of our nation's water infrastructure,
including locks and dams, inland waterways, and ports. Prior
Congresses have traditionally passed WRDAs on a bi-annual
basis, going back to--Jim, what, 1986?
Senator Inhofe. Yes.
Senator Barrasso. Unlike other contentious issues,
historically Republicans and Democrat members of the Senate
Environment and Public Works Committee have been able to work
together and pass WRDA legislation. To put it another way, this
is legislation that moves. Regardless of party affiliation, we
understand that these kinds of investments are far too
important to our economy and security to fall victim to
partisan politics.
The members of this Committee represent a diverse group of
communities with different needs. Our Committee has members
that represent Baltimore, Maryland, and Anchorage, Alaska; Des
Moines, Iowa, and Mobile, Alabama; Greybull, Wyoming;
Wilmington, Delaware. The citizenry and millions of other
Americans expect Congress to do its job by passing WRDA
legislation to grow their economies and to keep them safe.
When it comes to rural areas in particular, many
communities depend on Corps projects for their existence.
Congress must act to make it easier for the Corps to prevent
flooding and to modernize levees. We must find better solutions
to minimize ice jams, such as those that caused the Big Horn
River to flood small, rural communities such as Worland and
Greybull, Wyoming. Ice jams are a major public safety concern
for towns which can't afford the out of control costs that come
with severe flooding.
In Wyoming and other western States, rural communities
still face challenges associated with providing long term water
supply and storage. Federal water storage facilities out west
continue to lose existing space as a result of sediment build
up. This is a major problem for western State economies, which
have rapidly growing populations, significant ranching and
farming communities, and enlarging energy industries. I believe
the Corps and the Bureau of Reclamation need to work together
to address this challenge.
It is my hope that this Committee will work forward to find
solutions in a bipartisan way to meet our country's water
infrastructure needs for urban areas as well. Our nation's
ports on our coasts and inland waterways are just as vital to
the country's economic well being. Goods, commodities, and raw
materials from the heartland of America go through these ports
for export. In Wyoming, our soda ash--the key component of
making glass--gets shipped out of the Port of Portland, Oregon.
We all have a vested interest in maintaining these ports, which
are vital arteries of commerce.
So I urge my colleagues to work with me in a bipartisan way
to find these solutions to the enactment of the WRDA bill in
2018.
With that, I will now turn to the Ranking Member of the
Committee for his comments.
Senator Carper.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. THOMAS R. CARPER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF DELAWARE
Senator Carper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks very much
for pulling this together.
Thanks to all of our witnesses for taking time to share
with us. This is a really important issue, and encouragingly,
an issue that we might actually be able to work on together and
get something done. In past years Senator Inhofe, working with
Senator Barbara Boxer, they have been good at showing us how
this is done. So hopefully, we won't screw up a good thing.
With your help, that will be the case.
I want to say that this is an extremely important
authorization that we do about every 2 years. The most recent
authorization expires this December. As we all know, coastal
issues are extremely important to Delaware. But as the Chairman
just said--in what I thought was a very good statement--you
don't have to be on a coast; you don't have to be in
Massachusetts; you don't have to be in Rhode Island or Delaware
in order to have a real strong interest in this issue. It
affects us all every day.
Delaware's economic reliance on the Corps' work is not
unique. Ninety-nine percent of the U.S. overseas trade volume--
over 99 percent--moves through coastal channels that the Corps
maintains. Additionally, the Corps' inland waterways and locks
form a freight network. Think of it, if you will, as a water
highway, connecting waterways and ports and providing direct
access to international markets. They also serve as critical
infrastructure for the U.S. military.
In addition to navigation, the Corps of Engineers also
works to reduce the risk to human safety and property damage
from flooding. Flooding alone currently costs the United States
billions of dollars annually.
As the 2017 hurricane system illustrated, our nation needs
to be a resilient one that is ready for the next storm or flood
or drought event. Because they are coming. In fact, just this
week, we were told by NOAA, the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, they announced that in 2017, total
costs for extreme weather and climate events exceeded $300
billion. If that seems like a lot of money, it is. That is a
new annual record in the U.S. So it is clearly not a matter of
if the next extreme weather event is coming; it is just a
matter of when.
Together, the Corps' navigation and flood risk management
activities account for more than 70 percent of the agency's
annual civil works appropriation. But the Corps has or shares
jurisdiction over many other critical civil works programs as
well, including environmental stewardship, hydropower,
recreation, emergency management, and water supply.
Unfortunately, in the mid-1980s, Federal funding for new
project construction and major rehabilitation began to steadily
decline. With this trend, the Corps' actions have shifted to
operations, to maintenance, to rehabilitation of existing
infrastructure, and a backlog of deferred maintenance has
continued to grow ever since.
As a result, much of the Corps' infrastructure is now
exceeding its useful lifespan.
We have a couple of graphics here. I am looking here at one
Christine is holding up for us. It was provided by our friends
from the American Association of Port Authorities; a busy
chart, but a good one, nonetheless. Everybody should have it at
your desk, a copy of this. About $66 billion in investment in
port related infrastructure is needed over the next decade to
ensure U.S. job creation and economic growth; over $66 billion
in investment in port related infrastructure is needed over the
next 10 years to ensure that the U.S. job creation and economic
growth continues.
We have another graphic also provided by the American
Association of Port Authorities. As this graphic shows,
investment in our freight network, which is an interconnected
network of ships, barges, trucks, and trains, is essential to
the safe and efficient movement of goods, both into and out of
the United States. This freight network serves as the backbone
of our economy; it is not just ships; it is not just barges; it
is not just trains; it is not just trucks; it is all of the
above and more.
With respect to flood damage risk, the American Association
of Civil Engineers Infrastructure Report Card tells us an
unsettling story, with dams and levees and inland waterways
grading out at a D, receiving a grade of D. Deplorable.
Representing an overall cumulative investment backlog of nearly
$140 billion and an authorized but unconstructed portfolio of
another $60 billion.
The Corps faces a sizable math problem as they try to
service that roughly $200 billion--if you have the $140 billion
and add that to the $60 billion requirement, and more. Match
that up, if you will, with an annual budget that hovers around
$4.6 billion. The math just doesn't work, does it?
Clearly, we have a lot of important work to do. We need to
work in a bipartisan fashion, if we are to really address these
concerns and build consensus on a path forward, in a smart,
cost efficient way, leveraging both green as well as gray
infrastructure solutions.
Again, Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this important
hearing. We all look forward to hearing from our witnesses.
I want to submit for the record these letters of acclaim
for the newest member of our Committee.
[Laughter.]
Senator Carper. I just want to say, Chris, welcome aboard.
Senator Van Hollen. [Remarks made off microphone].
Senator Carper. Senator Harris came up to me yesterday at
the Caucus lunch and she said, ``I'm moving off your
Committee.'' I said, ``I know, we are sorry to hear that.'' She
said, ``It's not because I'm not interested in the issues, I'm
keenly interested in the issues and very much want to be part
of your extended family.'' I thought we could work that out.
But for an attorney general, somebody that is going to be
on the Judiciary Committee, if you can get there, I think it is
a good thing for her. She will still be part of our team.
Thanks very much.
[The referenced information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. We would like to welcome Senator Van
Hollen to the Committee. We now, with you and Senator Cardin,
and since my mom grew up in Maryland working in Dundalk,
Maryland, a summer job, I can tell you with two of you from
Maryland and this history, that now we can make sure that the
Chesapeake Bay is fully protected. I know that is an issue.
Senator Van Hollen. Mr. Chairman, I will say no more.
[Laughter.]
Senator Barrasso. Welcome to the Committee.
We are now going to hear from our witnesses. We are going
to start with an introduction in a second from Senator Inhofe.
We have Mr. Scott Robinson; we have Ms. Julie Ufner, who is
the Associate Legislative Director of the National Association
of Counties. We have Mr. William Friedman, who is the Chairman-
Elect of the American Association of Port Authorities; Ms.
Nicole Carter, the Natural Resources Policy Specialist for the
Congressional Research Service; and Mr. Steven Cochran, who is
the Associate Vice President for Coastal Protection, Restore
the Mississippi Delta Coalition.
And I believe Senator Cassidy is going to be here in a few
moments to introduce Mr. Cochran.
But if I could start by asking Senator Inhofe to please
introduce our guest.
Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that,
and also having the presence of Scott Robinson here. He has
spent a lot of time in this business, and we have become good
friends.
I have to say one thing, though, building a little bit on
what Senator Carper just said. It is not just the coastal
States that we are interested in. We are, in Oklahoma,
America's most inland warm water port. Now, the problem is,
nobody knows it. And I remember back when I was in the State
Senate, many years ago--in fact, it was back in the 1970s--we
conceived something that we thought, we are going to tell the
whole world that we are navigable in Oklahoma.
So the World War II submarine veterans came in, we worked
out a deal. They said, if you can procure a submarine, we have
figured out a way to get it all the way up from Texas to
Oklahoma. Now, we are talking about a submarine, the USS
Batfish, it was the length of a football field, a huge thing.
And all my adversaries were saying, we are going to sink Inhofe
with his submarine.
Nonetheless, we got it up there, and there it is, in your
port, Port of Muscogee, a 300 foot submarine that shows the
world that we are in fact an inland port.
So Scott, it is nice to have you here. You have a
tremendous background there. You have been at the Port of
Muscogee for 28 years now, with more than 1,000 acres of land
within the jurisdiction of the Port that is poised to continue
its growth and provide several transportation options for
Oklahoma industries.
Scott has been active in the waterway communities, serving
on a variety of related boards and commissions, including the
National Waterways Conference, the Marine Transportation
System, National Advisory Council, Arkansas-Oklahoma Port
Operators Association. So it is great to have you here. You
bring a lot of knowledge to this meeting, and I appreciate it.
Mr. Robinson. Thank you very much, Senator Inhofe, for that
introduction. It is good to see you. I could spend my 5 minutes
talking about stories about you, but I won't do that.
Senator Barrasso. We will extend your opportunity.
[Laughter.]
Senator Barrasso. Don't feel limited to 5 minutes if you
are going to talk about him.
But I do want to remind all the witnesses that your full
testimony will be made part of the official hearing records,
and except for Mr. Robinson, I would ask you please to keep
your statement to 5 minutes, so that we will have time for
questions.
Mr. Robinson.
STATEMENT OF SCOTT ROBINSON, PORT DIRECTOR, MUSCOGEE CITY-
COUNTY PORT AUTHORITY
Mr. Robinson. Chairman Barrasso, Ranking Member Carper,
members of the Committee, it is an honor and a privilege to
testify before you here today about America's infrastructure
needs and the importance of WRDA 2018. Thank you for this
opportunity to contribute my thoughts.
I am, as Senator Inhofe said, Scott Robinson, Port
Director, Port of Muscogee. I have been there since 1990. The
Port of Muscogee is one of two public ports in Oklahoma and one
of five in Oklahoma and Arkansas.
I commend the Committee for the work it has accomplished
through 2014 and 2016 WRDA legislation. As I hope to illustrate
further in my testimony today, the absence of regularly enacted
WRDA legislation during the period 2001 through 2013 caused
serious harm to an important infrastructure development project
along the McClellan-Kerr Arkansas River Navigation System,
which in the interest of time I will refer as NKARNS. The
NKARNS is a 445 mile, multi-purpose waterway that runs through
Arkansas and Oklahoma. Completed in 1970 at a cost of $1.2
billion, it was the largest Federal investment ever made in a
civil works project, connecting the two States--Oklahoma and
Arkansas--with domestic river ports and terminals along the
inland waterways of the United States and with ports all over
the world via the Port of New Orleans and the Gulf of Mexico.
In 2015 there was a regional impact study for the NKARNS
conducted and published, documenting the impacts, $8.5 billion
in sales, 55,000 jobs, $289 million in taxes to the national
economy. You will find a copy of that in Attachment A to my
testimony. At Attachment D you will find a letter signed by the
President of the Arkansas-Oklahoma Port Operators Association,
endorsing its priorities for the NKARNS. You will find my
briefing that we made to the Congress and to stakeholders and
congressional staffers in Attachments B and C.
I would like to take a few minutes to talk about three
infrastructure priorities for the NKARNS, and in doing so,
hopefully give this Committee a glimpse of waterway
infrastructure needs of the nation. No. 1 priority was
modification of an existing structure, the Molenda structure.
Near the confluence of the NKARNS and the Mississippi River,
the Arkansas River and the White River are trying to come
together. Every time it floods, the Corps has to spend money
trying to fix the problem. Failure is imminent, and a solution
is imperative.
The prominent solution to the problem will soon come out of
a Corps study now in progress, that is cost shared by the State
of Arkansas. Once the study is completed, and the chief's
recommendation is issued, the Molenda structure will face new
start and cost share hurdles. Until then, the NKARNS is at risk
of failure.
No. 2, backlog of critical maintenance. There is a serious
and growing backlog of deferred maintenance on the NKARNS,
$143 million of which is deemed critical by the Corps of
Engineers. The Corps defines critical maintenance as having a
50 percent chance of failure within 5 years.
In March 2017 there were 42 such critical maintenance items
on the NKARNS. More alarming than that, the critical backlog is
growing rapidly. In his testimony to this Committee in 2016,
Tulsa Port of Catoosa's Director Bob Porter expressed concern
that the critical backlog had reached $70 million. So that is
twice as much today.
The problem on the NKARNS is no different than the problem
faced all across the nation. In order to spread too little
funding too far, we are fixing critically important
infrastructure as close to failure as possible, and in some
cases after it fails and on an emergency basis. This is not an
acceptable asset management strategy. It is a prescription for
failure.
No. 3 was the 12 foot channel and the vacuum created by the
absence of regularly enacted WRDA legislation before 2014 and
2016 WRDA. Congress, in Section 136 of the Energy and Water
Development Appropriations Act of 2004, authorized the
deepening of the NKARNS from 9 to 12 feet. In the 2005 Energy
and Water Development Appropriations Act, $7 million was
appropriated for the channel deepening; $5.5 million was used
in 2006 for design and construction activities, which reduced
the $172 million estimated project cost by a like amount. In
2009 the Corps expressed a
$49 million capability, but it never ended up in the
President's budget.
In Oklahoma we call this the WEWOKA switch. I don't have
time to explain. Suffice to say, being lost in the WEWOKA
switch is not good. The Committee can rescue the 12 foot
channel and resolve the new start dilemma by including
clarification language in WRDA 2018 as follows: Congress finds
that the initial funding was provided and construction started
on a 12 foot navigation channel of the McClellan-Kerr Arkansas
River Navigation System, as directed in Section 136 of the
Energy and Water Development Appropriations Act, thereby
meeting the new start requirements.
In conclusion, according to the Institute of Water
Resources, from 2010 through 2012, the Civil Works Program of
the United States Army Corps of Engineers provided an annual
estimated national economic development net benefit of $87
billion and stimulated
$27 billion in returns to the U.S. Treasury. Sixteen to one
returns in terms of economic benefits and five to one return in
revenue to the Treasury. Waterways investment is a wise
investment.
If there is finally going to be a comprehensive
infrastructure reinvestment plan, then my plea on behalf of
NKARNS stakeholders is that it not be just for roads and
bridges, but for waterways, too. Not just for deep draft
coastal ports and harbors, but inland waterways as well,
together with modern, multi-modal connections, truck and rail,
for efficient, competitive movement of freight.
To the extent waterway projects are favorably considered in
such an infrastructure reinvestment plan and require private
investment as leverage, then the Water Infrastructure Finance
and Innovation Act Program, created in WRDA 2014, may be just
the tool necessary to track such investment in projects for
which the Inland Waterway Trust Fund Revenues are not
sufficient to share.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify. I would be
happy to answer any questions you may have.
I realize I have gone over my time. If you want me to tell
some of those stories, I will.
[Laughter.]
[The prepared statement of Mr. Robinson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much, Mr. Robinson.
Before moving to Ms. Ufner, I would like to invite Senator
Cassidy, if this is a convenient time for you to introduce your
guest here today.
STATEMENT OF HON. BILL CASSIDY,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF LOUISIANA
Senator Cassidy. Steve Cochran is sitting behind me; I
gather he is on the next panel.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to introduce him.
Chairman Barrasso, Ranking Member Carper and other members,
thank you again for allowing me to introduce Steve Cochran, a
dedicated Louisiana public servant. Steve has worked for many
years in pursuit of a long term solution that will restore and
protect Louisiana's incredibly fragile coastal ecosystem. He
has worked with former Louisiana Congressmen then-Governor
Buddy Roemer, the Lake Pontchartrain Basin Foundation, the
Mississippi River Delta Coalition and the Environmental Defense
Fund, which makes him uniquely qualified to speak to the need
of an integrated strategy that utilizes innovative approaches
to restore wetlands and support coastal ecosystems.
Now, coastal Louisiana is losing land as we speak. As we
speak, there is something on a Google map that looks green that
if you really had an updated Google map would no longer look
green, it would now look like open water. That is the crisis we
have. It poses a serious threat to our State, to our
communities, and upon our State's and nation's economy. It has
required our State to develop, in a bipartisan fashion, a
comprehensive plan referred to as the Louisiana Comprehensive
Master Plan for Sustainable Coasts, a $50 billion over 50 years
plan to restore Louisiana's coast, based on sound scientific
and modeling principles required to be updated every 5 years.
While Louisiana is prepared to implement projects detailed
in the master plan, the problem is the environmental review and
permitting processes challenges that threaten to stop these
projects from going forward. Currently, the average timeframe
for the government to approve a Federal project is close to 5
years. Now, remember I said we are losing coastline like this
minute? We get 5 years to permit something, and by that time,
there has been dramatic change.
This timeframe is unacceptable given the magnitude of the
threat to Louisiana's coastline. Revising the permitting
approach for the Corps and for other agencies, particularly
where multiple Federal agencies are involved, is critical, so
that regulations focus on finding ways to expedite
consideration of long term ecosystem projects that restore
wetlands and protect communities, rather than maintain the
current short term regulatory focus that again only seems to
impede these important projects from moving forward.
The Mid-Barataria Bay Sediment Diversion, a WRDA authorized
project south of New Orleans, offers a textbook example of the
need to increase transparency and improve coordination between
Federal agencies. The Diversion will take freshwater and
sediment from the Mississippi into threatened wetlands on the
western side of the river to be able to sustain new and
existing wetlands.
Now, the existing regulatory hurdles in multiple Federal
agencies will likely lead to multi-year permitting delays for
this and other large ecosystem restoration projects, resulting
in the loss of more Louisiana coast.
I look forward to working with this Committee to restore
the Mississippi River Delta Coalition, the Corps of Engineers,
and other interested parties, to update and modernize the
Federal permitting process in the next WRDA reauthorization
bill, so that we are better able to sustain coastal
environments and communities in both Louisiana and across the
nation.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify this morning to
introduce Mr. Cochran. Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much, Senator Cassidy. I
know you have other pressing matters. You are welcome to stay
as long as you like. I appreciate your coming here today to
introduce Mr. Cochran.
Now I would like to call on Ms. Julie Ufner, who is the
Associate Legislative Director for the National Association of
Counties.
Welcome.
STATEMENT OF JULIE UFNER, ASSOCIATE LEGISLATIVE DIRECTOR,
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF COUNTIES
Ms. Ufner. Good morning, Chairman Barrasso, Ranking Member
Carper and members of the Committee.
I am honored to testify before you today on water
infrastructure needs and challenges. My name is Julie Ufner. I
am from the National Association of Counties. We represent the
nation's 3,069 counties.
I have been asked to share with you our western counties'
experiences with the Water Resources Development Act, how we
use WRDA to work with the Army Corps to keep our communities
safe. Consider this: counties own 45 percent of the nation's
road miles and close to 40 percent of the nation's bridges,
along with harbors, ports, inland waterways, levees, dams.
These play vital roles to keep our economy safe.
This especially plays out in the west, where water issues
can be more complex. The Federal Government owns vast tracts of
land within counties, which prevents counties from raising
property taxes. Yet we are still responsible for law
enforcement and emergency services on these lands, while also
protecting our residents on non-Federal lands.
The Federal Government owns 97 percent of the land in the
city-borough of Juneau, Alaska, which leaves the borough of
33,000 with only 3 percent of usable land. They are highly
dependent on tourism, mining, and fishing to drive their $2.6
billion economy. A large part of their success comes from WRDA
funding that helps them maintain those navigation channels
leading to their port.
In Park County, Wyoming, a community of 30,000 residents
and comprised of 81 percent public lands, in the last year has
had mountain flooding and ice jams. This has resulted in
flooding which has destroyed county bridges and roads, many of
which lead to the gateways of the national parks. The county is
now working with the Army Corps and FEMA to replace these
structures.
But WRDA could do more. Counties have aging infrastructure
in their communities, some of which is close to 100 years old.
We have a limited pot of funds to pay for this. One example,
Tuolumne County, California, where the local economy of 54,000
is almost solely dependent on an old wooden flume and ditch
system for its water, which was built in the 1850s. This flume
is located in a heavily overgrown national forest, which is
vulnerable to wildfires. If it were destroyed, the community
would be without water for months. It would take over a year to
rebuild, devastating the local economy.
Additionally, some Federal regulations slow down
construction and significantly increase costs for public safety
projects. Orange County, California, maintains several hundred
miles of flood control channels that are intended to protect
homes, businesses, and roads from flooding. But for maintenance
activity in these channels, such as cleaning out debris, the
county is required to obtain Section 404 permits from the Army
Corps of Engineers.
It took the county approximately 3 years to obtain the
permit, which mandated them to clear 13 acres of vegetation and
required 20 acres of mitigation at a cost of over $3.5 million
for a permit that is only valid for 5 years. This is not an
isolated example.
Additionally, our counties note that there are challenges
within the existing Army Corps structure, which includes
cumbersome and complex requirements, the length of time that it
takes to complete water studies, limited funding, and competing
agency requirements. Congress has a unique opportunity to
address this issue. We are encouraged by the Senate's stated
commitment to complete a WRDA bill this year.
We look forward to working with you to identify ways in
which we can address challenges within the Section 404
permitting program for public safety infrastructure. We would
also like to address funding needs, because without WRDA and
the Army Corps, our counties would not have been able to
accomplish the multitude of projects that we have been able to
carry out in the past several decades.
Finally, we encourage Congress to provide a framework of
meaningful consultation between the Army Corps of Engineers and
State and local government partners on pending rules and
policies that directly impact those entities. We believe that
this will solve many of the conflicts that now exist between
the Army Corps and its intergovernmental partners. Simply put,
WRDA is a project that works. Together, we can work to make the
partnership stronger.
On behalf of NACo, thank you for the opportunity to
testify. I would be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ufner follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much, Ms. Ufner. We
appreciate your being here today.
I would like to turn now to Mr. William Friedman, who is
the Chairman-Elect of the American Association of Port
Authorities.
Thanks so much for joining us today.
STATEMENT OF WILLIAM FRIEDMAN, CHAIRMAN-ELECT, AMERICAN
ASSOCIATION OF PORT AUTHORITIES
Mr. Friedman. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Barrasso,
Ranking Member Carper, and members of the Committee. I want to
thank you for the opportunity to provide remarks to the
Environment and Public Works Committee on America's water
infrastructure needs and challenges.
I am William Friedman, President and Chief Executive
Officer of the Cleveland Cuyahoga County Port Authority, which
we usually shorten to the Port of Cleveland, because that full
name is a mouthful. The Port of Cleveland anchors northeast
Ohio's maritime sector, which is a major economic contributor
to our State and local economy. Maritime traffic in excess of
13 million tons annually through Cleveland harbor drives $3.5
billion in annual economic activity in our community and
supports 20,000 jobs in our community as well.
I am also speaking on behalf of the American Association of
Port Authorities, AAPA, as the Chairman-Elect of its
Legislative Policy Committee that sets policy for our members.
My remarks today will provide illustrative examples of water
infrastructure needs faced by public ports and recommendations
for WRDA legislation to improve the Corps of Engineers
navigation program.
AAPA members appreciate that Congress understands the
importance of our seaports' role in the U.S. economy.
Constructing and maintaining the nation's 21st century maritime
infrastructure is essential to the nation's economic future.
Public ports and their private sector partners are committed to
this challenge, with plans to invest upwards of $155 billion
between 2016 and 2020, in port related facilities.
It is imperative that related infrastructure be a part of
any broad infrastructure investment legislation the Committee
develops. AAPA has identified $66 billion in potential
waterside and landside investments over the next decade that
will help assure the benefits from an anticipated $155 billion
in port related capital infrastructure investments.
The waterside amount consists of full use of Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund revenues over the 10 year period, use of
the $9 billion Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund surplus to restore
Federal navigation channels, and $6.2 billion for the Federal
share of cost share channel improvements authorized in WRDA
2014 and WIIN 2016, and projects that are currently being
studied that will get authorized in the coming years.
AAPA believes a significant Federal investment would grow
the U.S. economy, increase family wage supporting jobs, enhance
America's international competitiveness, and generate
additional tax revenues. I have provided two infographics which
Senator Carper had pointed out at the outset of the hearing.
Those are both available to you. They look like this. The first
provides details on the $66 billion needs, and the second
infographic highlights the types of port related projects that
can benefit from infrastructure investment legislation.
Turning to WRDA, it is vitally important that this
legislation be passed on a 2 year cycle, as it enables both
major and smaller policy changes and improvements to be made
and navigation projects to be authorized. I look forward to the
next WRDA legislation to continue making these improvements in
the legislation.
I would point out AAPA's three key priority issues for the
next WRDA as follows. First, WRDA 2014 was landmark legislation
establishing a path to full use of the Harbor Maintenance tax
revenues for its intended purposes, which is navigation channel
maintenance. WRDA 2016 adjusted the annual funding target
approach so that progress is made toward full HMT use each
year. We are grateful the annual funding targets are currently
being met by Congress through the appropriations process.
However, we maintain that the ultimate solution is for full
HMT revenues to be provided directly to the Corps of Engineers.
We appreciate the bills that have been proposed to address this
issue. My fellow AAPA members and I are working on an approach
that accomplishes full HMT revenue use that includes an
industry supported spending formula.
No. 2, authorize and proceed to construct navigation
project improvements recommended in Chief of Engineers'
reports. This includes a project authorization change report
for the Soo Locks major rehabilitation on the Great Lakes.
No. 3, past WRDAs include streamlining of the Corps of
Engineers study process for navigation channel improvements.
That has worked well. We think that additional streamlining
improvements can be made in this upcoming WRDA. AAPA will
submit a list of specific streamlining improvements to the
Committee soon.
I commend the Committee leadership for recognizing the
nexus between water resources development and economic
prosperity. I urge you to develop and pass infrastructure
investment in WRDA legislation at the earliest possible time. I
would be happy to address any questions you might have for me.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Friedman follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much for your testimony,
Mr. Friedman. We look forward to the questions in a little bit.
I would like to turn first to Ms. Nicole Carter, who is a
Natural Resources Policy Specialist for the Congressional
Research Service.
Thanks for joining us.
STATEMENT OF NICOLE T. CARTER, SPECIALIST, NATURAL RESOURCES
POLICY, CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE
Ms. Carter. Chairman Barrasso, Ranking Member Carper, and
members of the committee, my name is Nicole Carter. I am a
specialist at the Congressional Research Service in Natural
Resources Policy. Thank you for inviting CRS to testify.
The Committee requested that CRS focus on the legislative
process for a Water Resources Development Act, WRDA, and
related issues in 2018. I will start with a WRDA primer, then
discuss executive branch reports relevant to WRDA
deliberations, and end with some broader context for water
resource authorization and infrastructure deliberations in
2018.
Congress is often involved at the project level when it
comes to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Congress authorizes
the Corps to perform specific projects to improve navigation,
reduce flood damage, and restore aquatic ecosystems. Congress
typically authorizes new Corps studies and projects in statute
in an omnibus Corps authorization bill, a WRDA bill, prior to
providing Federal funding.
Most authorities for previous WRDAs do not require
reauthorization. A small number of time limited authorities and
authorizations of appropriations end in 2018 and 2019.
Authorization, however, does not guarantee Federal
appropriations for a project.
Although Congress does not appropriate funds in a WRDA,
WRDA provisions may affect the use of appropriations. For
example, WRDA provisions have provided targets for navigation
trust funds, and have established the non-Federal/Federal split
of project costs. The timing of enactment of WRDAs has varied.
WRDA 1986 marked the end of a decade long stalemate between
Congress and the executive branch regarding cost sharing and
user fees.
Since WRDA 1986 Congress has aimed to avoid long delays
between the planning and the execution of projects. Biennial
enactment of WRDA was roughly followed from 1986 until the
early 2000s. Since then enactment has been less regular. An
issue that complicated enactment in the 111th and 112th
Congresses was how to develop a bill without congressionally
directed, geographically specific activities, commonly referred
to as earmarks. In response, the 113th Congress developed new
reporting processes that I will discuss later.
The 113th Congress enacted the Water Resources Reform and
Development Act of 2014. It expanded non-Federal opportunities
to lead Corps studies and projects and authorized 34 new
construction projects. The 114th Congress enacted the next WRDA
in December 2016. It authorized 30 new Corps construction
projects, as well as dozens of studies. WRDA 2016 was a title
of a broader water authorization bill that covered a range of
water infrastructure issues, including programs and activities
of the Bureau of Reclamation and EPA. All 64 new Corps
construction projects authorized in WRDA 2014 and WRDA 2016 had
a completed report by the Agency's Chief of Engineers.
Since WRDA 2016 five Chief's reports that recommend
congressional authorization of new projects have been
completed--two projects in Texas, two in Florida, and one in
New York. An additional 12 to 18 Chief's reports may be
completed by the end of 2018. Congress also uses WRDAs to
authorize significant changes to previously authorized
projects. The Corps is completing a report recommending an
increase in the authorization of appropriations for the
Savannah Harbor Expansion Project.
WRDA 2014 created a new process and requirement for the
Secretary of the Army to annually collect and report on
publicly submitted proposals for Corps studies and projects.
The most recent annual report was delivered in March 2017. It
includes 13 public proposals for new feasibility studies and
modifications to existing projects. The deadline for the next
annual report to Congress is February 2018.
Many topics may shape deliberations on water resource
infrastructure in 2018, such as the use of two navigation trust
funds and the safety and operation of Corps dams and levees.
Three broad topics of relevance to deliberation in 2018 are
infrastructure initiatives. How may a broad infrastructure
initiative relate to authorized Corps projects and reinvestment
in aging federally owned infrastructure?
Two, non-Federal expectations and partnerships; what will
the Federal Government expect of non-Federal project sponsors
in coming years? And what can non-Federal entities expect from
the Federal Government in terms of partnering and financing of
projects?
Three, floods. Recent disasters, including the 2017
hurricanes, have raised numerous questions, like how effective
and efficient are current processes for identifying priority
Federal investments to reduce the nation's flood risk?
Thank you. This concludes my statement.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Carter follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much, Ms. Carter. We
appreciate your testimony. There may be some questions in a
little bit.
I would like to now welcome Mr. Steven Cochran, the
Associate Vice President for Coastal Protection, Restore the
Mississippi Delta Coalition.
Thanks so much for joining us today.
STATEMENT OF STEVE COCHRAN, ASSOCIATE VICE PRESIDENT FOR
COASTAL PROTECTION, ENVIRONMENTAL DEFENSE FUND, AND DIRECTOR,
RESTORE THE MISSISSIPPI DELTA COALITION
Mr. Cochran. Thank you, Senator Barrasso, Senator Carper,
and members of the Committee. I also want to thank Senator
Cassidy for coming here this morning. I don't know if you
noticed it, but he has a bad cold, so I particularly appreciate
him being willing to come out here today.
I want to thank Senator Kennedy from our State as well,
both of them do diligent work on behalf of our State's
vulnerable coastal communities.
For the record I am Steve Cochran, Associate Vice President
with the Environmental Defense Fund, and the director of a
coalition called Restore the Mississippi River Delta. We are a
coalition of three national organizations--the Environmental
Defense Fund, the National Audubon Society, and the National
Wildlife Federation--and two Louisiana based organizations, the
Coalition to Restore Coastal Louisiana and the Lake
Pontchartrain Basin Foundation.
For over 10 years our coalition has worked together on
landscape scale restoration across the Louisiana coast. In
addition to my own written statement, which is submitted for
the record, Coalition members National Wildlife Federation and
Audubon have also submitted written testimony. I hope the
Committee can give them due consideration as well.
This morning I would like to tell you a little about the
challenges in my home State of Louisiana, where, to be blunt,
as Senator Cassidy said, we have a coastal crisis. As Congress
begins to look at WRDA, I want to focus on possible solutions
from what we believe are lessons from the front.
The Louisiana coast, since the 1930s, has lost about 1,900
square miles. As Senator Carper knows, that loss is roughly the
size of the State of Delaware. Without action, we are projected
to lose up to another 4,000 square miles within the next 50
years.
These losses have dramatic implications for millions of
people and their communities along the coast; for nationally
significant energy and refining infrastructure, for globally
significant port facilities, and for world class habitat that
supports countless wildlife species, including a huge diversity
of commercial and recreational fisheries.
While the crisis along Louisiana's coast is unique, its
challenges are reflected across the country. As the Committee
knows, 2017--Senator Carper pointed this out earlier--set the
record for weather related damages across the country, the
majority of which were from hurricanes and floods. As you would
imagine, we spend a lot of time in the Delta thinking about
solutions. From that perspective, here are some general
concepts that we would recommend as you consider WRDA.
First, coastlines are complex systems, and each area
requires its own carefully considered measures to adapt to
changing conditions.
Second, no engineered or natural structure is 100 percent
effective against all storms, but structural solutions can be
rendered far more effective in concert with restored natural
features and processes.
Third, in many cases our nation's wetlands and floodplains
are themselves critical infrastructure that needs to be
restored so that, in addition to their ecological benefits,
they can be used specifically to reduce the impacts and costs
of floods and storms.
In Louisiana, the State and its partners have used these
concepts in constructing their own approach. Louisiana's Master
Plan for a Sustainable Coast is a document which guides
comprehensive State planning initiative based on cutting edge
science and modeling. It is driven by priorities, recognizes
finite funding, and enjoys quite remarkable bipartisan support.
This Plan is iterative, which means it is updated every 5 years
to incorporate the latest science and reflect progress. Each
update must be approved by the State legislature, and each of
its three iterations over 15 years have all been unanimously
approved.
This plan is also informed by an exceptional and growing
public engagement process, giving communities a voice in their
own future. We strongly recommend that other States facing
significant flooding challenges examine the Master Plan's
approach as a useful guide.
As for details, gray projects like rocked shorelines or
levees are complemented with restored wetlands, barrier
islands, and oyster reefs, as well as non-structural
approaches. A combination of these measures are organized to
create a ``multiple lines of defense.'' As you can see, my
colleague Shannon is holding here, you see the array of various
approaches that can be married together, both structural and
natural, to really provide multiple lines of defense. That is
true along rivers; it is true along coastlines. It is this kind
of thinking that we would strongly recommend to the Committee
in thinking about the kinds of projects that it encourages and
supports, incentives that it builds into the system going
forward.
This next chart is just simply a specific version, done
specific to Louisiana, where you can actually see how it works
in our setting. These charts are in the written testimony, and
you can look at them in more detail that way.
Now, the natural aspects of these are really beneficial,
because they have so many co-benefits. Oyster reefs, which help
reduce wave problems, also grow oysters. Storm surges that can
be stopped by wetlands, wild wetlands maintain significant
habitat. The maritime, swamp and mangrove forests can lower
wind speeds from storms, while also supporting vast numbers of
wildlife and commercial species. So it is these things together
that we think really make the most sense, particularly as we
have limited assets and finite resources going forward.
One final element I want to tell you about that Senator
Cassidy mentioned is the Mid-Barataria Sediment Diversion. It
is a unique and innovative approach. This was originally
authorized--I will make this point--in WRDA 2007 under a
different name. It will take up to 75,000 cubic feet of fresh
water and sediment from the Mississippi River, and at strategic
times in the river's cycle, deliver it to the threatened
wetlands on the western side of the river. In doing so, it will
use the power of nature to build and sustain tens of thousands
of wetland acres, including those created through separate
projects. These wetlands will in turn provide buffering for the
levees, inside of which are our communities and the industry
that we depend upon. So you get the mix of natural
infrastructure, protecting built infrastructure, protecting our
communities and coasts. It is that combination that we think
makes the most sense.
It is a wonderful approach for us, but I have to add here
that these kinds of projects are not without challenges. In
this case, because of the project's essential nature for our
work, the State has decided to fund it entirely on its through
resources that came through the Deepwater Horizon penalties.
Those of course are subject to Federal agency permitting, as
they should be. I want to underscore the importance from our
perspective of environmental review, and frankly, even our
opposition to some of the forms of streamlining that we have
seen.
However, the Federal permitting timeline of nearly 5 years
for this urgent, already long studied project is unacceptable,
given the urgency that we face. In this case, some delays stem
from several factors, including the challenges some agencies
confront in accounting for what happens if no action is taken
at all.
Given the urgency of the crisis in Louisiana and the
challenges associated with it, it may be that a targeted
legislative solution is required, which if done carefully and
without damage to the underlying statute, we support. Here and
elsewhere, we are encouraging permitting agencies, including
the Corps and NOAA, to work cooperatively and expeditiously to
find ways to consolidate the permitting timelines.
In summary, Louisiana is deploying multiple lines of
defense and pursuing innovation to address a coast in crisis.
But to be successful, it needs a reliable, effective Federal
partner that can provide timely and appropriate resources, and
stay focused on solutions. As the Committee moves forward with
this authorization, we encourage you to think about that
formula for the rest of the country as well.
I went a little long. Thank you for your patience.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cochran follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much for your testimony.
We appreciate all of you being here. We are now going to
move on to a series of questions from members.
I will start with you, Ms. Ufner. Many stakeholders who
work with the Corps of Engineers have commented and maybe
complained a little bit about the process that it follows to
get from identifying a water resources problem to implementing
a solution, and that there can be long and costly delays. For
example, in the arid west, there are many water supply
challenges that have not yet been solved, such as removing
sediment from reservoirs, to providing more water supply
capacity and effectively managing multiple water supply needs,
such as flood risk management, drinking water, irrigation, all
from a single reservoir.
So as a result, the water supply is becoming scarce and
more expensive. Could you please share any thoughts you might
have as to how to improve the Corps' processes, so that the
water resource projects are operated more efficiently?
Ms. Ufner. Thank you, Senator. We actually have a number of
suggestions, but in the interest of time, I am going to limit
it to two. First, improve the intergovernmental collaboration
between the Corps and local governments. The Corps has a lot of
technical assistance that is very valuable to local
governments. But the processes and permits they have often
prohibit or slow down projects from moving forward.
Second, Congress may want to consider requiring the Corps
to do a regulatory efficiency assessment of Corps processes,
and have the Corps submit to Congress the results of this with
potential alternatives on how they are going to address it.
Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. You said you were just going to share
two. If there are some additional ones you would like to add in
writing, we would be happy to receive those.
Ms. Ufner. We would be happy to do so.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you.
Mr. Robinson, as well as Mr. Friedman, ports and inland
waterways are very important to the lifeblood of the American
economy and our economic activity. Every year, over a trillion
dollars' worth of goods moves through the ports and inland
waters, and to every basic corner of the United States and
around the world. Can you talk a little bit more about the
importance of ports and inland waterways and how their
management impacts your ability to transport goods, allowing us
to keep jobs at home and help us to more effectively compete
globally?
Mr. Robinson. Senator Barrasso, just speaking on behalf of
the NKARNS, from Tulsa, Oklahoma, to Muscogee, just in that
segment of the waterway, 53 miles, there are more than 8,000
jobs, there has been $5 million invested. Annual payrolls to
the counties and to the cities are $320 million annually.
In Muscogee, which is a community of 39,000 people, most of
the manufacturers in that community--and Muscogee is a
manufacturing town--depend on the waterway. So they depend on
the reliability of the waterway. They depend on the
transportation cost savings for delivering and receiving goods
on the waterway. It is critically important to the economy of
rural America. We are not investing in the system like we
should be. Therefore, we are encountering delays, and it is not
a good situation in rural America.
Senator Barrasso. Mr. Friedman, would you like to add?
Mr. Friedman. Yes, thank you for the question, Senator
Barrasso. I will address that from the perspective of the Great
Lakes and the St. Lawrence Seaway, which is a unique waterway
system, where we are all interconnected as ports, and we trade
with one another, both within the system domestically. There is
also of course the international waterway, St. Lawrence Seaway,
where we connect to all parts of the globe.
The partnership that we have with the Army Corps under WRDA
to keep our harbors fully dredged is a critical lifeline for
big cities like Cleveland, Detroit, Chicago, as well as a
number of rural communities. It is critical for agriculture,
for heavy manufacturing, for steel making, which takes place in
Cleveland, based on iron ore, which comes down from Minnesota.
That is one of the primary examples of the types of trade in
our region.
Then we have many cargoes that flow in and out of the
heartland through the St. Lawrence Seaway, both exports from
American manufacturers and imports like specialty steel that we
rely on in the appliance manufacturing sector and other
manufacturing sectors. So I think in total, the number for the
entire system is something like on the order of 227,000 jobs,
both on the U.S. and Canadian side of the Seaway and the Great
Lakes. So making sure that we continue to get WRDA right,
streamline the process, authorize new projects, and get to full
use and full spend of the Harbor Maintenance Tax is a critical
priority for us. Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you.
Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
I will start out with Nicole Carter.
Let me say, excellent testimony; very helpful. A question
for you. Given our current operating environment, with recently
passed tax reform which reduces revenues over the next 10 years
by about
$2 trillion, the state of our crumbling infrastructure with a
grade of D, and we are talking about the kind of situation we
face here with our ports, our rivers, and so forth, it is just
as bad with respect to roads, highways, and bridges.
Complete with limited numbers of Chief's reports and a
large backlog of Corps projects, what are the big issues that
we should tackle on the next Water Resources Development Act?
Ms. Carter. Thank you for the question. In WRDA 2014
Congress established new ways for non-Federal entities to be
involved in projects. This has resulted in additional projects
being led by non-Federal entities, and trying to understand how
well are those projects and processes working for those non-
Federal entities, as well as delivering on projects would be
part of the process to understand how to incorporate Corps
projects into a larger investment package.
Basically right now that process consists of the non-
Federal entities often providing the funds up front, and
essentially signing an agreement that upon the availability of
appropriations, they may receive some reimbursements. GAO
recently did a study that identified that there are about $4
billion in projects like this in the country, and about $400
million has been reimbursed. But we don't know the total amount
that requires to be reimbursed.
How well those are working, well, [indiscernible] how well
other non-Federal entities in the future want to make those
investments and what they can expect in the way of the Federal
Government partnering in those investments if they do choose to
lead rather than wait for the Corps.
Senator Carper. Thank you very much.
I will turn next to Mr. Friedman. Thank you very much.
Does the Cuyahoga River still catch on fire?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Friedman. No, sir. We are coming up on the 50th
anniversary of that infamous fire, Senator Carper. I am happy
to report that the environmental health of the river has been
restored significantly. We are proud of what we have been able
to achieve since that dark day.
Senator Carper. I was a student at Ohio State University
about that time. We used to talk about fish fries up on the
Cuyahoga River.
[Laughter.]
Senator Carper. The wrong kind. Question for you, if I
could. By 2020 the total volume of cargo shipped by water is
expected to more than double by what it was just 17 years ago
in 2001. As ships continue to get bigger, we see more
congestion at the docks, longer ships required, deeper
navigation channels, as we know, which only a few U.S. ports
currently have.
How do we ensure that ports are able to effectively
distribute and receive goods as ships continue to grow in size?
Is it a policy, funding? Is it policy issues, or funding
issues, or both? If it is a funding issue, how do we go about
doing more with less?
Mr. Friedman. Thank you for the question, Senator. I will
try to address that. Yes, it is certainly a funding issue and a
policy issue, both. As you heard me say earlier, AAPA is asking
for $66 billion over the next 10 years to address many of those
issues that you just spoke to, deepening waterside projects,
such as deepening in order to keep up with the ships that are,
of course, enormous today, as well as some landside projects to
ensure that we have the intermodal connections, so once that
cargo comes off that ship at a port, or moves onto that ship,
it can get to that port efficiently from an inland point.
So we absolutely need a Federal partnership. I would also
point out that there is already what I would call a robust
public-private partnership in place, because our port
authorities work very closely with private sector port terminal
operators and ship owners who invest heavily in our ports in
partnership with our ports and the Federal Government. The
Federal dollars will leverage additional private investment and
go toward those sorts of infrastructure projects, which there
is no direct pay back on.
So we look forward through this next round of WRDA, and in
this infrastructure discussion we will be having this year to
ensuring that we can put a plan in place to fund those
important needs at our ports.
Senator Carper. In my opening statement, I mentioned that
the Corps faces a rather sizable math problem, as it tries to
serve roughly a $200 billion requirement, and more with an
annual budget that hovers around $4.6 billion. Think about
that. Think about that, a $200 billion requirement to meet and
an annual budget that hovers around $4.6 billion. We are just,
we know it costs a lot of money. We know how economically
important it is in our country. We are just not spending the
money; we are not investing the money. We can do streamlining
from now until the cows come home. We have done a lot of smart
streamlining. I think we are prepared to do some more.
There is good news, and good opportunity to figure out how
to leverage Federal resources, State resources to bring in
private sector resources. We are doing that right now with an
extension of the Port of Wilmington.
But at the end of the day, one of the things we need is for
the Federal Government to do its share, to do its part. That is
not something that requires a response from any of you. I think
that is the 800 pound gorilla in the room. Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Inhofe.
Senator Inhofe. I think Senator Carper brought out
something that is significant and that is very unique, and that
is that in this area, where we are trying to bring in private
sector funding, we actually had to pass a bill and a provision
into law to allow that to take place. I can't think of any
place else in government where you have to ask permission to
let the private sector pay for something. So that was something
that was good.
Mr. Robinson, I again appreciate your being here so we can
make it very visible to people that we have problems on this
inland waterway. I can remember back when I first came to
Congress, I would go up through some of the eastern States and
see the problems they have had with their old ports, thinking,
well, we are pretty fortunate in Oklahoma; we don't have those
problems. Well, now we do have those problems. Enough years
have gone by, we have outlived the lives of some of our ports.
So we have to address that.
We had a Subcommittee that I chaired not long ago on
transportation and infrastructure. Someone suggested that the
cost share of the Inland Waterway Trust Fund should be changed
in some way. One suggestion was from, to 15 percent from the
trust fund and 85 percent from the general fund. Are you
familiar with that suggestion?
Mr. Robinson. Yes, Senator Inhofe, I am, and I think there
probably needs to be an adjustment. The problem, as Senator
Carper acknowledged, is not doing more with less. We have been
trying to do that forever. It is not working. We need to do
more with more and do it efficiently and in a businesslike
manner.
Senator Inhofe. Those of us who have been down there and
observed the problems that we have in some of these relatively
new ports through where we carry our goods and services, our
nation's system directly touches 38 States, as has been brought
out. It is not just the coast. Three of our ports go through
Senator Boozman's State, then two more ports are in Oklahoma.
Now, in the FAST Act, for the first time, and I have been
through all seven of them since 1987, that we were able to have
a freight provision. That freight provision left a lot of the
authority up to the States as to how to expend that and so
forth.
So I would ask the question, would allowing the States to
use FAST Act freight funds on our waterways, if they chose to
do it, would that be a valuable tool to address the issues and
the needs in the States?
Mr. Robinson. I think so, Senator Inhofe. I think we need
more tools, and that would be one of them. The question, of
course, would be whether States who are so focused on their
highways' needs, roads and bridges, how much effort or how much
expenditure they would allow from those funds for waterways.
The other question is, what would they use those funds for?
Would they use it to cost share new projects? If that were the
case, I think there is a real need to cost share new projects.
There is not enough money in the Inland Waterways Trust Fund to
do that. Perhaps the States are going to have to pick up a
little bit of the load there.
Senator Inhofe. It is not going to happen unless somebody
does something. You have to get aggressive and come in with the
State, decide what the alternatives are and then what
percentage perhaps might be appropriate for that. I look at
sources, and I run out of ideas. So anyway, I think that is
something we can do, and something that doesn't affect us as
much here in the Federal Government as much as it does in State
government.
Mr. Robinson. I also think, Senator Inhofe, the Water
Infrastructure Financing Act that the Congress authorized in
2014 is another tool that could be used. It is leveraged,
because the Federal Government is getting the money back, it is
a loan. So I think that is another one of the tools at our
disposal, like the TIGER program.
Senator Inhofe. There is a variety. We can get together and
decide what we want to do on a State level.
Ms. Ufner, the counties and cities are facing a lot of
issues when it comes to water resources, in trying to address
these. I know other States, not just the State of Oklahoma,
have some of these problems. In the city of Bartlesville,
Oklahoma, the community is growing and in need of additional
water storage. Now, we had water storage from one lake in that
city. As a result, it increased our rates to the customers by
over 100 percent.
But when we tried to open up another one, and I am not sure
you are familiar with this particular issue, but we went to the
Corps of Engineers, and they increased--they had a rate
increase of 3,000 percent, which obviously our cities, that
particular city of Bartlesville, was not able to do anything.
When I asked the GAO to investigate how the Corps comes up with
their prices, they reported back that they couldn't, because
the agency's recordkeeping was so bad and varied they could not
actually study how the agency arrives at their numbers. That is
shocking.
Ms. Ufner. I almost feel like that is a trick question,
Senator.
[Laughter.]
Senator Inhofe. No, it is not a trick question; it is a
serious question, and I would like you to talk about it.
Because we have new people coming in, and we have had a hearing
already with the Civil Division of the Corps of Engineers. They
recognize that changes have to be made. But not if we all sit
around and keep quiet and don't talk about it.
Ms. Ufner. I think that you hit a strong point on the head.
There is a lot of information that is not available out there.
It is something that we need to figure out and work together to
do it.
Senator Inhofe. Yes, well, my time is expired, but that is
something we need to address.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Inhofe.
Senator Whitehouse.
Senator Whitehouse. Thank you, Chairman. I appreciate the
panel being here. Particular welcome to Mr. Friedman.
Rhode Island has two ports that we are investing in and
proud of, ProvPort and Quonset. We are the home of Moran
Shipping Agencies, which is one of the world's best ship
servicing agencies. So we are keenly interested in ports.
I am interested in your take on what sea level rise
infrastructure impacts our ports are looking at.
Mr. Friedman. I think our ports are keenly interested and
concerned about sea level rise and what they can do in
partnership with local, State, and Federal governments to
enhance resiliency, as we heard Mr. Cochran speaking to
earlier. I think we would look toward this WRDA bill to
increase our ability to work in innovative ways with the Army
Corps of Engineers.
I think you usually find that a lot of the new and
interesting ideas tend to bubble up from those of us who are on
the ground at our local ports and communities. We need the
ability to sit down with our Army Corps districts and work
together on those solutions. We are engaged in those
discussions with the Buffalo District of the Corps, which
oversees Cleveland. Believe it or not, we have had some coastal
resiliency issues in Cleveland. SuperStorm Sandy did a
tremendous amount of damage to our breakwater and other
structures in our port. We are looking at dredge material, for
example, to fortify our port.
Senator Whitehouse. Is it fair to say that the concern of
America's ports about sea level rise goes beyond the actual
seashore itself, that you can raise piers and sea walls and so
forth. But if the sea is infiltrating through, for instance,
water systems and bubbling up behind, if it is flooding access
roads that are necessary to get goods in and out of the ports,
those are matters that are of equal concern to the actual
shoreline itself; is that correct?
Mr. Freidman. No question, Senator. I think our ports are
literally on the front lines of this issue, and they are very
concerned about the upland impacts of sea level rise as well as
being inundated right on the docks. There is no question that
all our ports are focused on that question. I think they are
all working very hard to figure out how do we mitigate going
forward.
Senator Whitehouse. Ms. Ufner, you are here on behalf of
all counties, but if I could direct your attention to coastal
counties, could you tell us what you are hearing from coastal
counties about the infrastructure hazards and risks and
problems and challenges that they are seeing related to sea
level rise and storm surges and so forth?
Ms. Ufner. It is much broader even than sea level rise and
storm surges. We are definitely getting the flooding in the
coastal counties. I also work very closely with our Gulf States
Counties and Parishes Caucus, and especially with the
hurricanes that have come through this past fall, they are
increasingly focusing on how to address those issues. Because
the weather events have been getting more severe, and the
population growth within those communities makes it even more
essential that the communities can address these issues at the
local level.
Senator Whitehouse. So my view on this is that this is a
problem that coastal communities face, counties and
municipalities. That very often those counties and those
municipalities don't have a lot of resources to do the
planning.
I see your head nodding, for the record, yes. Good.
It is also my view that a lot of the FEMA mapping has
proven itself to be wildly inaccurate. So you have counties
that are counting on the Federal Government for planning as to
what sea level rise and flood risk looks like, and they are
being given bad information, which puts it again back on the
community to try to reach its own better planning process. But
without the resources it is really hard to ask a local
community to take on a task like that. Is that a fair
description of the problem as you see it as well?
Ms. Ufner. It is. Counties derive a large part of their
income from property taxes, and States set the limit of how we
can even raise property taxes. So it sets an ugly cycle of how
do we fund for something, how do we strengthen our local
communities. And that is why the Federal-State partnership is
so valuable to us.
Senator Whitehouse. Yes.
Well, let me just make one point to my colleagues. I think
that as we are beginning to address these WRDA issues, one of
the areas in which we can become more efficient and more
helpful to the Army Corps would be to try to find a good,
honorable, and transparent way for Congress and this Committee
to be able to assert its own priorities in the process.
It concerns me that we shovel projects in one side of the
WRDA bill and we shovel money in the other side of the WRDA
bill, and how the Army Corps of Engineers connect that money to
those projects is a giant black hole. I think we need to fix
that. I know we have been through a problem of earmarks that
received a lot of justified criticism. Our response was to
abandon this responsibility entirely. I think that was an
overreaction, and that we can and should in this Committee try
to frame out an honorable, transparent, proper way for these
priorities to be met under our supervision, rather than just
throw it off to the Army Corps bureaucracy. I hope that
statement was not unwelcome, and I appreciate that time.
Senator Barrasso. It was very welcome. Thank you very much,
Senator Whitehouse.
Senator Wicker.
Senator Wicker. Thank you.
Mr. Friedman, let's talk about the Harbor Maintenance
Trust. I notice in your testimony you advocate full use of HMT
revenues over a 10 year period. What we have been doing, as has
been pointed out, is we have been taking in more HMT revenue
and sort of setting it aside, making the deficit look better by
not spending it for its intended purpose.
If we take your recommendation and restore--and restore
over a 10 year period the full use of these revenues, will that
get us where we need to be in terms of meeting our funding
needs?
Mr. Friedman. Thank you, Senator Wicker. It gets us part of
the way there, but not all of the way there. If you look at the
numbers that AAPA has submitted in the infographic, and they
can provide more detail, we are calling for full spend every
year of the revenues that are brought into the trust fund, and
spending the roughly
$9 billion surplus that has been built up, as you just
mentioned. Then on top of that, we would need additional moneys
through an infrastructure bill to reach the $66 billion, which
we identify as the full need.
So we would certainly be fully maintaining our harbors at
that point, if we fully spend the Harbor Maintenance Trust
Fund, catching up with the backlog if we use the surplus. And
then for some additional waterside improvements, such as
deepening, which was mentioned earlier, some of our largest
harbors for the larger ships, some of the big container ports,
then some critical landside multimodal connections, using
infrastructure dollars, we think that gets us to where we need
to be as a nation.
Senator Wicker. OK, so it is your hope that the President's
infrastructure plan, which should be outlined to us and to the
public within a couple of weeks, or at least within a month,
that that
$1 trillion infrastructure plan will be the third step in
getting us where we need to be to meet our needs?
Mr. Friedman. We hope so, Senator, yes.
Senator Wicker. OK, and I hope so, too.
Thank you for this chart and these graphics. Senator Carper
showed a bigger copy of this. They are illustrative examples of
port related investment needs. I notice you have three rail
projects, one being the Mississippi Rail Relocation Marine
Terminal Project at Pascagoula, Mississippi. That is the only
city in the United States that rhymes with hallelujah; you
might tuck that away as a fact to be learned today.
[Laughter.]
Senator Wicker. Also, Cross Harbor Rail Tunnel in New
Jersey and Port Arthur Rail Project. How are we doing in rail
access to ports? And why aren't we where we need to be? What
have been some of the challenges in getting that rail to the
ports?
Mr. Friedman. I think we have made good progress in the
last 20 or 30 years or so in improving rail access to ports.
Intermodality, or the whole concept of putting a container onto
a train, is not that old a concept. So many of our ports had to
be retrofitted with the kinds of rail connections that would be
functional for them.
The granddaddy of all those would be the Alameda Corridor
project in southern California, which consolidated all the rail
lines in a cut, so as to eliminate grade crossings. We have
seen those sorts of projects on somewhat smaller scale at many
of our ports. That has been, I think, a good public-private
partnership between the railroad industry and between ports
themselves, between the Federal Government.
But we do need more. We are seeing increased volumes to and
from our ports. I think it is particularly important for
exports. We tend to think about containers coming in through
our ports. But where I am in Cleveland, we think a lot about
exports. We need those strong rail connections from the
hinterland into the ports in order to move exports, which quite
often are heavy and bulky products that we make here in the
U.S.
That is why, in that $66 billion, we have included those
critical rail connections. In some cases it is tunnel
clearances; in some cases, it is rail bridges; in some cases it
is grade crossings, it is more track in order to manage those
trains as they move in and out of the ports. Thank you.
Senator Wicker. Quickly, Mr. Cochran. This loss of land in
Louisiana is something I am more than familiar with, as a next
door neighbor. Truth of the matter is, I am not advocating
doing away with flood control, but it is actually flood control
over the centuries and decades that has caused the absence of
sediment and the loss of land, is that correct?
Mr. Cochran. One of the significant factors, yes, sir.
Senator Wicker. Just the point I would make is, no one
would advocate the solution to the problem is to go back to the
wild days that we used to have that caused the sediment. I
appreciate you and your testimony by thinking of different
ways, innovative ways to address them and that we can't change
back to the way it used to be. I appreciate that.
Also let me just say, I understand you that we are all for
streamlining permitting. You have some doubts about some of the
suggestions at the other end of the table. We are going to have
to come together across the aisle on ways that we can
streamline the permitting processes. I am glad to see a
consensus among all five of our witnesses, I believe, that we
need to address that. I hope we can work on the nuances that
can be a happy solution and a win-win for all parties.
Mr. Cochran. I would offer, and I appreciate that. The key
there is what you identified, which is sitting down together,
sitting down together on the things that we have been lucky
enough, and maybe threatened enough in Louisiana to do, is to
recognize that hurricanes and other things are completely non-
partisan. We need to be, too, as we figure this out. So looking
at how to make the system work better, how to make underlying
protections do what they are intended to do, but to do so in
the most efficient way, that is a great conversation to have.
Senator Wicker. Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Wicker.
Senator Gillibrand.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking
Member. I am very grateful for your holding this hearing. It is
important work that our Committee does, to draft the new Water
Resources Development Act this year.
My State of New York has a wide range of diverse water
infrastructure needs and challenges. We are a coastal State
threatened by the impacts of climate change, coastal storms and
sea level rise. We are also a Great Lakes State, constantly
challenged by aquatic invasive species like Asian carp, that
have the potential to destroy our fisheries if they are not
stopped from gaining a foothold in the Great Lakes Basin.
We have the largest and busiest port on the east coast,
which is essential to international commerce. And we have a
number of small ports and harbors across our State that are
important to the local economies and need to be properly
maintained.
We cannot address all of these challenges without a strong
investment in the Army Corps. But funding is only a part of it.
We need to ensure that we are investing our Federal dollars so
that we are more resilient in the face of these challenges.
I was very disappointed that the Trump administration chose
to rescind the Flood Risk Management Standard implemented by
the Obama administration, which required federally funded
projects to incorporate best available and actionable science
on climate change and sea level rise and build above the base
floor elevation levels. If we are spending, as we are in the
northeast, billions of dollars to build the infrastructure to
protect our communities, it defies logic that we would leave
taxpayers exposed to the types of catastrophic losses we saw
after SuperStorm Sandy, and more recently hurricanes Harvey,
Irma, and Maria, but not building to withstand the current and
future flood risk.
So to Ms. Ufner, what are the consequences to counties and
local governments and their taxpayers if we fail to properly
assess risks, both current and future, when planning to build
in flood plains?
Ms. Ufner. Thank you, Senator, for your question.
Ultimately, counties are responsible for the public health and
safety of our communities. Probably, if you look at what has
happened in Santa Barbara County, California, within the last
day, with the flooding that is due to the wildfires, there are
only limited things you can do after a wildfire to address
risk. But it demonstrates that when floods happen, people die,
homes disappear, roads are gone, memories are gone. This is
something that local governments want to prevent, and they want
to be there to help with their residents.
Senator Gillibrand. Are we doing enough to ensure that we
are adequately protecting ourselves and our assets from future
storms and floods? What could we be doing better?
Ms. Ufner. It is a combination approach. There is a
responsibility on the local governments. A lot of our local
governments, though, they have the limited income and technical
assistance to follow through with these projects. And that is
where they really look to the Army Corps of Engineers and other
Federal agencies to bring the technical assistance, the data,
the modeling, the communities can use. We have been working
with our counties on best practices that they can use in their
own communities to build their resilience at the local level.
Senator Gillibrand. What else could we be doing?
Ms. Ufner. We just keep on going in the direction we are
going. The way NACo views it is that these are steps on the
ladder that we can help the communities that are out there,
really being aggressive. There are trend setters. They are the
ones we learn from on what may work in other communities.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you.
To Mr. Cochran, what needs to change in terms of Army Corps
policies and procedures to allow for greater use of nature
based solutions to mitigate flood risks along our coastlines?
Mr. Cochran. One of the things that I want to point out is
that this multiple lines of defense system chart that we used
earlier to illustrate the integration of hardened
infrastructure and natural infrastructure is actually based on
a chart that the Corps put together following in its post-Sandy
efforts, as it did a comprehensive coastal study in the
northeast. So I take that as both a positive sign that--too
often what we do is learn about these things after the fact.
This is a post-Sandy study, not a pre-Sandy study.
So I think one of the things we really need to encourage
within the Corps is to take the learnings that have occurred in
these post-Sandy situations and really make sure that they
penetrate across the Corps, across the various divisions, not
just single in on one place, so all the areas, coastal and
inland, can get the clear benefit of this kind of thinking,
this kind of an approach. Because from that comes actual
information and data, so that you can actually do the kinds of
comparisons that let you select the things that will work best,
not just take one old system because that is the way we have
always done it, but actually integrate these things so that
they become not only protected but sustainable in the process.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Gillibrand.
Senator Ernst.
Senator Ernst. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair.
A number of my coastal colleagues have mentioned the
detriment from hurricanes and so forth. I would offer them the
opportunity to come inland a little bit. Iowa has about 1,000
miles of coastal setback in either direction. But regardless of
those large scale effects that come from hurricanes, we do have
flooding issues in Iowa that occur on a much more regular basis
than those 100 year floods or 500 year floods that are recorded
out there.
Senator Whitehouse mentioned that black hole that exists
within the Army Corps of Engineers. We get the projects in on
one side, and as he said, the funding in from the other side. I
tend to agree with the Senator, in that there is a black hole
and we need greater transparency there.
Part of that black hole, I feel, is the benefit to cost
ratio. Mr. Cochran, in your testimony, you encourage Congress
to direct the Corps to modernize that BCR, the benefit to cost
ratio analyses, because you believe the estimated costs are
often inaccurate. A priority of mine has also been to modernize
the BCR metrics, so that more communities, particularly our
rural ones, have an opportunity to get their projects funded.
We have a flood mitigation project in Cedar Rapids, Iowa,
that was authorized by WRDA in 2014. It was mentioned for
prioritization in WRDA in 2016, but has not received any
funding due to the low BCR that results from Iowa's relatively
low property values. I know that is true in other areas as
well, and maybe Mr. Cochran in Louisiana, too, because your
property values are low also.
Do you have any thoughts on how the BCR metrics could be
modified so that projects like this flood mitigation project in
Cedar Rapids have a better chance of receiving funding?
Mr. Cochran. One of the recommendations that we have is
really a focus on making sure that you can in fact take account
for the range of benefits that can come from projects when you
are doing protection. A lot of that has to do often with the
benefits of wetlands, the benefits of setbacks, things like
that that you are used to in your riverine situation that
really don't get accounted for any benefits when you get into
the cost-benefit. It is just, well, there is some land there,
but they don't actually look at the benefits associated with
it, this kind of benefits.
So a true accounting for the benefits from natural
infrastructure, for the benefits that are there, really needs
to be done. It will end up benefiting these discussions in a
lot of the ways that you are talking about because it actually
gives a true picture, not just one that is just slanted toward
and old way of doing things.
Part of the challenge that I think a lot of people have had
with these analyses, too, is a real lack of transparency. It is
difficult understanding exactly where the numbers came from or
how they got there, and no real requirement that they be
justified in a way that allows people to actually engage in
that conversation. So we think that that transparency is a
fundamental piece of this. Data transparency, real accounting
for real benefits, those things together really can make a
difference.
Senator Ernst. That is too true. Again, going back to that
black hole that Senator Whitehouse was referencing. So thank
you. I think that is important, and I hope we are taking a look
at the BCR as we move forward.
And of course, Ms. Carter, the Army Corps component of the
WIFIA program that was established by WRDA in 2014 has yet to
get off the ground. That is the Army Corps portion. The EPA has
already implemented their portion.
What are some of the challenges that the Corps is facing in
implementing this program? And at this current pace, how long
will it take for the Corps to catch up to where EPA is?
Ms. Carter. Thank you for the question. Indeed, the WIFIA
program for the Corps has not been funded. And part of what has
been going on is that the Corps has no real history with a loan
or loan guaranty program, so developing the guidelines. And
then understanding how will those projects be scored in terms
of the risks to the Government have been some of the primary
challenges.
Basically, as those issues get worked through, with either
congressional or Administration involved in those discussions
of how to score the risk, as those progress, then funding could
be provided and the Corps could start providing these loans and
loan guarantees, which could assist with projects like flood
levees where communities could potentially proceed on their own
to be able to perform those projects.
So those are the main ones, the ability to understand the
scoring of it.
Senator Ernst. Would it be helpful, since EPA already has
an established process, would it be helpful then if the Corps
could determine those projects and then fund those through
WIFIA and EPA?
Ms. Carter. I have not looked at that as an option. But I
believe there is some legislation that is out there to that
effect. We have a CRS expert that covers the WIFIA program, and
any questions for the record that you would like to provide for
us, we are happy to answer.
Senator Ernst. I appreciate it; thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Ernst.
Senator Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I don't have a question for you, Ms. Carter, but we do
appreciate CRS, we appreciate all of your knowledge and just
CRS in general. You all do a great job and probably are not
thanked enough by us as we try and get things together. Give
yourself a big pat on the back.
Ms. Carter. Those types of comments are what keep us going.
Thank you.
Senator Boozman. We do appreciate you.
Mr. Robinson, to capitalize on America's changing economy,
it is clear that necessary infrastructure improvements must be
made to our inland waterways and ports. Arkansas and Oklahoma
have been working for years to deepen the McClellan-Kerr
Arkansas River Navigation System so barges and boats can carry
larger loads. I think about 40 percent greater loads. So it is
very, very significant.
Senator Inhofe and I both understand, and certainly we
appreciate his leadership, but also the national significance
of a 12 foot channel versus what we have now. We are going to
work really hard in WRDA 2018 to try and get that accomplished.
Can you explain why the 12 foot channel would be a benefit?
Not just for Arkansas and Oklahoma but for the country as a
whole.
Mr. Robinson. As you said, Senator Boozman--well, let me
give you an example. You know Scott McGeorge with Pine Bluff
Sand and Gravel, operating a rock quarry there in the Pine
Bluff area. The closest rock quarry to New Orleans in the
country. So Scott McGeorge and Pine Bluff Sand and Gravel were
not able to compete when New Orleans needed rock desperately.
So as a nation, we paid more for that rock than we otherwise
would have, because we weren't willing to deepen the channel.
Or we started the channel, but we didn't complete it, we didn't
go forward with it.
Senator Boozman. Along that line, I have great concern in
the sense that as recently as 2016 Bob Portis expressed concern
that the critical backlog on the NKARNS was of that nature.
That number is now ballooned to $143 million in less than 2
years. If we can continue to kick the can down the road and not
address the critical backlog, talk about that. Talk about the
effect of it, if we actually had to shut the system down,
again, not only for Arkansas and Oklahoma, but for the rest of
the country.
Also, according to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 58
percent of locks and dams are past their 50 year life
expectancy. Talk about, if we could do some more things, the
positive effect.
Mr. Robinson. The locks and dams on the NKARNS are 47 years
old. I realize that the locks and dams on the rest of the
system and in the nation are older than that. One of the
reasons that the backlog of critical maintenance is growing at
such an alarming rate is because we are nearing the end of the
50 year life that most projects like that have from an
engineering standpoint. So we are discovering new things every
time we de-water a lock, and we do that quite often in order to
make sure that we are keeping up with the maintenance that
needs to be done.
Unfortunately, the funds aren't available to do the
maintenance, even when we know they need to be done. If NKARNS
were shut down as a result of failure of the system in one way
or another, we have calculated that the cost in Oklahoma would
be $2 million a day. That is a significant cost to shippers, to
ports and terminal operators, and to the nation. It is just not
a good way to do business.
These projects were justified on expectations that the
benefits would exceed the cost. They have done that. There is
significant earnings to the Federal Government to go into the
Treasury. It is not a matter of not enough benefits and
revenues. It is a matter of using those revenues for other
purposes.
Senator Boozman. Mr. Friedman, a top priority for the
Chairman and Ranking Member, for the entire Committee, is
passing a WRDA bill. We went through a period from 2007 to 2014
where we had a gap. In 2014, 2016, we have gotten back on
track. Can you talk about what it means to have certainty with
having a WRDA bill every 2 years to address these problems?
Mr. Friedman. Sure, thank you, Senator. Yes, it is
critically important for the port industry, American industry
to have a WRDA reauthorized every 2 years, or on a regular
cycle. Because adjustments need to be made to the new
construction start authorizations as projects are designed and
then being built that, as we know, the Army Corps has been
plagued with projects that string out for many, many years,
adding costs.
It hurts the competitiveness of the nation if we can't
complete these harbor improvement projects, complete these
deepenings. A gap of 7 years, as you mentioned, is very, very
harmful.
It also gives us an opportunity to address the issue that
was brought up in terms of transparency and opening up the
decisionmaking process at the Corps, the so called black box
which we think would be good for all stakeholders to be able to
have input, to modernize the benefit cost ratio, to make sure
we are funding the best projects for the nation. So AAPA is
strongly in favor of getting back to the regular order on WRDA.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Boozman.
Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A question again for you, Ms. Ufner, dealing with
stakeholder involvement. The ground rule is that stakeholder
and project sponsor, in collaboration with the Army Corps of
Engineers, is essential to solving our water resource
challenges, which are many. And this collaboration helps to
limit the cost of missed opportunities, promotes better
planning, provides better transparency, results in more
fiscally and environmentally sound projects.
A question for you, if I could. How can the Army Corps
adapt its efforts to promote integrated planning and
management? Please.
Ms. Ufner. You are talking integrated planning from the
concept of Environmental Protection Agency but using it also
within the Army Corps of Engineers?
Senator Carper. Yes.
Ms. Ufner. And basically how to--it is a big issue for us
with water issues, whether in the Corps or the Army Corps to
address Clean Water Act issues in a holistic way. That
essentially includes potentially--I don't want to say bundling
projects, but it is a way for us to look at what is the most
important thing. We are still meeting our Clean Water Act goals
in the Corps, or EPA. But we can do it in a much more
affordable way. That is something that NACo has been supporting
within the realm of the Clean Water Act.
Senator Carper. Thanks.
I want to go back to something I said earlier in my opening
statement. I am going to ask you to join me in an airplane, and
let's go up to about 30,000 feet. I would like for you to react
to what I am going to repeat, what I said earlier. As the 2017
hurricane season illustrated, our nation--I spent some time in
Puerto Rico and spent some time in the Virgin Islands, spent
some time in Houston and saw the kind of devastation that we
are going to pay for for a long time, long, long time.
But as the recently departed hurricane season illustrated,
our nation needs to be a resilient one that is ready for the
next storm, flood, or drought event, because it is coming. In
fact, just this week, NOAA, as was said earlier, NOAA estimated
that the total cost for extreme weather and climate events
exceeded $300 billion, which is a new annual record for the
U.S. So it is clearly not a matter of if our next extreme
weather event is coming, but when.
Together, the Corps' navigation and flood risk management
activities accounted for more than 70 percent of the agency's
annual civil works appropriation. But the Corps has or shares
jurisdiction, as we know, over any number of critical civil
works program. They include environmental stewardship; they
include hydropower; they include recreation; they include
emergency management and water supply.
Unfortunately, in the mid-1980s Federal funding for new
project construction and major rehab began to decline steadily.
With this trend, the Corps in its actions has shifted to
operations, to maintenance, to rehabilitation of existing
infrastructure, and a backlog of deferred maintenance has
continued to grow ever since. As a result, much of the Corps
infrastructure is now exceeding its useful life plan.
If you were sitting on this side of the dais, as members of
this Committee, what would you be doing about it?
We will start with you, Steve, please.
Mr. Cochran. I think that situation you described is
incredibly debilitating to the people who work at the Corps of
Engineers. They are, many of them, quite skilled, quite
talented, and quite able. And yet they--the vision of what it
could be and what they need to be is completely overwhelmed by
a backlog of things that they are not getting done.
So it does seem to me that it is essential to find a way to
overcome the backlog. Not by doing all the projects; frankly,
that is not going to work. But by creating a new vision that
actually does, we talk a lot in Louisiana about getting ahead
of the next storm, the same way you talked about in your
opening statement. Well, that is critical, because otherwise
you are always playing catch up. That is what the Corps is
doing now. That is all they can do, is play catch up.
I don't actually mean this, but we should either give them
a real job to do, or we should just get rid of them. Because
the way it is right now--Mr. Robinson said earlier--everybody
has learned how to do more with less. That is just business as
usual. If you do that long enough, you give up on what you
really need to do. I think that is what the Corps has done.
Senator Carper. Thank you for that.
Ms. Carter, please.
Ms. Carter. CRS has no opinions or reactions. But one of
the topics that may be of concern in the future is the dam and
levee safety issues. The Corps should be coming out in the next
few months with reports related to some of the infrastructure
investment needs in that area, including related to I-walls,
which are one of the pieces of infrastructure that failed in
New Orleans and contributed to the costs to the Federal
Government for emergency response and recovery.
Figuring out how aging infrastructure like that fits into
the infrastructure package in the long run will help or hinder
the Government's ability to manage its risk.
Senator Carper. OK.
Well, I am going to ask you to react to what I said earlier
and just repeat it, please.
Mr. Friedman. Absolutely, Senator. With my AAPA hat on, I
would repeat what I have said, which is that our ports want to
see the continued movement toward full use and spend of the
Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. That would make a tremendous
difference for us. We are grateful for the progress that
Congress has made and you have made in that direction recently.
The numbers are remarkable from where we were 5 or 6 years ago.
Then we would again submit that our waterways, our water
infrastructure needs to be viewed very high priority in any
upcoming infrastructure legislation that is passed out of
Congress.
And then speaking for myself, if I were on your side and in
your shoes, I would think back to when the Army Corps, the days
when the Army Corps was building some of the greatest public
works projects known to man, the Panama Canal, our great dams,
and other waterways and waterworks. I think we need to get back
to that spirit of, we can do this. We have to fund it, but we
can do it, we can address these issues. I could share the view
that without enough funding, there is not much the Corps can
do. They are fighting this backlog perpetually. I think we have
to start thinking on a bigger scale to address these problems
and make that a national priority.
Senator Carper. Thank you.
Julie.
Ms. Ufner. Thank you, Senator. Actually two thoughts on
that, well, several thoughts. There is such a backlog within
the Corps, and the need within the communities are so huge.
There are communities out there that would love to partner with
the Corps on projects, but there is no funding. They don't meet
the cost-benefit analysis. And the technical assistance that
the Corps offers is so valuable.
Having said that, there is a lot of challenges within the
Corps, with the processes, the bureaucracy, complex
requirements that make it very difficult, even if counties do
want to partner with them, that they make go to other Federal
agencies first, because it may take 10 years through the Corps
as opposed to 7 years somewhere else.
Senator Carper. Good, thanks.
Mr. Robinson. I hate to beat a dead horse, but the Civil
Works program in the country for many, many, many years has
delivered significant benefits to the country. And revenues to
the Treasury, revenues far in excess of the cost of the
program. It is time to reinvest some of those earnings back
into the system, instead of using up the principal, the
capital, that was originally invested.
Senator Carper. All right, thanks. That is good. Thank you
all. This is a good hearing, and we appreciate very much all
you have added to it.
Senator Barrasso. Just a couple quick questions.
Mr. Friedman, when you talked about the days of the Panama
Canal, there is an excellent book by David McCullough, I don't
know if you have had a chance to read it, The Path Between the
Seas.
Mr. Friedman. I have read it.
Senator Barrasso. The comment about the time, the
complexity, the bureaucracy, all of those things. The title is
actually The Path Between the Seas: The Panama Canal, 1870-
1914. It spanned a 44 year plan and the issues. They actually
had to find a cure for a major disease that was killing a lot
of people down there at the time of the construction. So it was
a remarkable achievement, and it was over 100 years ago. Thanks
for bringing that up.
Ms. Ufner, there were several projects and programs passed
in the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation Act, to
reduce flooding, ice jam prevention, you mentioned mitigation
pilot programs. In your opinion, how important is preventing
flooding to the economic health of rural communities?
Ms. Ufner. To reiterate what we mentioned before, it is
immeasurable. Communities are responsible, counties in
particular are responsible for health and public safety. We
take many measures to ensure that our public is protected. We
are the first on the scene of any emergencies, flooding
disasters. When they result in deaths and/or damage to our
economies, ultimately it impacts the national economy. So it is
huge that we are able to address this long term, and figure out
the steps that we need to get there in the end together.
Senator Barrasso. One of the things I don't think I had
mentioned yet was in terms of, because I continue to advocate
maintaining this network of stream gauges and snow pack
monitors throughout the Upper Missouri Basin. I don't know if
you are familiar with these; these are gauges that are used to
monitor snow depth, snow moisture, to help inform agencies like
the Corps as to potential flooding, issues of drought as well.
So in your opinion, is there more than can be done to
better predict flood and drought than what we are doing here?
Ms. Ufner. There is definitely more than can be done. What
we are hearing from our counties is that there needs to be more
available data, and that it is reliably updated. We hear this a
lot about the LIDAR data used for NFIP, or also flood elevation
data that is not readily available and/or updated. For
communities to make the most efficient decisions in their
community, they need the most up to date information.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you. Thank all of you. Some members
may ask----
Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a question,
but I am not going to ask it now. I just want to flag it for
Mr. Cochran with regard to flood risk management and beach
nourishment. I will submit a question for the record. One of
the things that is important to a lot of us on the east coast,
from Maine down to Florida, is the issue of cost-benefit ratio
not just with regard to beach renourishment, but actually
building the dune systems and so forth that protect a lot of
our coastal towns and communities. We are going to send that to
you. Be sure to take a good look at that.
Thank you very, very much, all of you. You have done a
great job.
Senator Barrasso. In follow up, members may submitting
written questions to each and every one of you. I ask that you
follow up quickly for the record. The hearing record will
remain open for 2 weeks. I want to thank all of you for being
here, for your time and your testimony.
The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:50 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]