- FEMA: PRIORITIZING A CULTURE OF PREPAREDNESS
[Senate Hearing 115-442]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-442
FEMA: PRIORITIZING A CULTURE OF PREPAREDNESS
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON
HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
APRIL 11, 2018
__________
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
32-452 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin, Chairman
JOHN McAIN, Arizona
CLAIRE McCASKILL, Missouri
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
JON TESTER, Montana
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
HEIDI HEITKAMP, North Dakota
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
STEVE DAINES, Montana
KAMALA D. HARRIS, California
Christopher R. Hixon, Staff Director
Gabrielle D'Adamo Singer, Chief Counsel
Michael J. Lueptow, Chief Counsel for Homeland Security
M. Scott Austin, U.S. Coast Guard Detailee
Barrett F. Percival, Staff Assistant
Margaret E. Daum, Minority Staff Director
Phylicia L. Woods, Minority Counsel
Claudine J. Brenner, Minority Counsel
Joel F. Walsh, Minority Professional Staff Member
Laura W. Kilbride, Chief Clerk
Bonni E. Dinerstein, Hearing Clerk
C O N T E N T S
------
Opening statements:
Page
Senator Johnson..............................................
1
Senator McCaskill............................................
2
Senator Peters...............................................
11
Senator Harris...............................................
14
Senator Heitkamp.............................................
17
Senator Lankford.............................................
19
Senator Hassan...............................................
23
Senator Daines...............................................
26
Senator Jones................................................
28
Prepared statements:
Senator Johnson..............................................
33
Senator McCaskill............................................
34
WITNESSES
Tuesday, October 31, 2017
Honorable William B. ``Brock'' Long, Administrator, Federal
Emergency Management Agency, U.S. Department of Homeland
Security
Testimony....................................................
4
Prepared statement...........................................
39
APPENDIX
Chart referenced by Senator Johnson..............................
46
Document submitted by Senator Harris.............................
47
Statements submitted for the Record:
International Association of Emergency Managers, National
Association of Counties and National Emergency Management
Association................................................
54
National Governors Association...............................
59
Oxfam America................................................
64
America Red Cross............................................
72
Responses to post-hearing questions for the Record:
Mr. Long.....................................................
77
FEMA: PRIORITIZING A CULTURE OF PREPAREDNESS
----------
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 11, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Homeland Security
and Governmental Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room SD-342, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Ron Johnson,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Johnson, Lankford, Daines, McCaskill,
Heitkamp, Peters, Hassan, Harris, and Jones.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN JOHNSON
Chairman Johnson. Good morning. The hearing will come to
order. I can see that most of our available audience must be
over on the House side with Mr. Zuckerberg. But I certainly
want to welcome Administrator Brock Long from the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
I ask unanimous consent that my written statement be
entered in the record,\1\ and I will just have a couple opening
comments here.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Johnson appears in the
Appendix on page 33.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
First of all, I think it is without a doubt, particularly
when you take a look at the massive problem you had to deal
with, within days of being confirmed, with three hurricanes and
the wildfires out in California, there has been some pretty
dramatic improvement made, continuous improvement within FEMA's
administration of and handling of these disasters since
Hurricane Katrina. I think that is a very good thing.
But there is no doubt about that you never achieve
perfection, and there is always opportunity for additional
continuous improvement, and that is really what this hearing is
all about. Take a look at what could have been improved upon
and what do we need to do moving forward. And I know
Administrator Brock Long will talk about his Strategic Plan for
FEMA, and we will talk about a number of things.
I notice in your Strategic Plan kind of a watch word is
disasters should be federally supported, State managed, locally
executed. And I guess the only bone I would pick with that is I
would change the order of that, and I would say State managed,
locally executed, federally supported. And the reason I point
that out is, if we can put up our chart,\1\ when you take a
look at the number of Federal disaster declarations over
almost--well, we are not quite a century yet, but over the last
70 years or so, there has just been a dramatic increase over
the last three or four decades.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The chart referenced by Senator Johnson appears in the Appendix
on page 46.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is interesting to note that the high-water marks are the
year before a Presidential reelection--I do not know if there
is any correlation there or not, but, again, it has just been a
dramatic
increase, and my concern--and I think it is a legitimate
concern--is that as local and State governments look to the
Federal Government to come in--and, of course, the Federal
Government has to when we have these massive disasters. But if
State and local governments rely on FEMA time after time, if
they get addicted to FEMA, they are going to be less inclined
to really produce that culture of emergency preparedness that
you are talking about in your Strategic Plan.
So I would like you to address a little bit that potential
moral hazard in FEMA doing an even better and better job. We
want you to do a better and better job, but what we really want
is we want State and local governments to be completely
prepared so that it really can be State managed, locally
executed, federally supported.
And with that, I will turn it over to my Ranking Member,
Senator McCaskill.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR MCCASKILL\2\
Senator McCaskill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Mr. Long, for being here today. I, too, want to start with a
positive and recognize the progress that has been made since
Hurricane Katrina. I think we have all witnessed a much more
efficient and a much more effective FEMA from the lessons
learned from Hurricane Katrina and other catastrophes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The prepared statement of Senator McCaskill appears in the
Appendix on page 34.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, I cannot get through this hearing, as you might
well imagine, without talking about some of the problems that
we continue to see, especially on contracting.
I am sure you are familiar with the report that we issued
this week or last week on emergency tarps and sheeting
contracts. It was really problematic. FEMA approved this
contract without vetting, $73 million to two contractors with
no relevant past performance, one of which had only existed for
2 months, did not take appropriate steps to assess the
capabilities, and ultimately had to cancel contracts with both
companies due to their failure to deliver.
That is not the only serious contracting problem we had in
the aftermath of our hurricanes last hurricane season: a $156
million contract to deliver meals to the people of Puerto Rico.
FEMA contracted with a company in Atlanta that had one full-
time employee and a history of contract cancellations. All
someone would have had to do is check and do just some basic
due diligence to see that this company had had serious
contracting issues with the Federal Government in the past. And
I do not know how you give a $156 million contract to a company
that has one employee. I do not know how that happens.
Obviously, that contract also had to be cancelled, all of these
contracts were still at a cost to the Federal Government and,
obviously, a painful cost to the people who needed tarps and
needed meals.
We have already had tornadoes in southeast Missouri this
year. We have extensive flooding in Michigan, Ohio, and
Wisconsin, and our hurricane season begins in 2 months. I would
love to spend some time talking about what steps you have
taken, particularly on the contracting front. And I think we
have to obviously now expect that you might get slammed with
three hurricanes, because you all were dealing with Texas,
Florida, and Puerto Rico simultaneously. And I understand the
stress that puts on the contracting system, but you have to
prepare for that. That is what this is all about. We now know
that that very easily could happen, and clearly we have to
anticipate it.
I also would like you to address the 2019 budget proposal
that the President put forward in February. The proposed budget
was stunning to me. The President wanted to cut funding for
counterterrorism grants; he wanted to eliminate training and
exercise programs that give State and local emergency
responders the skills they need for natural disasters. It would
slash the pre-disaster mitigation grants and Federal flood
mapping programs that obviously are very important for our
preparation for future natural disasters. It does not build the
culture of preparedness that I know you embrace, and I want to
have a frank discussion about how we move forward.
Obviously, I do want to end my opening comments by
complimenting the Federal workforce and the National Guard who
appropriately are always on the front line for natural disaster
response. And I know how proud I am of Missouri's National
Guard and the work they do and the training that they have to
deal with natural disasters. I hope, especially as we get into
the hurricane season and get into the tornado season, that they
are not in any way depleted in terms of their ability to
respond to these natural disasters because of a political
pulling to the border.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. It is the tradition of this Committee to
swear in witnesses, so if you will stand and raise your right
hand. Do you swear that the testimony you will give before this
Committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, so help you, God?
Mr. Long. I do.
Chairman Johnson. Please be seated.
Senator McCaskill did beat me to the punch in wanting to
extend this Committee's gratitude to the entire Federal
workforce. I would love to have you kind of mention a little
bit about that in your opening statement as well, the
Operations Center. It was not just FEMA employees or the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) employees. These were
individuals from around the Federal Government, different
agencies that came and manned that Operations Center 24/7 for a
couple of months at least. So if you can mention that, I would
appreciate that.
But we also want to thank you for your service. You started
and you were hit with something that this Nation quite honestly
has never seen in terms of disaster management, so we want to
thank you for that.
Our witness is the Honorable Brock Long, who is the
Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. In
his role he leads FEMA's workforce to fulfill its mission in
responding to natural disasters and emergencies facing the
United States, including in 2017 Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and
Maria, and the California wildfires. Administrator Long.
TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE WILLIAM ``BROCK'' LONG,\1\
ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Mr. Long. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member McCaskill, and
Senator Peters, thank you so much for allowing me to be here
today. I guess this marks the fifth time I have been before
Congress in 9 months since coming on board, and I want to stop
and thank you as well, because as you alluded to, Chairman,
emergency management and disaster response and recovery
requires the whole community. It requires all of us being
unified, and for us to get better to ultimately build a more
resilient and prepared Nation, it requires me communicating to
you about our needs and the Congress acting, as you have, and I
appreciate it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Long appears in the Appendix on
page 39.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thank you for the three supplementals, and not only the
three supplementals, but specifically the authorities that were
provided to FEMA in and around the challenges that we faced
with the deferred maintenance issues in Puerto Rico. They are
much needed to be able to build a stronger, more resilient
Puerto Rico going forward. And I look forward to continuing to
ask you for your support on several different authorities that
I believe we need as a Nation to push forward and make a
better-prepared Nation.
To wrap the magnitude and to put the numbers around the
magnitude of what we went through, we estimate now that about
47 million Americans, or 15 percent of the population, were in
some way, shape, or form impacted by the events from just
Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria and the California
wildfires.
We have registered approximately 4.8 million just under 5
million people in our individual assistance system to kick-
start recovery. We cannot make people whole, but just to kick-
start it. But to put that into context, more than half of the
survivors that FEMA has registered over the past 10 years were
put into our system within the last 9 months. That is an
extraordinary number. And, again, all of these numbers are
moving targets because we are putting more and more down every
day and putting more and more people in different places. But
as of April 10, FEMA has provided approximately $22 billion
just to three hurricanes and the California wildfires down to
those who were impacted; $11 billion of that has gone to the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico alone.
In addition, I appreciate the thanks toward my staff. These
men and women do not get credit for what they do. They are
working disasters in 35 States and territories this year.
Thirty-five. They work around the clock. They sacrifice their
personal lives to take care of others. It is an honor to lead
these people every day.
Major lessons learned. Survivable and redundant
communications is something that we have to tackle with the
private vendors. We cannot lose communications. Forget
interoperability. We have to have the ability to operate and
communicate. And we lost that. We need all-hazards
communications capabilities. We have got to streamline a very
fragmented recovery process. As I have said, recovery funding
comes from 17 different Federal Government agencies, and it is
too difficult to understand what you are entitled to and how to
put it to work.
I need greater granting authority. I want to hit the reset
button on disaster housing. I need greater granting authority.
It is not the Federal Housing Management Agency. It is not the
Federal Electricity Management Agency. I need greater granting
authority to do housing more effectively and efficiently and to
allow Governors greater ability to control their own destiny.
Of course, training emergency managers all over the country
at all levels is the most important thing that we need. Nothing
is more important than the well-trained emergency manager.
We need to increase State management costs to allow them to
be able to hire force account labor or consulting firms to
augment their staff as well, which would require some
legislative changes. And, obviously, it is a no-brainer: More
investment in pre-disaster mitigation rather than doing it
after the fact is ultimately going to reduce disaster costs.
But I also have some other ideas that we can change about why
we repair public facilities that could be covered by private
insurance. If you want to reduce disaster costs, maybe we
should look at things like that.
Going forward, yes, we have put forward a new Strategic
Plan that I am not only asking just my staff to embrace, but I
am asking the whole community and all of you to embrace. We
took 2,300 comments from our constituents. We are taking
lessons learned from 2017. We do a trend analysis. We arrive at
three major goals that are supported by four subset goals:
Build a true culture of preparedness, which we do not have.
We have to increase the access to tangible training to our
citizens for doing Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). One in
four of us is going to do CPR in our lifetime, according to the
Red Cross. We have to financially get them ready. Asset poverty
is getting in the way, which is increasing the need for
individual assistance on FEMA's back end. Too many people are
letting mortgages lapse, as we saw in the California wildfires,
to have extra money in their retirement. So, therefore, it puts
more drain on FEMA on the individual assistance side. So we
have to cover the insurance gaps. Insurance is the first line
of defense, not FEMA assistance. We have to incentivize pre-
disaster mitigation. The key to resiliency is at the local
level--land-use planning, building codes--and we should
incentivize that as a country to make sure that local leaders
are doing that. FEMA cannot create a resilient community on its
own.
Goal 2, ready the Nation for catastrophic disasters. I do
not believe we are ready to go for the low-to no-notice events,
the catastrophic earthquake in California or the New Madrid,
because there is too much of a gap on depending on FEMA to do
things such as life-saving, life-sustaining commodities.
Ranking Member, in your report it correctly points out we
have to do more pre-event contracts, but not just at FEMA. We
need those at the State and local level. We need to make sure
that State leaders and local leaders are putting pre-event
contracts in place that I would happily reimburse once they
activate to do their own level of food, water, hygiene kits,
and the things that they need, because if we have a no-notice
event, like a New Madrid or a Cascadia or a large earthquake in
California, it is going to take some time for us to be able to
mobilize our forces to get there, if we can even get in.
Goal 3, reduce the complexity of FEMA. I am my own worst
critic and I am the agency's worst critic when it comes to
doing things better. There are policies that we can streamline.
But we have to streamline specifically the disaster survivor
experience. We have to streamline the grantee experience. I am
empowering my staff to help me, and my constituents, to help me
understand where to make those changes. We had to perform 2.4
million home inspections this year, physically deploy people to
look at almost 2.5 million homes. That is an arduous
bureaucratic process when we have technology that can say, yes,
it is damaged. It puts me in a tough spot because we have to
protect the taxpaying dollar against fraud, but we also have to
move at lightning speed.
Finally, in closing, there is a misunderstanding that
recovery has not started in Puerto Rico. That is not the case.
I was in Puerto Rico last week. I met with the Governor as well
as my staff. We are pushing forward on 428. We have signed an
agreement, the guidelines to move forward to do large-scale,
sector-based, resilient work. The Section 428 will force us all
to think what is the recovery outcome that we are all striving
for so that we can put taxpaying money against that to strive
for a collective vision to ultimately make sure that we do not
walk through this whole situation again when hurricanes are
obviously going to hit in the future.
I look forward to the dialogue today and the constant
improvement. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Administrator Long.
I will be brief and turn it over to questions, but I did
want you to detail a little bit more the 428 authority and how
important that is, rather than, thousands of individual grants,
create a larger grant bucket so, again, you are streamlining
that possibility or the approval for those types of things. So
just spend a little bit more time talking about that, if you
would.
Mr. Long. So the 428 program allows for more alternative
procedures. It makes no sense in this country if we put
taxpaying dollars to say let us fix the jurisdiction back to
the pre-disaster condition, only to go through this again and
again and again.
The other thing is that 428 is the way that business is
done in America every day. If I give you a budget and tell you
to reach X amount of milestones, you have to reach those
milestones against that budget so that we are calculated on how
we move forward and push forward. And then if you manage it
well, for example, if 428 is managed well in Puerto Rico, then
what is left over in that budget they can keep to do other
things like pre-disaster mitigation, so there is incentive
built in.
The old way of doing business, for example, there were
thousands of roadway breaches into the system, thousands of
issues in the water system, thousands of problems with the
schools, many problems in the hospital system. Instead of
writing a single project work sheet to fix this roadway breach
and that roadway breach, that can be re-versioned for the next
10 or 15 years, over and over and over again, this says let us
do one project work sheet to fix the infrastructure called
``roads'' or the infrastructure called ``schools,'' the
infrastructure called ``hospitals,'' and we collectively push
forward.
Chairman Johnson. So spend a little bit more time
explaining how the law in certainly the past and maybe
currently requires FEMA just to rebuild, I mean kind of full
replacement as opposed to, no, let us be smart about this, let
us build something that is far more resilient to newer
standards. Just talk a little bit about your constraints that
still exist.
Mr. Long. Right. So take the power grid, for example. The
power grid on Puerto Rico is one of the oldest on the globe, so
it is nearly four decades old. There are serious problems when
it comes to just power generation in general and the way that
it is done. So the emergency process that we go through to make
sure that people can have power is the emergency process of
just getting the lights back on. The 428 process, for example,
is going to allow the Commonwealth, if they so choose and as we
are pushing, to do things such as replace wooden poles with
composite poles that will be there for much longer and harder
to blow down in the future or they are wind resistant. It is
making improvements and changes through alternative procedures
to better the system.
I look at 428--and, also, I met with Governor Mapp from the
U.S. Virgin Islands (USVI) yesterday. This is the way forward.
This is the way forward to build resilience which will
ultimately bolster their economic capabilities so that they do
not have gaps when they lose hotels and roadway systems and
power systems that are not consistent.
Chairman Johnson. But I get the sense 428 is an exception
to the rule, and the rule is rebuild to what it was.
Mr. Long. Right.
Chairman Johnson. Which is somewhat insane from my
standpoint. How much of what FEMA is rebuilding is done just as
a complete replacement versus upgrading the standard?
Mr. Long. Well, under the emergency work, it is a fraction
of what needs to be done on the permanent side, and I think
that we have to remember that you do not just build--I mean,
just expanding a lane out here in D.C. on a major highway takes
years. We are talking about a lot of work ahead of us and some
of the first initial estimates for just Puerto Rico, for
example--and here again, these numbers will change as we start
to dig in--is anywhere between $40 and $50 billion when we
encroach on this. I think it is important, Chairman, that 428
is not a new program. It is just that we have not educated
Governors and emergency managers on how this process works.
There are projects that were being used in Louisiana as a
result of the flooding. It was used in Hurricane Sandy.
The greatest concern that the Governors have is hopefully
we hit that estimate right on the first go-around when we enter
into the agreement to fix the hospitals and the schools and the
way forward. It is a much more efficient process that allows
for mitigation to be incorporated in as we go forward.
Chairman Johnson. OK. Well, thank you. Senator McCaskill.
Senator McCaskill. So should we require Puerto Rico to put
up the composite poles with the money we give them?
Mr. Long. That is a question for the legislature. I do not
have the authority to require a Governor to do anything when it
comes to being resilient.
Senator McCaskill. It just seems weird to me because the
Governors, I mean, there is way too much thought around this
place and around everybody in elective office that they are
just worrying about the next election cycle and maybe not
enough concern about long term. It just seems to me--I am not
big on the Federal Government dictating to localities, but if
it is Federal money and we are the ones that are going to be on
the hook for more Federal money if they put back up the wooden
poles that blow over again, that seems that we ought to
incentivize it maybe that you get 10 percent more if you show
resiliency in your plans. Maybe we do this with the carrot, not
the stick.
Mr. Long. Right.
Senator McCaskill. And maybe that would be easier on the
whole friction between local control and Federal control. I
just throw that out there.
The contracting thing, I am not going to put you through
the painful process of acknowledging how bad these contracts
were. I think you know how bad they were, particularly
Tribute's contract proposal. I do not know if you have had a
chance to read it.
Mr. Long. No, ma'am, but what I can say on the contracts--
and I realize we have work here again.
Senator McCaskill. Pretty obvious.
Mr. Long. I was in office 2 months before Hurricane Harvey
hit, but the facts are we had 59 pre-event contracts in place
before Hurricane Harvey hit, as I understand it, and that is
based on a historical need over the past 10 years or so.
Obviously, it was not enough going into what we saw. We let an
additional 1,973 contracts after Hurricane Harvey hit. So out
of that 1,973 contracts, only 3 that I am aware of were
canceled. OK?
Senator McCaskill. That is just not true. Your folks are
giving you the wrong numbers. There were at least 14 that were
canceled.
Mr. Long. OK. Well, I will have to----
Senator McCaskill. The three that you know about it are the
three that were so egregious, they made the press.
Mr. Long. OK.
Senator McCaskill. But you need your staff to do a better
job because I know you testified to that previously. The
records show that at least 14 hurricane response contracts were
canceled, and, frankly, at least 7 of those cancellations
appear to be due to the vendor's failure to be able to meet the
requirements.
Mr. Long. Sure. Well, there is one problem across the
Federal Government----
Senator McCaskill. And, by the way, how many they were does
not necessarily show how impactful they were. Obviously, it was
30 million meals that were supposed to be delivered--30 million
meals--and they had delivered 50,000 before everybody figured
out it was a joke.
Mr. Long. So here again we try to build in redundancy and
resiliency into our contracting, so we do not rely on one
contractor. For example, Bronze Star had two contracts. One of
them was for blue tarps. I think the other one was plastic
sheeting. We canceled that. Not one dollar of taxpaying money
went to those contracts. But we also had four or five other
vendors that were providing blue
tarps, and at the end of the day, these were backfilling--we
pre-staged--we tried to get as much on the island as possible,
then keep backfilling the logistics pipeline. So there was
never a stop-gap on blue sheeting or tarp or food. The thing
about food was it was not that we could not get food to the
island. We actually purchased around, I think it was, $2
billion worth of commodities which would rank as one of FEMA's
most expensive disasters in history alone, just commodities
getting to Puerto Rico. It was messaging because the
communications system was put down.
One of the things that I want to make sure that everybody
is aware of is that Tribute had problems in the Legislative
Branch of government, and it was never put on our radar screen
to be able to see it in the Executive Branch. So the systems
that we use to initially--so they did work for the Government
Publishing Office (GPO). Well, the GPO sends out an alert under
the Legislative Branch, but it does not translate to the
Executive Branch. So apparently the Legislative, Executive, and
Judicial branches are using different systems to say, ``Stay
away.'' Had that translated to the Executive Branch, we would
have seen it and never even thought twice about touching it.
Senator McCaskill. Yes, I think there were contracts
canceled that were in the Executive Branch by this company. We
do not do that much contracting in the Legislative Branch. The
contracting is, by and large, all done in the Executive Branch.
So I am not saying that the databases are perfect. I am not
saying--but I am saying that some due diligence and common
sense beyond just checking three databases for a red flag is
going to be required here.
The reason I asked you if you read the Tribute contract
proposal is because I think if you read it, you will be
startled. It reads like an Internet scam.
Mr. Long. OK.
Senator McCaskill. You should take the time, honestly,
Administrator, to read that contract proposal, because I think
when you do, your common sense, you would just go, ``Wait a
minute. This does not even look real.''
Mr. Long. Sure, so fair enough.
Senator McCaskill. Let us talk about the tarps. We looked
at your pre-positioned contracts on tarps, and obviously you
know you are going to need sheeting and tarps in any kind of
hurricane disaster. So we looked at your pre-positioned
contracts, and we looked at the contracts that were issued
after all the 2017 hurricanes, and only 3.5 percent of the
total amount awarded for tarps and sheeting went to pre-
positioned contracts. So I think this is something you have to
drill down on.
Mr. Long. Sure.
Senator McCaskill. Because, clearly, we are not using--in
this instance the pre-positioned contracts were not even being
used. And, second, clearly we did not have enough pre-
positioned contracts to deal with the kinds of challenges that
you were facing.
Mr. Long. Right.
Senator McCaskill. So do you have any answer as to why only
3 percent of the pre-positioned contracts would have been used
on tarps and sheeting, how we would have been in a position to
hire somebody who clearly had been in existence for 2 months?
Mr. Long. So, listen, I agree. The bottom line is we can
always get better on the pre-positioned contracting, but it is
not solely the responsibility of FEMA. This has to be the
responsibility of State agencies as well as local emergency
management, which is something that we are pushing FEMA
integration teams out, I am getting my people out of my
regional offices and out of headquarters. I want to embed them
on a permanent basis with our State agencies to start setting
up their own contracts.
Senator McCaskill. Can we do something to help that? Can we
begin to make a requirement--for example, we do a lot of grants
to States for emergency preparedness. Can we make a condition
of those grants that they pre-position contracts for disaster
for things like sheeting, tarps, food, water?
Mr. Long. Sure.
Senator McCaskill. I do not think that needs legislation,
does it?
Mr. Long. I am all for incentivizing good behavior like
pre-disaster mitigation, land-use planning, building codes,
putting forward contracts. Some States have it. Too many of
them do not. We have to push forward on how we get them to set
up and exactly what they need.
What we also experienced in 2017 was a drain on resources.
I mean, right now you cannot find enough construction materials
to get to the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico. We saw a drain on
resources everywhere. So when it comes to almost 2,000
contracts that we let, there is very little time to do the due
diligence as if this was a blue-sky day and we had plenty of
time to think about it.
So what we have to go back and do is we have to look at the
contractors that performed extremely well and are performing
well to make sure that they are part of our pre-event cadre
going forward.
Senator McCaskill. Well, I know this Committee--and I am
confident the Chairman would agree with me on this--whatever we
can do to help incentivize States to be better prepared to
handle some of this, that we then can confidently reimburse the
State officials that have found the right contractors to
deliver, in the long run it is going to be so much less
expensive when they have located people locally to provide this
anyway.
Mr. Long. Right.
Senator McCaskill. And it is better for the States. You
build up that base of contracting capability in the States. So
I look forward to working with you on that, and thank you very
much for your time here today.
Mr. Long. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. And we would obviously love the input
from FEMA in terms of which States have the pre-let contracts,
and I am happy to work with you to include requirements on any
kind of FEMA grants, or whatever is under this Committee's
jurisdiction in terms of grants.
Mr. Long. OK.
Chairman Johnson. That would make an awful lot of sense.
I would also just quickly ask, the constraint in terms of
number of workers in terms of disaster relief.
Mr. Long. Sure.
Chairman Johnson. Former Congressman Reid Ribble is head of
the Roofing Association, and I think DHS called him looking for
20,000 roofers, and he is short 20,000 roofers.
Mr. Long. Yes, sir. So let us talk about that, too. At one
point--and here again the numbers are so huge in what we are
dealing with, it is hard to say here is exactly what we were
spending today. But at one point we were spending close to $300
million a day. That is FEMA. That is the Federal Government,
putting that down to help others. When I was State Director of
Alabama Emergency Management Agency, I bet my general fund
budget was, if I remember correctly, somewhere close to about
$6 million. So, basically, FEMA is spending every hour or 2
hours, the general fund budget set aside for a State emergency
management agency.
What 2017 has taught not only us--there are plenty of
lessons learned for FEMA to get better, but it is a call to the
State legislators and local elected officials to make sure that
their emergency management agencies at the State level and
their local emergency managers are well staffed and well
budgeted, and we cannot ignore the fact that disasters seem to
be getting worse.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Peters.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PETERS
Senator Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Long, it is
good to see you. You have been a very busy man. We appreciate
your attendance here today.
I am also encouraged by the comments you have made related
to reducing the complexity with FEMA. Certainly that is
something that we must do, and I appreciate your focus on that,
also taking and using taxpayer dollars much more efficiently
than they have been done in the past. And one of those programs
in particular is the Public Assistance Alternative Procedure
428, which you have already spoken about in relation to Puerto
Rico, which will be using those monies.
But I have also heard some concerns from folks that this
new program could shift costs to Puerto Rico without ultimately
saving total funds on recovery efforts, especially if any
unforeseen challenges should emerge. I would imagine that
certainly Members on this Committee would also have concerns
about accepting estimates from the Federal Government without
input or without at least significant input into those
estimates.
So I have just a yes-or-no question to start, and then I
have some other questions afterwards. So this is simply yes or
no. Did anyone in those meetings held after the storm in the
White House--you, the President, Mr. Mulvaney, Mr. Bossert, or
anyone else--either implicitly or explicitly suggest to
Governor Rossello or his leadership team that Federal funding
or support for permanent work in Puerto Rico would be withheld,
altered, or limited unless he requested to use the 428 program
as modified by the text found in the amended declaration?
Mr. Long. No. The bottom line is Governor Rossello is not a
Governor that can be strong-armed, and I have yet to meet a
Governor that could be strong-armed. That is just not the
approach that we take with FEMA, no.
Senator Peters. OK. Good. As the Chairman noted, costs
associated with disasters continue to rise all the time. You
are well aware of that as well. But ensuring accountability and
efficient use of taxpayer dollars must always be our top
priority.
In Puerto Rico, the Federal assistance they stand to
receive exceeds their entire annual budget over many times,
actually. And in late November, Governor Rossello held a press
conference and indicated FEMA will have unprecedented authority
over approval and use of the money on the island.
Could you describe this unprecedented authority that FEMA
is instituting in Puerto Rico and what specifically the
Commonwealth must do to provide to FEMA prior to being allowed
to draw down any funds?
Mr. Long. So here again, we had to implement a manual
drawdown process for Puerto Rico because of the liquidity
issues. This is going to sound harsh to Puerto Rico, and that
is not the case. I am not trying to be harsh, but the bottom
line is that the Commonwealth had not been able to demonstrate
the fact that they were going to be able to manage this amount
of money wisely, and it is my due diligence to protect the
taxpaying dollars. Initially, when we were putting money in the
hands of the Commonwealth, too much money was beginning to be
drawn down at a quick rate that did not make sense to us, so we
put a stop on it, and we implemented what is called the ``270
process,'' where it is a manual drawdown process to ensure that
the money is going where it needs to be and in a thoughtful
process.
The Governor and I spoke about this last week, and we
continue to put forward--and my conversation with the Governor
was, listen, if you want us to relax the manual drawdown
process, then I need to understand specifically what the
Commonwealth's plan is to manage money and how this is going to
be done. He and Mike Byrne, my FCO, are working through the
best way forward, because, yes, the manual drawdown process
does slow things down. But I am caught between a rock and a
hard place all the time on move at the speed of light, and
protect the taxpaying dollar. So we are trying to strike the
right balance, and the Governor and I have had very productive
conversations, which is why we are able to move forward now.
Senator Peters. OK. Economic analysis on the Sheltering and
Temporary Essential Power (STEP) Program, during Hurricane
Sandy response indicated that the program could save the
government upwards of $170,000 per household when compared to
the traditional individual assistance options. I am certainly
very encouraged, we all should be encouraged by the innovative
nature of this program, and certainly it is my hope that we can
continue to prioritize cost savings and recovery.
My understanding is that the program, though, was slow to
deploy in Texas and that most people had already found
alternative housing or were taking advantage of the shelters or
TSA Program, presumably at much higher cost to the Federal
Government since housing assistance is paid for at 100 percent
cost share, as you are fully aware. So my question is: How can
FEMA, through incentives in the emergency management grant
programs or through guidance from FEMA, ensure that States are
prepared to leverage these cost-saving programs and
successfully manage the very complex web of housing assistance
with real case management that oftentimes seems to be lacking?
Mr. Long. Senator, this is an excellent question, and if I
can take a minute, I am ready to hit the reset button on
housing, period. I think the entire program is wasteful. I am
just being honest. I think what we have to hit the reset
button. I believe I need granting authorities, and I would hope
that this Committee could lead the way for us to redo disaster
housing.
Right now, what we did with Texas specifically is that we
knew because of the multitude of homes that were impacted that
the traditional way of doing business was not going to work.
When people say housing is moving slowly; compared to what
mission moved quickly in housing in history? I do not know
where one moved quickly, but the bottom line is we put up more
options on the table for Texas through direct construction,
through the STEP Program, through temporary repairs that were
made, and then we also allowed the Governor to be able to
purchase through inter-service agreements manufactured homes
and travel trailers. But the problem is if I go through an
intergovernmental service agreement to the Governor, who boldly
stepped up to lead the housing--and he is one of the only
Governors that has truly done this--he has to follow my
procurement rules and not the State procurement rules.
So what I need specifically is granting authority to do
housing to where I can grant the funding to the Governor and
the Governor can control whether or not he or she would like to
do the STEP Program, direct construction to the house, or to
buy travel trailers off the lot. The most frustrating thing to
me in Texas is when you are driving out of town and there are
not enough manufactured homes in this country based on the way
that I have to purchase them to be able to get to Texas, but I
drive past private RV lots filled with travel trailers that I
cannot touch. It makes no sense. If you give me the granting
authority to push down to a Governor, they can go buy what they
need, and I reimburse them, and it is much quicker.
Governors know their people better than FEMA, and they know
how the housing solutions will work. The fact of the matter is
a housing plan in Texas is not going to work for what we saw in
California. It is not going to work in Puerto Rico, either. So
it has to be granting authority that allows a Governor a
multitude of options based on whether it was a flood, whether
it was a wind event, or whether it was a catastrophic fire.
So I am ready to hit the reset button. I think what we are
good at, sir, we are good at mission assigning, the Army Corps
of Engineers to do blue roofs. They did over 60,000 blue roofs
in Puerto Rico, for example. We are good at supporting shelter
efforts. We sheltered over 1.1 million Americans in 2017. At
one point there were close to 300,000 Americans in shelters
overnight. We are good at doing that. We are pretty good at
getting money to the citizen who needs to repair their home.
But after that, I am not a housing construction expert. It
needs to go to the Governor. The Governor needs to be empowered
to be able to do what they want to do with a permanent housing
construction. Then, when it gets too difficult for both FEMA
and the Governor and the damage to the house is greater than 50
percent, this is where the Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
needs to step in. This is where the funding needs to come in
for HUD to deal with the hard case that we are just not
designed to manage.
Senator Peters. Well, I appreciate that answer, Mr. Long,
and I would love to have a chance to work with you as we try to
sort that through. I am out of time. I have a number of other
very detailed types of questions that I would like to present
to you and work with your staff.
Mr. Long. OK.
Senator Peters. And I think there will be other
opportunities for us to work together to achieve the goal which
you want to achieve, which is to streamline FEMA as well as
make it more responsive in terms of taxpayer money.
Mr. Long. Yes, sir. Thank you.
Senator Peters. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. By the way, you just confirmed why your
optimal disaster response tag line needs to be reordered to
State managed, locally executed, federally supported. This is
to-do number two, the grants on the one side and then in terms
of housing assistance as well. So let us work together with
your agency to give you the authority you need. Senator Harris.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HARRIS
Senator Harris. Administrator Long, I want to thank you for
the work that you have done as a priority for you as the leader
of FEMA and the men and women of FEMA have done in California
in response to the fires and the mudslides. That work has been
right on time and been very helpful, so thank you for that.
I would also like to submit a letter for the record from
the California Office of Emergency Services\1\ concerning the
Administration's Fiscal Year (FY) 2019 budget request for FEMA.
In particular, the letter outlines California's concerns that
the Administration's budget for FEMA has reduced Federal
funding for education, training, and exercises by 47 percent
and reduced Federal funding for pre-disaster mitigation grants
by 61 percent. Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit that for
the record, please.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The letter referenced by Senator Harris appears in the Appendix
on page 47.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chairman Johnson. Without objection.
Senator Harris. Mr. Long, I appreciate that in your
testimony this morning you said, and I think I am quoting you
directly, ``We cannot ignore the fact that disasters seem to be
getting worse.'' And I could not agree more.
However, in contrast, I am concerned that FEMA has removed
references to climate change from its Strategic Plan. The
previous plan, which covered 2014 through 2018, specifically
mentioned climate and climate change seven times and devoted an
entire section to how climate change impacts the risks that
communities face. What concerns me is that the current
Strategic Plan does not mention climate, let alone climate
change, not even once.
In response, FEMA's Public Affairs Director stated, it is
``evident that this Strategic Plan fully incorporates future
risks from all hazards, regardless of cause.'' And I will tell
you specifically what I am concerned about with that. Climate
change itself does not cause natural disasters but, rather,
acts as a force multiplier, meaning it exacerbates the
environmental conditions that favor disasters like wildfires
and large wildfires. So when it comes to these devastating
natural disasters, we cannot plan for the future, I believe,
without acknowledging, understanding, and incorporating the
impacts of climate change.
So my question to you is: How can FEMA adequately prepare
for future disasters without acknowledging, recognizing, and,
in fact, even removing acknowledgment?
Mr. Long. So I really appreciate the question, Senator,
and, look, I believe the climate is changing. I believe that
the ocean is rising about 1 inch every decade. But I also
believe there are other cycles that increase and decrease
activity, such as thermal circulation. That is how the oceans
flow around this Earth like a river. It increases, it pumps
warm water and cold water in and out of hurricane basins, for
20-and 30-year purposes. OK? I believe in El Nino and La Nina
and the cycles that take place, and to me El Nino means less
hurricanes, freak nor'easter snowstorms, and tornadoes in
places that they do not typically get them. It has implications
for wildfires in California.
The Strategic Plan also does not mention earthquakes. It
does not mention school shootings. It does not mention anything
specifically because we are an all-hazards agency regardless of
cause or frequency.
I cannot solve climate change. That would be similar to me
saying let us stop plate tectonics and stop earthquakes as well
while we are at it.
Senator Harris. So, Mr. Long, I appreciate your point, and
we do not have to belabor this. But I only have a few minutes
left.
Mr. Long. OK.
Senator Harris. And all I would ask you is that we not play
politics with issues like this, because as you and I both know,
those folks who are devastated by these tragic events are not
thinking of themselves as Democrats or Republicans.
Mr. Long. Right.
Senator Harris. They are thinking of themselves as American
citizens who need help and need their government to be honest
about what is causing and what is exacerbating these situations
that are affecting their lives and the lives of their children
and communities.
So moving on to earthquake preparedness, I appreciate that
in your opening statement you mentioned it at least a couple of
times. According to the United States Geological Survey (USGS),
there is a 72-percent chance that a large 6.7 magnitude
earthquake will strike the Bay Area in California within the
next 30 years. The last time FEMA responded to a major
earthquake in California was a quarter of a century ago, the
Northridge earthquake.
So my question to you is--with the potential for a major
earthquake to happen at any time, it is obviously imperative
that FEMA be prepared to deal with this. How are you ensuring
that FEMA is ready to respond to the next catastrophic
earthquake, and using all that is available in terms of the
resources and technology that did not exist a quarter of a
century ago. So what is happening, and also in light of the
fact that there is now reduced support for your agency in terms
of training in the budget that has been submitted by the
Administration?
Mr. Long. Senator, going back to the Strategic Plan, Goal 2
is ready the Nation for catastrophic disasters. I recognize it.
It keeps me up at night, the low-to no-notice event, whether it
is a nation-state threat or an earthquake.
So the bottom line is that I have to move my staff out to
do better integrated planning with the State of California, for
example, and other States. I want to get my people out to be
part of the discussion every day to make sure that we
understand the gaps fully in California's ability to rapidly
respond, because if a major earthquake strikes one of the
cities, San Francisco, for example, we may not be able to get
supplies in very quickly if the roadway structures there--and I
realize that. So we have to make sure that the State bolsters
their own capability and that we are incentivizing them to do
so.
The other thing is that, going back to the original
question and on top of this one, nothing is more effective than
pre-disaster mitigation. So here again, I do not control the
resiliency at the local level. We need to make sure that when
people are building and populating areas that are vulnerable to
earthquakes or vulnerable to hurricanes, that they are doing so
in a mitigated manner. The way we address mitigation in this
country is regressive.
Senator Harris. I agree with you.
Mr. Long. You have to have it.
Senator Harris. We have to do a better job. I agree with
that.
Mr. Long. We need to do a better job.
Senator Harris. Can you provide us, please, with a
timeline\1\ for what your plan is for making sure that FEMA is
prepared for California's earthquakes and what you might need
from California State government? Can you please provide me
with that as a follow up to this conversation?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The timeline referenced by Senator Harris appears in the
Appendix on page 79.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Long. We would be happy to.
Senator Harris. And then, finally, a question concerning
the USVI and Puerto Rico. You probably know that 7 months after
the hurricane, a lot of the folks in Puerto Rico, for example,
cannot access disaster aid because so many of them cannot
provide official documentation that they own their property.
This is one of the issues that contrasts the States like
California with the territories. And, in fact, in Puerto Rico
they have a history, a widespread history of informal land
ownership, and that makes it difficult for them to obviously
provide this information, which means they cannot then have
access to the aid that you otherwise would provide.
Mr. Long. Sure.
Senator Harris. Can you tell me what your systems are for
verifying proof of ownership so they can have access to that
aid and what your plan is for the future, knowing that they
have this informal system of land ownership?
Mr. Long. So I think what is best is I acknowledge,
Senator, you are right, the old way of doing business was not
ready to handle this cultural problem that we have when it
comes to ownership. What happens is that the actual homeowner
may live in the continental United States. It could be a
grandmother, a grandfather, or an aunt or uncle, and it is
something that we are trying to work with, to overcome, to try
to locate who actually owns the home, because we may be bound
by the authorities of the Stafford Act to where it is hard for
us to get around that.
So what I would like to do is work with my team to say here
are the fixes that we need to get around or these are the fixes
that we are temporarily putting into place.
Senator Harris. Can you give us a timeline\1\ on when you
expect that understanding and that system within FEMA to be
established?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The information referred by Senator Harris appears in the
Appendix on page 89.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Long. Sure, absolutely.
Senator Harris. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Earlier in the hearing, I used the term
``moral hazard,'' and I think I should point out one of the
major reasons for the increasing costs of these disasters is
the very high priced development that has occurred throughout
the decades in these disaster-prone areas. Again, that is that
moral hazard that somebody else takes care of the cost, they
continue to do that. How many times do people rebuild in the
flood zone? So I think that is a real problem. Senator
Heitkamp.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HEITKAMP
Senator Heitkamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Administrator Long. You have had quite a tenure since we all
got together during your confirmation hearing, and we have
watched very closely and understand and appreciate that your
experience with Hurricane Katrina may have helped inform, but I
am very concerned about what is happening in Puerto Rico, very
concerned about the ongoing challenges that Puerto Rico
experiences. And I think, just because it is not on the front
page of the news, I want to acknowledge that the whole country
should be helping to help Puerto Rico recover. As a State like
North Dakota where we had a whole city taken out, we had
exactly the same problems. People could not access paperwork.
We have to figure it out, and we have to be engaged and re-
engaged in Puerto Rico.
But I want to talk about something that is probably nearer
and dearer to my heart, which is communications systems and the
ability to have redundant and navigable communications systems
during a disaster.
In response to one of my questions for the record in a
previous hearing, you noted that agencies must proactively
develop logistics community plans that mitigate the
destruction, disruption, and overload of communication
capabilities.
Mr. Long. Sure.
Senator Heitkamp. I could not agree with you more that this
has to be integrated and, this is not something that you build
from the top down. We build from the bottom up. To date, what
steps have agencies taken to develop those continuity plans?
And what role are you playing in the development of those
plans? I think this has to be one of our highest priorities.
Mr. Long. So actually improving continuity and resiliency
of communications capability is Goal 2.4, and we are putting a
lot of effort into reviving continuity of operations,
continuity of communications.
The problem that we may run into is I do not know how much
of local and State governments have control over to influence
how the private sector builds a resilient backbone into the
communications system that we operate on.
Senator Heitkamp. Can you explain that for me?
Mr. Long. For example, in Puerto Rico a lot of the
communications systems that we are dependent upon are owned by
other private companies. They are not owned by the Federal
Government, State government, or the local governments, and so
the private company has to come in and fix it. What they will
tell you, and probably rightfully so, is that the technology
changes so rapidly that to invest in a mitigated system is
costly because the technology constantly has to be changed and
the systems have to be upgraded to keep up with the way
technology and information flows----
Senator Heitkamp. So to that end, obviously Google came in
and stood up their airborne communications system. A lot of
things were tested. So it is not just about what infrastructure
is there and whether that infrastructure is adaptable to what
you are doing. But what have you learned from Puerto Rico in
terms of communications? And what should we be investing in to
be better prepared? I agree with the Chairman that we want to
mitigate and look at how we can avoid the moral hazard of
continuing to do the same old thing. But this is backbone
Emergency 101, that we will need this no matter whether we even
have a disaster. We have to have this capability.
Mr. Long. Sure. So, Senator, we learned a lot of lessons
particularly from Hurricane Maria. After Hurricane Katrina and
September 11, 2001 (9/11), we learned that we need to be
interoperable, which means we have to have multiple agencies
being able to talk to one another. Well, after Hurricane Maria
hit, we could not communicate, period. So it changes the way we
did everything, and, for example, we get hit on there was not
enough food and water on Puerto Rico. That is not correct.
There was food and water on Puerto Rico. It was messaging to
the people on where to go to the hubs or to the community
leaders to be able to go where to get it. So we had to adapt
not only that communication, but we also had to call in
military what they call ``case teams,'' putting speakers on
helicopters and flying over the Commonwealth to say go here, do
these things, and putting out a public awareness message.
Unfortunately, a lot of FEMA's Individual Assistance
Program was moving to a digital platform that forced us to go
back to navigating by the stars and pencil and paper, again, to
register people into our systems. I think that we are too
dependent on the communications backbone. The integrated public
alert and warning system that we use for nation-state threats,
we are kind of at the mercy of how redundant and resilient the
private companies are that we utilize to get the message out.
Senator Heitkamp. That is exactly my point.
Mr. Long. That is exactly it.
Senator Heitkamp. And so what I am trying to get at is how
are we reaching out to private entities, maybe better
understanding, better capability, better understanding of what
we can do. Obviously, Puerto Rico is a discrete area. It is an
island, so that gave us a little--it is not like it was
nationwide. That gives us a great little test ground for where
we can, in fact, deploy different forms of communication. And I
want to make sure that this is, like you said, the top
priority, but that we are not creating something that cannot be
integrated in the communications system that we have; and if it
cannot, that we are providing redundancy that is totally
separate from the private sector.
Mr. Long. Sure. What I would like to do is I can respond to
you in writing. I would like to go back to my continuity staff
to talk about the dialogue that they are starting, but part of
this problem is greater than FEMA.
Senator Heitkamp. Absolutely.
Mr. Long. We need to get the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) and others involved, and what is the standard
that we are striving for, because we are becoming more and more
dependent on digital technology.
Senator Heitkamp. But we also have more and more
sophisticated technologies that are more micro. They are not--
if you look at a grid, you think, OK, you are going to stand
up, a kind of generation to transmission grid. That is pretty
fragile by weather or by terrorism. What are we doing to make
sure that we can re-establish micro communications, micro
energy power distribution? All of these things, this is what I
want to see in the follow-on report from Puerto Rico. I want to
know how we are going to be more resilient and more redundant
both on power and on communications.
Mr. Long. Sure. So I think that is a fair question to ask
the private vendors. I am not the expert when it comes to the
communications. I can tell you what FEMA is doing, but as far
as the private vendor----
Senator Heitkamp. But you cannot do it without the private.
Mr. Long. You are right. We cannot.
Senator Heitkamp. So it is two sides of the same coin, and
what I am saying is this has to be a priority, because I do not
want to see what happened in Puerto Rico happen again.
Mr. Long. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Heitkamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Lankford.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR LANKFORD
Senator Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me add on to that conversation. A big gain that we can
have from this, Brock, is lessons learned and things that can
change in the future. You have already mentioned some of those
dealing with housing, for instance, and how that needs to be
managed as far as grants back to States, what the Federal
Government should have, what the State should have, so that
they can do what they do well in the local entities.
Is there a pending report that is coming out at some point
that is kind of lessons learned from 2017, here is what FEMA is
going to change and the things that we are doing that we see
that were wrong, but we have the authority to do; here is what
needs to change but we do not have the authority, we need
legislative changes on these if you could help us with
statutes; and here is what private industry needs to be able to
do, that they have to do just in the free market, but we just
want to make them aware and, quite frankly, their stockholders
aware that these are some gaps that are in the system? Will
something like that come out?
Mr. Long. Yes, sir. So early on, what we did is we embedded
what we call ``learning teams'' in our Joint Field Office
(JFOs) and within the agency, and we were very proactive in
saying we need to capture exactly what is going on. As a
result, we are currently working on an internal after-action
report that I would be happy to share with the Committee, once
completed.
Senator Lankford. That would be great, especially the areas
that obviously FEMA has the authority to be able to do, what
they need to do right now, but what you do not have the
authority to do. Do not worry about committee of jurisdiction.
We are your Committee of jurisdiction. We can help get the
information out to the different committees.
Mr. Long. Yes, sir.
Senator Lankford. But if we just knew what is it that you
need that are changes, that is inhibiting you from doing the
work--and, again, a classic example of that already is your
comment about housing. That is something that there is some
prohibition in statute that you can do. We have to be able to
find a way to either debate that and fix that or to be able to
change your authorities or whatever it may be. Those are things
that we need to fix for you to be more productive.
Mr. Long. Senator, one thing that is really important to
point out is that it is not just FEMA that is in this game. We
coordinate roughly over 30 different agencies and the fire
power of 30 different agencies down, and one of the goals about
reducing the complexity is how we streamline all of the
funding. How do I go tell your Governor that this is what you
are entitled to from these different agencies to fix the
community? How do we get them to move in an expedited manner?
For example, HUD funding, Community Development Block Grant
(CDBG)-GR funding, is a fantastic piece of funding that is much
needed by a community, but what happens is from the
announcement, there has to be a 6-month period to write the
Federal Register. There is a 3-month period to write the action
plan on how you are going to use that funding. And then there
is another month on top of that to make sure that we all agree,
and then the money does not hit for a year.
Senator Lankford. Well, 2 years later.
Mr. Long. So it makes it very difficult for a Governor to
understand, well, I have to use FEMA money for this and these
projects; based on cash-flow, here is what I think I can hit on
my recovery priorities, and I have to wait for this HUD funding
to hit. And then there is Federal highway funding. There is
Small Business Administration (SBA) funding.
Senator Lankford. So where do we go to get the overview of
that? How do we get that?
Mr. Long. Well, we start with my agency, and let me point
you in the right direction.
Senator Lankford. Great. That would be helpful to be able
to get. Again, there is a big fight here typically on
committees of jurisdiction and who has that and who does not
have it. What we need to be able to have is members--and all of
us are members are multiple committees. What we need to be able
to have is the ability to be able to see these are the issues
and to be able to get them out to the right committees to be
able to make some of the decisions that need to be made, rather
than worry about them, sorry, you are writing a report that is
someone else's deal. That does not work very well.
Mr. Long. Right.
Senator Lankford. That does not solve the problem. So if
you can give us a big picture and just know from our
perspective at least, tell your folks not to worry about, ``I
am sorry, you cannot write about that because that is someone
else's agency.'' If there is a communication issue or if there
is a part of it--I have already had the ongoing conversations,
for instance, on wildfires. Wildfires in California, if there
are so many structures that are destroyed, tragically, you are
involved. If it is a wildfire in western Oklahoma and it is
cattle and fences and sheds, then Farm Service Agency (FSA)
does it.
Mr. Long. Right.
Senator Lankford. If FEMA engaged in it, they are going to
get a response back in 30 to 45 days. It is going to be very
rapid to be able to help them turn around a check. If FSA does
it under U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), it will be a
year to 2 years for them to get relief. Both of them had a
fire, two different structures, two different systems on it,
and so we have to be able to figure out a way to be able to
solve that.
Mr. Long. Yes, I agree, Senator, and the problem with the
National Disaster Recovery Framework is it may be a plan
without authorities given to the agencies that are truly in
charge of things like power or housing. We can ceremoniously
put HUD in charge of housing or Department of Energy (DOE) in
charge of energy, but where the problem comes in is: Do they
really have the authority and the funding mechanism to be the
lead? Or are we just coordinating? Does FEMA end up being the
lead for all of it? A lot of it that we are told to lead, we
are not the experts for.
Senator Lankford. Right. So, Brock, you are going to have
to help us with that.
Mr. Long. OK.
Senator Lankford. Let me mention a couple of other things
as well. I do appreciate FEMA and how you continue to be able
to partner with not only for-profit entities for contracting,
but nonprofits that are out there, church groups, faith-based
groups, whatever it may be. You are basically taking and
coordinating whoever is coming to help to help. Oklahoma
Baptist Disaster Relief during what was happening in Houston
was delivering 20,000 meals a day, just down there working with
the Red Cross and getting a chance to get it done. We had
multiple of our power companies that they picked up folks that
have gone to Puerto Rico. In fact, we had another group from
Oklahoma that just came back a few weeks ago. We are continuing
to be able to send folks down there.
Thanks for the way that you are continuing to coordinate
and not have to say you have to be in this certain box, but
that you are working through who is coming to help and trying
to be able to work with all those groups on it. And so I
appreciate that.
Mr. Long. Yes, sir, and the nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) and the faith-based community are a tremendous asset and
one of the greatest assets in this country to help us
overcome----
Senator Lankford. And then you can----
Mr. Long. We cannot do it without them.
Senator Lankford. Yes, and they can continue to be used.
There has been a few in government for a while of saying, ``I
am not sure about that.'' We need to continue to be able to use
those faith-based and nongovernmental groups to be able to
partner with them.
Mr. Long. You are right. What is beautiful about utilizing
these agencies is that they do not have to adhere to my bulky
Federal bureaucratic laws. They can do things that I cannot do.
Senator Lankford. And rapidly.
Mr. Long. What I want to figure out is how we get the NGO's
on the front end of pre-disaster mitigation to help people
before disaster strikes rather than just being seen on the back
end as well. So how do we shift the mindset of maybe they can
start installing hurricane clips for areas that are vulnerable
to hurricanes and tornadoes.
Senator Lankford. Be helpful, yes.
Mr. Long. There are a lot of things that we can do.
Senator Lankford. Let me mention just a couple of other
things. I want to give you another thank you for how you are
working through with houses of worship, which has been
completely confusing to me for years why, if a nonprofit there
is hit with a disaster or a for-profit business or a house,
they are treated one way, but if you are a house of worship,
regardless of your religious affiliation, you are treated
completely separately. Thank you for actually trying to draw
those two together. We have now followed that up with a statute
to make sure that that actually stays permanent on that. But
that has been a lingering issue with FEMA for a long time. With
the list that you come back with, whenever you bring that back,
things I am going to watch for: electric grid, what has been
durable and what is non-durable in the electric grid, what have
we learned. I have talked with the Corps of Engineers, and it
is my understanding when you actually talking about power
coming back on and what actually is producing power, there are
lessons to be learned about lines and about the poles. But
there are also lessons about the power generation as well, what
worked, what did not work, what survived disasters, what did
not. There may be some lessons learned that we need to be able
to get on that.
The flood insurance is still a big issue for me, and for
you, I am quite confident, but that is learning how we can
solve the multiple repetitive claims issues and any
recommendations that you have. As you know, this Committee and
others are dealing with the flood insurance issue for a while,
and we are going to--I would hope we would get into duplication
of coordination, as you have already mentioned. Any reports
that you can give to us on that would be very helpful, and then
we will try to follow through in the days ahead to resolve it.
So thank you very much.
Mr. Long. Sure. We would be happy to provide ideas. Thank
you.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Hassan.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HASSAN
Senator Hassan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair and Ranking
Member McCaskill. Good morning, Director Long. It is good to
see you.
It is fair to say, and I know that you have heard it
already this morning, that many of us in the Senate were
unsatisfied with the rate of recovery in Puerto Rico after
Hurricane Maria hit the island. You were quoted last week
saying that rebuilding Puerto Rico would cost $50 billion and
that Puerto Rico was running out of time before the next
hurricane season, which starts on June 1.
Certainly the recent announcement that the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development will provide the island with
$18.5 billion in developmental assistance is a huge step in the
right direction. However, other reports suggest that just under
20 percent of the island is still without power, including more
than 100,000 residents.
So why after 6 months does Puerto Rico still ``have a long
way to go,'' as you have said? Certainly its infrastructure
challenges play a role. I understand that. And I know you spoke
earlier about getting 428 authority. However, I want to know
what specific steps FEMA and the U.S. Government will take in
the coming months to help the island so that when you appear
before this Committee again in 6 months we are not hearing
about the same infrastructure obstacles we have been dealing
with since the storm?
Mr. Long. Sure. One, rebuilding the infrastructure, I think
we all have to back up and remember that a lot of the
infrastructure was not functional, including major portions of
the power infrastructure.
Senator Hassan. I understand that. I have heard you give
that explanation before. I understand the challenges. What I
want to know is what it is the United States of America and
FEMA are doing, understanding those challenges, so that we can
make as much progress as possible. What specific action items
do you have?
Mr. Long. Sure. So the bottom line is we have over 4,000
employees there. I am getting ready to be one of the largest
employers in Puerto Rico. We have hired close to 1,500 Puerto
Ricans that we are training to be the Commonwealth and the
municipal emergency management arm. We are doing a train-the-
trainer and making sure that they understand our systems as
well. In readiness for hurricane season, we are rewriting plans
at all 78 levels of government that did not exist. We are
rewriting the Commonwealth plans on their behalf and working
with them. We are making sure that leadership is being put into
place. But we are also getting ready to go through a set of
culminating training and exercise, I believe, June 14, there is
going to be a full-scale exercise with the Commonwealth and
with the municipalities to actually run through physical
movements such as commodities.
We have tremendously increased the amount of warehouse
space that we have on the island and stocked it, in some cases
for water. I think the last number I saw--and we can get you
specifics--is there is a sevenfold increase of water that is
being pre-positioned on the island. Then on the June 14
exercise, it is my understanding that we are going to be
running those commodities and demonstrating how the new
distribution plans will work and the municipalities that
participate in the exercise are going to be able to keep those
commodities to be able to store for future disasters. There is
a lot that we are doing to ready the Commonwealth.
Senator Hassan. Well, I would love it if your team would
follow up with us and give us kind of the full sense of plan
here, because, again, I understand the problems you are dealing
with, but what makes you all FEMA and what makes the United
States the United States is that we do not look backward, we
look forward.
Mr. Long. Sure.
Senator Hassan. And we respond on the ground to make sure
that our people have what they need in the face of disaster.
I also just wanted to touch with you on the FEMA Strategic
Plan. You and your team argue in that plan for simplifying the
process by which FEMA administers assistance. I think we would
all support the elimination of unnecessary red tape. In my
State, it appears that bureaucratic disorganization has
contributed to lengthy response times from FEMA. For instance,
in one town in New Hampshire that was hit by a damaging storm
last July, FEMA has sent 22 people on six different occasions
to assess and reassess the same damaged roads. The frustrated
fire chief of that town who has managed the town's recovery--
and I have to tell you, he has been managing recoveries for a
long time and is a smart, able businessman when he is not being
fire chief. He has told us that several of the FEMA personnel
had to be shown how to use a tape measure and how to calculate
the costs. FEMA has yet to release any funds to the town.
With that said, you have highlighted how emergency response
requires interacting with multiple levels of government and in
many cases interacting with several different agencies within
each level of government, something I certainly appreciate as a
former Governor. Therefore, FEMA's assistance and coordination
system, it is complex by design because you are supposed to
coordinate here, but how are you going to address this
necessarily complex system and attempt to cut out steps or
simplify this process?
Mr. Long. So in regards to the specific issue that you
raise, I am not aware of that, but I would be happy to--I will
personally call Perry Plummer, the director in your State, to
follow up on that issue.
Here is what we ran into and what I learned about staffing
patterns and the way the system is set up. We had roughly--I do
not know the exact number. We had too many people dispersed
across the country working disasters that are pretty small, in
my opinion. Now, the term ``catastrophic,'' it lies in the eye
of the beholder. You lose your house, you are uninsured, I
realize that is a catastrophic----
Senator Hassan. You are a small town with very little
infrastructure.
Mr. Long. Right.
Senator Hassan. And a volunteer fire department.
Mr. Long. So if I remember correctly, there is a Government
Accountability Office (GAO) report that says roughly 80 percent
of the disasters that FEMA has to work with are less than $41
million when it comes to putting out public assistance funding.
My question is: How do we get to the point where we become
almost a granting agency to push the funding out, the public
assistance funding through the Governor to where they have the
trained staff, we simplify the systems to where they can put
the money in the infrastructure back to work without me having
to roll my staff even to your State? We are having to
constantly break down the policies, and one of the problems
that we have is the inspection process. It is not just FEMA
that does inspections. It could be Federal Highway, the U.S.
Department of Transportation (USDOT). There are a number of
inspections that take place. But when it comes to dealing with
specifically the disaster survivor, how do we do one inspection
that cuts across every bit? We are not there yet. I do not have
an answer. But here again, we are trying to kick-start the
effort to reduce the frustration.
Senator Hassan. And I appreciate that, and I also know, Mr.
Chair, that I am out of time. The one thing I would ask you to
think about, because this is something that small States run
into a lot, is that the Federal Government tends to look at
comparables, and they say, ``Well, this disaster is only a $1
million disaster. It does not really need people.'' In my
State, that is a huge disaster.
Mr. Long. Sure.
Senator Hassan. And we do not have the people or
infrastructure necessarily to receive those dollars from the
Feds without help because of our scale. And so I just would ask
that you guys consider the State scale, not just where the
State falls in the Federal size. Does that makes sense?
Mr. Long. Here is where this Committee can help. We need to
increase State management costs. Right now it is 3.34 percent.
It should be roughly 12 percent. OK?
Senator Hassan. Yes.
Mr. Long. So that when there is a smaller disaster, if
there is a $10 million or $20 million disaster, they can take
12 percent of what we are going to potentially obligate or
obligate to hire force account labor or consulting firms to
augment their capability to be able to do it. That is the
direction we need to go because I cannot continue to send staff
out to do every $2 million disaster. The Nation needs me to be
ready to go for the Hurricane Marias and the Hurricane Harveys
and the Hurricane Irmas.
Senator Hassan. Well, and I understand that, and I think
the people in my State would say, with respect, if there is
flexibility and targeted ways we can do this, that is great.
But they pay taxes, too, and need FEMA to be there for them.
Mr. Long. Sure.
Senator Hassan. Because their disasters are as devastating
to them as any disaster. So I would look forward to working
with you on that. I think we have just got to get the balance
right. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, for letting me go over.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Daines.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR DAINES
Senator Daines. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Long, thanks
for coming here today. It is good to see you again. I know you
have been Administrator for less than a year, and you have
already had to help navigate our country through some very
difficult times. Thank you. I know it has been some long hours.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Daines. However, there is always room for
improvement. I appreciate you making a concerted effort to
learn from last year's lessons. It is critical we identify ways
to do things better in the future as people lives and
livelihoods, as you know, are at stake.
In Montana, we experienced historic droughts. It seems like
last year was either too much water or not enough water, and we
were on the not-enough-water side. We had 2,400 wildfires
burning 1.4 million acres. I want to thank you for working with
me--you took a call in the middle of one of our battles we were
fighting in a fire in eastern Montana, in Garfield County--and
for your assistance in getting Montana additional emergency
funding last year. Your rural roots contributed to helping
understand the fact of how do we deal with these disasters that
hit rural America, where sometimes our conventional formulas do
not always factor in, how we should think about assessing the
need.
Even with the significant snowfall we are getting now this
year in Montana, early forecasts already are saying we are
going to have above average fire potential this summer. That is
a fire prediction I did not like to hear.
As you mentioned in your testimony, we need to ensure that
we are not just ready for catastrophic hurricanes but also for
other natural disasters. In Montana, our concern is wildfire
and how to prepare best for the upcoming season.
FEMA declared eight fire management assistance grants
(FMAG) for wildfires in Montana last year. I understand that
with these grants there is a fire cost threshold that must be
reached before eligible for reimbursement. But in a State like
Montana, where we can have thousands of wildfires that are put
out before they contribute to a major disaster, these smaller
costs still add up and deplete State and local funds.
Furthermore, clear guidance for frontier counties and their
eligibility for fire management assistance grants is sometimes
lacking. And I agree with your plan of making emergency
response federally supported, State managed, and locally
executed. A little breath of federalism is always refreshing
here in these massive bureaucracies in Washington, D.C.
Moving forward, my question is: How can FEMA and States
like Montana with rural communities better work together to
utilize Federal grant programs to mitigate the damage done by
wildfires?
Mr. Long. So, Senator, excellent question. I have had very
spirited conversations with Governor Bullock on going forward,
and I understand that your State has been totally ravaged by--
almost like a death by a thousand cuts when it comes to the
number of fires. The problem is that--how do you declare a fire
season? If I declare a fire season, then do I have to declare a
severe weather season for another State? It is difficult. It is
my understanding in the omnibus that was recently passed there
are some legislative fixes with Department of Interior (DOI)
and Agriculture to help offset some of the costs that I cannot
cover through the FMAG Program. But I think that what we are
having to do inside FEMA is reset the bar and the intent of the
FMAG Program internally and with our regions to say the purpose
of this grant funding is to prevent a fire from becoming a
major disaster declaration. We have to increase the dialogue
that we have with our State partners to make sure that we are
on top of it and helping to do all we can to suppress that fire
before it gets way out of hand.
But the issue at hand is we look at each fire as an
individual fire. I do not know if I actually have the authority
to look at the multitude of fires and declare one season,
because you get into this complexity about incident period. Was
it the same drought that is causing--was it the same weather
system that caused all of the flooding, for example? Do we
declare that whole period or incident as one disaster? With the
fires, it is something that we have got to work through, and I
would be happy to continue the dialogue. But it is also
continuing the dialogue on where FEMA begins and ends, where
DOI and Department of Agriculture also support as well.
Senator Daines. Well, thank you, and that dialogue will be
helpful. It is also worth noting we have also got to get better
at preventing and reducing the risk of these and severity of
wildfires through better force management, and that is
something else I am working on aggressively, because as these
combustibles continue to build in our forests, they either burn
or they are harvested. There really is not an option, there is
not a Choice C in that multiple choice equation. So we have to
do a better job as well as managing our forests, because as I
have said before, either we will manage our forests or they
will manage us.
Mr. Long. Right.
Senator Daines. So we have to fight kind of a two-front war
here.
Switching gears, I have introduced a bill, the Homeland
Security for Children Act, that would simply ensure DHS' Under
Secretary for Strategy, Policy, and Plans, including input from
organizations representing the needs of children. I am
soliciting stakeholder feedback in developing policy. I say
that as a Daddy of four kids myself; further, that a technical
expert at FEMA be authorized to lead as external collaboration
and policy developments to integrate the needs of children into
activities to prepare for and respond to disasters. The bill
has already passed out of this Committee, and the DHS
reauthorization also includes its language.
Mr. Long, as the Administrator of FEMA, how would this bill
better equip you to protect our kids in the event of a tragedy?
Mr. Long. So, Senator, we do have programs that are geared
toward helping children specifically cope with the aftermath as
far as mitigating the impacts of disasters. I would have to
look into that. Let me go back to my staff, and then we could
provide that in writing.
Senator Daines. We are trying to give you another vehicle
there to help in that regard.
Mr. Long. Sure.
Senator Daines. Both in preparation for and then after the
fact.
Last, I know Puerto Rico came up. As we saw in Puerto Rico
following Hurricane Maria, establishing communications is
critically important to effectively respond to a catastrophic
event. I spent over a decade in the tech sector in cloud
computing, and I am well aware of the need of reliable
connectivity.
Mr. Long, how is FEMA leveraging technology to improve
communications following a natural disaster?
Mr. Long. Well, we have a long way to go, and in some cases
I want to move away from manual processes to incorporate more
technology to help us rapidly assess and approve assistance
that goes forward. For example, as I quoted earlier, we had to
do 2.4 million home inspections. Why can we not use technology
and imagery to say, yes, these houses are damaged, there is 8
feet of water in this house, therefore it is approved, rather
than having to go through the cumbersome process of sending
people out to verify damages. But we have to be careful to
protect against waste, fraud, and abuse, which I do not think
most disaster survivors by any means are trying to do. But we
have to protect the taxpaying dollar, so it is the right mix of
technology as well as the manual processes that we have to keep
to ensure that the dollars are being right.
The other thing on technology is we have had a very healthy
discussion on redundant and resilient communications in regards
to wildfires. As we were talking earlier, the communications
systems were blown out by Hurricane Maria. Well, they were
burned up in California. So a lot of this is outside of FEMA.
How do I help the private sector or how does the Senate engage
the private sector on mitigating these communication backbones
to where we do not lose them for all hazard? Because if they
are gone, for example, with the California wildfires, we lose
our ability to communicate alert and public warning to
citizens.
We have got a long way to go, and I think that there is a
lot of work that we can do to be more innovative in
incorporating technology.
Senator Daines. I am out of time here. I want to tell you,
Mr. Long, I know in your job you usually only are getting
criticized and rarely affirmed. I think you are doing a great
job.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Daines. You have had a tough year, and I appreciate
your leadership, your attention to detail, your willingness to
engage us when we are in times of need, and keep up the good
work.
Mr. Long. Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Jones.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR JONES
Senator Jones. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr. Long,
welcome, and thank you for your service. I want to echo what
Senator Daines said about your job, your performance now, but
also thank you for your service to Alabama, my State. It was
very important. You worked tirelessly for the folks in Alabama.
We have our share every year it seems, between tornadoes or
hurricanes. We sit up in the spring waiting for that next
tornado to hit, and then late summer and fall, it is always a
hurricane going to hit the Gulf of Mexico. So we have had our
share. It was 20 years ago this week, I think, that I was
United States Attorney, and I toured the F5 tornado that went
through Oak Grove and areas where my family had serious deep
roots, both in their homes and their churches. The damage that
can cause--and I would urge colleagues, if they have never, if
something hits their State to go see. You cannot appreciate it
on television like you can in person. It will take your breath
away.
Recently we had another tornado, a storm that hit in kind
of the northeast section of Alabama that did a significant
amount of damage in a number of counties, including damage to
Jacksonville State University, a number of their buildings.
Fortunately, it hit during spring break, and none of those
students or very few of those students were on campus.
Can you give me any update about FEMA's interactions with
our State authorities? I want to make sure that everybody is
doing everything that they can to make sure that we have the
appropriate documentation to maybe get some help.
Mr. Long. Senator, absolutely, and I will follow up with
you in regards to what specifically is taking place, or the
process when it comes to the damage assessments that are being
done in Alabama. Tornadoes are typically tough, particularly on
rural communities, because a lot of what they impact is
typically insured. Like Jacksonville State, hopefully a lot of
those buildings are insured, which cuts against the numeric
indicator that would suggest that disaster declaration support
is needed from the Federal Government, which is the way
insurance should work.
Senator Jones. Right.
Mr. Long. But one of the things I will do is go back and
make sure that we respond to you on where we are in that
process, and if there are any issues, I would be happy to----
Senator Jones. Great. It is my understanding from some
information we got from the State yesterday that they are
preparing a package that the uninsured costs now will probably
top $35 million, so if you could just keep my office updated on
that, and if there is anything that we can do to help with
that, I appreciate it.
Alabama, last year we had Hurricane Irma, and it is my
understanding that as of April 9, the State completed their
paperwork and closed that out in record time. So we are good
stewards of the FEMA money.
The second thing I want to talk about is really in
Anniston, Alabama, we have a training center out at the Fort
McClellan area, a training center for domestic preparedness,
which is a training facility for State and local and tribal
leaders from all over the country that come there every year.
The President's Fiscal Year 2019 request for the Center for
Domestic Preparedness (CDP) would be reduced despite the fact
that the impacts of the 2017 natural disasters show that
resources, in my view, for CDP should actually be increased. In
order to respond to the 2017 hurricanes and wildfires, the CDP
activated a personnel mobilization center at its facility in
Anniston and processed some 5,335 responders through that
facility.
Unfortunately, when they did so, they had to shut down the
regular training for over 2 months, which cost training that
had been scheduled for some 2,400 students from across the
country that just could not go and that were delayed.
So I guess my question is: If we are trying to create a
culture of preparedness, as you state--and I think that
everyone would agree with--it is important that we educate and
train our State and local emergency managers. And what can we
do to find ways to accommodate both training at the CDP and
mobilization needs should those come up during the course of
the year? And should we not prioritize resources toward
developing that capacity?
Mr. Long. Senator, I think, as I said earlier in my
testimony, money is tight and the bottom line is with grants
and training, I agree, there is nothing more important than the
trained emergency manager. The fiscal year 2019 budget was
basically put together before what we just went through in the
2017 season, which is something that I think we all understand
as well. But when it comes to training at the local and State
level, it cannot just be on FEMA's shoulders to do so. I think
that it is time for the State Legislature of Alabama and other
States to consider whether or not the Alabama Emergency
Management Agency has its own robust training capability and
dollars as well. This is a shared responsibility. Preparedness
is everybody's responsibility, from every citizen all the way
up to my office.
We are getting to a point where we need to evaluate how
much the Federal Emergency Management Agency can continue to
supplant across this country for the multitude of programs that
we run, and something has got to give at some point. I wish I
had tons of dollars to train everybody, but that is just not
reality.
Senator Jones. Right. Well----
Mr. Long. The CDP, incredibly valuable asset. I have got
great people down there. That is the disaster lab that I hope
to better incorporate on how we utilize our entire training
network.
Senator Jones. That is great. Well, thank you very much.
And I appreciate that, and I also understand and know from your
experience in Alabama that this is not the first time you have
advocated for State training and for legislatures in Alabama to
step up and do the right thing. So I appreciate that comment. I
agree with you 100 percent. We will do what we can from our
standpoint, and I will be happy to go with you to talk to the
Alabama Legislature sometime if they step up.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Jones. Thank you so much for being here. It is
great to see you.
Mr. Long. Thank you.
Senator Jones. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Senator Jones.
I had about 2\1/2\ minutes on my first round of questions,
so let me quickly ask two follow up questions.
First of all, as it relates to insurance, from my
standpoint, preparedness, part of that equation really is being
adequately insured. I mentioned moral hazard earlier. Do you
believe that because of the Federal Government--and let us face
it, we have been spending billions of dollars. Do you think the
Federal Government's involvement has actually incentivized
people not to carry adequate insurance? And if so, to what
extent?
Mr. Long. Well, when it comes to citizens, I think there is
this myth that FEMA is an all-encompassing insurance agency
that can put your life back together, and that is just not the
case. If you look at Harris County, TX, for example, and some
of the initial numbers--and here, again, these numbers will
change as more policies are put into place. FEMA's average
payout typically in individual assistance is like $4,000 to
$6,000 versus those who were insured through the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP), I think the average payout was over
$100,000. So insurance is the first line of defense.
Now, when it comes to governments, if we truly want to have
a conversation about reducing disaster costs, in addition to
doing pre-disaster mitigation, then let us look at the
categories of permanent work that FEMA performs under the
Stafford Act. One of those is Category E, which is public
buildings and content. Cities and counties that self-insure
their buildings or basically do not have insurance for their
buildings, FEMA is on the hook to fix. Is that an opportunity
for the private sector and the insurance companies to step up
and insure that? Is that an opportunity to where I can reduce
costs and the private industries should take over and be able
to insure those?
Chairman Johnson. My question: Are you seeing an uptick in
the self-insurance, in other words, having no insurance?
Mr. Long. Well, in citizens, the unfortunate thing is
that--what we just saw in California was unfortunately people
who were struggling in retirement pay off their house, they let
their insurance lapse, their fire insurance lapse, and then
their house burned up. And they ultimately let it lapse to be
able to have a couple hundred extra bucks a month in their
paycheck. That is a big problem, and education and budgeting
problem.
Chairman Johnson. Again, are you seeing data that is
actually growing?
Mr. Long. We can get that to you.
Chairman Johnson. OK. I would appreciate that.
Mr. Long. We would be happy to.
Chairman Johnson. Second, I was struck by your testimony
about the fact that you could not prove ownership. Now, is that
something completely unique to Puerto Rico, or are you seeing
that in other areas of the country?
Mr. Long. The volume within Puerto Rico is very unique,
yes.
Chairman Johnson. But is it totally unheard of in the rest
of the country?
Mr. Long. It is not typically a major problem across the
rest of the country. In some cases what we run into is people
claiming ownership when they do not. It is more fraud than
anything.
Chairman Johnson. OK.
Mr. Long. But Puerto Rico is just the sheer volume.
Chairman Johnson. OK. Well, again, those are my only two
questions. Senator McCaskill.
Senator McCaskill. I will have some for the record.
Mr. Long. OK. Thank you, ma'am.
Chairman Johnson. So, Administrator Long, first of all,
again thank you. I do not envy you your task. I do believe that
you have the appreciation and I think the respect and, quite
honestly, the confidence of this Committee, which is saying an
awful lot. So we do appreciate that, and please convey our
sincere appreciation to all the men and women that have worked
with you not only in FEMA but throughout the government
agencies in really responding to something that was just
completely unprecedented. So we truly appreciate that.
With that, the hearing record will remain open for 15 days
until April 26 at 5 p.m. for the submission of statements and
questions for the record.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:34 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]