- COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
[Senate Hearing 115-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
FISCAL YEAR 2019
----------
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 25, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 2:32 p.m., in room SD-192, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Jerry Moran (Chairman) presiding.
Present: Senators Moran, Shelby, Alexander, Murkowski,
Collins, Graham, Boozman, Capito, Lankford, Kennedy, Shaheen,
Leahy, Feinstein, Coons, Schatz, Manchin, and Van Hollen.
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
STATEMENT OF HON. JEFF SESSIONS, ATTORNEY GENERAL
opening statement of senator jerry moran
Senator Moran. Good afternoon. I call the hearing to order.
Mr. Attorney General, welcome to the committee, the
Committee on Commerce, Justice, Science Appropriations
Subcommittee. We're here to examine the Department of Justice's
fiscal year 2019 budget request.
I am pleased to welcome you to this subcommittee. My
colleagues and I are very much interested in hearing from you
in your--hearing your testimony, considering your testimony
today. Your input is not only helpful, but necessary, as we
review the President's spending priorities for the Justice
Department.
While this hearing is about the Department's fiscal year
2019 budget request, I would suspect that you will hear about a
number of other issues unrelated to the Department's resource
and funding needs. My focus in this hearing is to better
understand your top funding priorities and to emphasize those
that are important to our Nation.
The Department of Justice is responsible for, and involved
in, many important national priorities. Arguably, the greatest
responsibility includes keeping Americans safe, which carries a
new meaning, given the growing national security threats of
today, and upholding the rule of law. This requires that
Congress adequately fund our Nation's law enforcement efforts,
including counterterrorism and cybersecurity initiatives.
investigation of conspiracy to bomb somali immigrants
In Kansas, the Department recently successfully
investigated and convicted individuals who conspired to bomb
residents of Somali immigrants to our State. The work done by
the FBI, by the Liberal Kansas Police Department, the Seward
County Sheriff's Office, the Ford County Sheriff's Office, the
Garden City Police Department, the Dodge City Police
Department, and the Finney County Sheriff's Office, along with
the Kansas Highway Patrol and the Kansas Bureau of
Investigation, and the United States Attorneys Office showed,
in my mind, be a model for Federal and local partnerships. I
trust the Department will seek to replicate the successes of
these entities with the funds in this request.
fix nics and stop school violence act
The President's fiscal year 2019 budget proposal of 28.4
billion for the Department of Justice. I note that--however, I
note that the many agencies and departments this budget request
was created and produced before the recently enacted fiscal
year 2018 bill, which was finalized and has recently become
law. For example, both the Fix NICS Act and the Stop School
Violence Act authorized important safety initiatives, but were
signed into law in the 2018 omnibus after your fiscal year 2019
budget submission. As a cosponsor of both pieces of
legislation, I look forward to hearing the Department's plan to
implement these two important policies.
Furthermore, this administration has made it a priority to
combat violent crime, which is reflected as one of the
Department's highest priorities. Specifically, the
administration seeks 109.2 million to enhance ongoing efforts
to reduce violent crime and to combat transnational criminal
organizations in the fiscal year 2019 budget request. For
example, the Department requested increased funding to expand
the Project Safe Neighborhood Initiative. Project Safe
Neighborhood's main focus is the extradition of illegal
firearms--I'm sorry, the eradication of illegal firearms and
violent gang activity. The program is designed to improve
police and community relations, which is strongly supported by
many from law enforcement officials in my State of Kansas. The
subcommittee looks forward to hearing more details about this
program.
national integrated ballistics information network
I also look forward to hearing about the impact of emerging
technologies, such as those being utilized by the National
Integrated Ballistics Information Network, known as NIBIN.
NIBIN allows law enforcement officials to share ballistic
intelligence across the United States, making law enforcement
resources more efficient and effective.
executive office for immigration review funding
The Department and administration have also prioritized
solving the problem of illegal immigration. The fiscal year
2019 request seeks 65.9 million in immigration-related
programs, program enhancements to support border security and
enforcement efforts. For example, the 2019 request outlines
that this funding would hire 150 attorneys for the Executive
Office for Immigration Review, which oversees the Nation's
immigration courts and the Board of Immigration appeals, and
provide 25 million for technology improvements to transform
current paper operating system to an electronic filing system.
opioids
The Department is also involved in helping to combat
ongoing opioid epidemic. According to the Center for Disease
Control and Prevention, opioid overdoses in the U.S. have
surpassed motor vehicle accidents as the number-one cause of
accidental death in the country. The crisis needs to be
aggressively addressed, and I look forward to working with the
Department to ensure adequate resources to--are provided to do
just that.
legal orientation program and help desk
Last, Mr. Attorney General, I want to thank you for your
attention and acknowledgment of a letter that Senator Shaheen
and I sent to you exactly 1 week ago regarding the Executive
Office of Immigration Review, Legal Orientation, and
Immigration Help Desk Programs. We also spoke on the phone
earlier this week, and I would appreciate it if you address
this matter in more detail in this hearing. I know that you
would agree that ensuring congressional direction is--ensuring
that congressional direction is followed is extremely
important.
Again, I thank you for your service as our Attorney General
and the important testimony that we will hear from you today as
our subcommittee begins its work on the fiscal year 2019 budget
for the Department of Justice.
I now recognize the Senator from New Hampshire, Senator
Shaheen, the Ranking Member.
statement of senator jeanne shaheen
Senator Shaheen. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. This is
our first hearing together, and I look forward to working with
you on this subcommittee.
I'm very pleased that Attorney General Sessions is here
with us this afternoon. Thank you for being here, and thank you
for taking time to speak with me last week on the phone.
I want to begin by thanking the 115,000 career employees of
the Department of Justice. They are working hard every day to
keep Americans safe from crime and terrorism. The breadth of
issues that the Department handles on a daily basis is vast.
concerns about proposed cuts
I do have a concern that, as I look at the budget proposal
for fiscal year 2019, the Department has requested addressing
these numerous missions with less funding, a reduction of $1.9
billion, which is 6.2 percent less than the level provided in
the omnibus we passed last month. Now, while I was very pleased
to see the funding levels preserved for lifesaving grant
programs under the Office of Violence Against Women, I'm
concerned about some of the drastic reductions and eliminations
that have been proposed for other programs.
opioids
As you know very well, the Justice Department is on the
front lines fighting the deadly, uncontrolled opioid epidemic.
As Senator Moran said and as every Member of this subcommittee
knows, this is an epidemic that we have seen across this
country. It's also an epidemic that is still gaining strength.
I just met with a group of family members and the Addiction
Policy Forum who spoke about the challenges that they face.
They reminded me that we lost, as Senator Moran said, about
63,000 Americans last year to the opioid epidemic. And, for
every one of those people lost, there is a family who is
suffering and is experiencing that loss.
dea and 360 strategy
So, I certainly support enforcement and prosecution
efforts, but I believe they should be paired with prevention
and treatment responses as well. This balanced approach is
something that I've heard support for from police chiefs, from
judges, and from other criminal justice professionals in New
Hampshire. The critical need to help children and families
grappling with the opioid crisis in their neighborhoods and
within their own families is very real. Even the DEA has
focused on a comprehensive approach to opioids with their
three-fold 360 Strategy that targets enforcement, diversion
control, and community outreach. Manchester, New Hampshire,
which is our largest city--and I know, as Attorney General,
you've already been there, and we appreciate that--was one of
the first locations chosen for the 360 Program. The DEA has
seen real success there, not only in tackling heroin and opioid
trafficking, but by partnering with social service and other
community groups, such as the Boys and Girls Club of
Manchester, to provide prevention and education programs for
young people that are so critical.
fentanyl
New Hampshire has also been grappling with the dramatic
rise of fentanyl, the synthetic opioid that's approximately 50
times more potent than heroin and 100 times more powerful than
morphine. Unfortunately, New Hampshire leads this Nation in
overdose deaths from fentanyl. Sadly, it's now spreading across
the country, and it's something that has overwhelmed State
crime labs, which are already backlogged with testing crime
scene evidence.
concerns about eliminating cops
We provided a total of $447 million for Justice grant
programs, $299 million more than we provided in the fiscal year
2017 budget, to help communities respond to the opioid crisis
with a balance of enforcement, treatment, and prevention
programs. I'm interested to hear how the Department plans to
expand these programs and what your fiscal year 2019 budget
request will do. I'm concerned that, right now, it calls for
eliminating key programs, like the COPS Anti-Heroin Task
Forces, which we funded at $32 million. It calls for dramatic
cuts in programs like the Coverdell Program, which we talked
about, and I know is something that you care a lot about,
because you authored that legislation.
byrne jag
I'm also concerned about the continued hold on the fiscal
year 2017 Byrne-JAG awards to our States. This program is the
backbone for helping State and local law enforcement with crime
prevention efforts across the country. I know that my police
chiefs in New Hampshire are very frustrated, waiting to receive
funding that they had expected months ago. According to Nick
Willard, the police chief in Manchester, a city that responded
to 800 overdose calls last year, he now has fewer police
officers on the street conducting drug operations without their
Byrne-JAG funding. I know you would agree that getting these
grant awards to law enforcement for programs like this is
critically important.
When we spoke last week, you indicated that once a decision
was reached in the pending Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals
case, that the Justice Department would release Byrne-JAG
funding from fiscal year 2017. That Court did issue its
decision on April 19, so I'm interested to know when these
awards will be released. I'm concerned when I see that the
Justice Department has filed yet another motion on Monday
evening that will further delay these awards.
So, Mr. Attorney General, thank you again for being here. I
look forward to your testimony and to our discussion today.
Senator Moran. Senator Shaheen, thank you very much. In the
newness of the moment of actually having the gavel in my hand,
I failed to acknowledge my desire to work very closely with you
and to make certain that this subcommittee does its work in a
timely and a bipartisan way. I would tell you that the previous
subcommittees that I've chaired, both of those bills have
passed through the full committee with unanimous vote, and I
look forward to seeing if we can't accomplish that in this
arena, as well.
I also would say that I have a high priority of making
certain that all 12 appropriation bills that our full
Appropriations Committee will address march their way across
the Senate floor, approved by the House, and signed by the
President. I want the appropriations process to work, and I
pledge to you to do everything I can to accomplish that goal.
In that regard, I'm honored to recognize the Chairman of
the full committee, who has stated on so many occasions this
committee is going to do its work. And I look forward to not
only hearing Senator Shelby's remarks today, but, in
particular, working with him to make sure that we accomplish
our goals in this subcommittee.
The Senator from Alabama, the Chairman of the committee, is
recognized.
statement of senator richard c. shelby
Senator Shelby. Thank you, Senator Moran.
I will be brief. I just want to welcome my former
colleague, Jeff Sessions, the Attorney General of the United
States, to this appropriation hearing. We will be working with
the Justice Department to help fund the requisite programs. Of
course, that includes the FBI, because it has to be done. And I
hope, under Chairman Moran and Ranking Member Shaheen, that we
can move this bill to the floor as fast as possible, and not go
from crisis to crisis, you know, in--with some certainty.
With that, I'm going to have a number of questions, but I'd
like to do them for the record. And I would ask my--unanimous
consent that my opening statement be made part of the record,
Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
Prepared Statement of Senator Richard C. Shelby
Chairman Moran and Ranking Member Shaheen, I would like to thank
you for calling this hearing to examine the President's fiscal year
2019 funding request for the Department of Justice.
I am also pleased to welcome my friend, Attorney General Sessions,
to this subcommittee hearing. Your input is certainly helpful and
necessary as we review the President's spending priorities for the new
fiscal year.
In today's world, the Department of Justice serves a vital role in
ensuring our country's national security and upholding the rule of law.
As such, I am looking forward to working with Attorney General Sessions
and all of my colleagues on the subcommittee in drafting a bill that
funds the Department in an appropriate and sufficient manner.
Senator Moran. I now have the honor of recognizing the
Ranking Member of the full committee, the Senator from Vermont,
Senator Leahy.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR PATRICK J. LEAHY
Senator Leahy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I'm glad to hear what you said about regular order.
Senator Shelby and I have been working closely on that. We had
a long meeting, the two of us, with the Republican and
Democratic leaders last night, and plot out ways to get most of
the bills done within the fiscal year.
Attorney General Sessions, welcome. Finally, we have you in
the Appropriations Committee. I'm sorry it's only your first
appearance here in 16 months. Because we have to make
appropriations, and we have to ask, after we make
appropriations, how the funds are expended. And, in my years on
this committee--and I think this can be said by Members of both
sides of the aisle--we consider the oversight operations of
this committee very important. And for the operations of your
Department, there is an urgent need for oversight.
INTEGRITY AND INDEPENDENCE OF DOJ
I want to begin with one thing. While you and I may
disagree on many policies, I've known you long enough to know
if there's one area where you and I are in total agreement--
total agreement--and that is that we care deeply about the
integrity of the Justice Department. You and I have felt that
way whether we've had a Republican or a Democratic President.
We have both stated so many times in the Judiciary Committee
our concern about the integrity of the Justice Department. And
I worry that the walls intended to protect the independence and
credibility of our law enforcement institutions are at the risk
of crumbling. I am very concerned how the President's
relentless and, I think, baseless attacks on senior DOJ and FBI
leadership, including attacking you for your recusal for the
Russia investigation, something you were required to do--you
just followed the law, and you did the right thing--is simply
without precedent. And I believe it's wrong.
SPECIAL COUNSEL ROBERT MUELLER AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL ROSENSTEIN
We've also learned that the President wanted to fire
Special Counsel Robert Mueller last year. The President's
allies are now going on television, apparently at the direction
of the White House, to build a case for firing your second in
command, Rod Rosenstein. Some of the President's allies in the
Congress have, I think, irresponsibly even talked about
impeaching Rod Rosenstein.
Now, I've been here 44 years. I've never seen such attacks.
And again, that's attacks against people in Democratic or a
Republican administration. I worry that they are being done to
interfere with your Department, the Department of Justice, a
place that you and I have always tried to protect the
Department's ability to complete an investigation into how and
with whom Russia attacked our democracy. And you're at the helm
of a Justice Department under siege. This is your chance to
talk to us about how you're going to protect it.
IMPORTANCE OF PROTECTING EQUAL RIGHTS FOR ALL
And, in that regard, don't let the Justice Department turn
its back on its tradition being a guardian of equal justice for
all, including the most vulnerable in our society, the most
disadvantaged. We have to be careful. Civil rights, voting
rights, immigration. In other words, giving equal protection to
all, including the most vulnerable in our society.
So, Mr. Chairman, those are the areas I will question,
because the Department of Justice is there for all of us, for
every American. And I want to make sure the Attorney General
has the tools and the ability to do that.
Senator Moran. Senator Leahy, thank you very much.
We now will recognize our witness today. I welcome once
again Attorney General Sessions to this subcommittee hearing.
And I recognize you for your opening statement.
SUMMARY STATEMENT OF HON. JEFF SESSIONS
Attorney General Sessions. Thank you very much, Chairman
Moran and Ranking Member Shaheen, distinguished Members of this
subcommittee, friends, and former colleagues. Thank you for the
opportunity to be with you.
I'm particularly pleased to be able to congratulate my
former senior Senator for 20 years, Senator Shelby, for being
chosen to Chair this historic committee. It is a tremendous
honor, Senator Shelby. And my sincere congratulations to you.
And you can know for sure how much I've appreciated our good
relationship for 20 years.
IMPORTANCE OF WORKING WITH LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AND FALLEN OFFICER
It's been an honor of a lifetime to serve as the Attorney
General of the United States and to represent the men and women
of the Department of Justice. You can be sure--really sure that
I understand the importance of the office I hold, and I will
strive to be worthy of it.
Every single day, the 115,000 men and women of the
Department work to protect our national security against
terrorist threats, reduce violent crime in our communities,
stop deadly drug dealers and their organizations, and
strengthen the rule of law. So, today I'd like to lay out some
of the priorities reflected in our budget request.
First of all, the Department has rapidly moved to improve
partnerships with the 85 percent of law enforcement officers
who serve at the State, local, and Tribal levels. We know that
we cannot succeed without them to make America safe.
And yesterday, we were once again reminded of the sacrifice
we ask of our men and women in blue. Officer Crystal Almeida
and Rogelio Santander responded to a routine call at a Home
Depot in Dallas, but they did not return home. And today we
mourn with the family of Officer Santander, and pray for the
recovery of Officer Almeida. The men and women of law
enforcement deserve our respect, they deserve our support, they
deserve our commitment in our work to reduce crime.
SPIKE IN CRIME RATES AND INCREASED PROSECUTIONS
After two decades of declining crime in 2015 and 2016, the
violent crime rate went up by nearly 7 percent. Assaults went
up 10 percent, rape went up nearly 11 percent, murder increased
in those 2 years more than 20 percent. That's the largest
increases since 1968. President Trump, our Federal officers,
our local law enforcement partners are determined that this
crime rate rise will not continue.
Our prosecutions of illicit drugs, gun violators, violent
crime, gangs, opioids, and immigration offenses are going to go
up, too. In 2017, we brought cases against more violent
criminals than any year in decades. We charged the most Federal
firearms prosecutions in a decade. We convicted nearly 500
human traffickers and 1200 gang members. Your strong support,
Congress's support for our work means that we can sustain our
Project Safe Neighborhood Program, where our United States
Attorneys will meet with your local community leaders and law
enforcement leaders to develop crime reduction plans based on
local needs. This is a program that has proven to be--to work.
Scientifically, it's been analyzed. And I feel great support
for it when I travel around the country. Indeed, there are some
good signs in the preliminary data that the increases in murder
and violent crime appear to have been slowed, and violent crime
may have actually begun to decrease.
OPIOIDS AND OVERDOSES
We also embrace the President's goal of reducing
prescription drugs sold in the United States by one-third over
the next 3 years. This is an important step in reducing
addiction and overdose deaths. We are simply prescribing too
many drugs in this country. This Department is going after drug
companies, doctors, pharmacists, and others who violate the
law. And we will use civil, criminal, and sound regulatory
powers to do so. I've directed that every United States
Attorneys Office establish an opioid coordinator to focus on
this dramatic problem.
As Senator Shaheen noted, the largest cause of death for
Americans under age 50 is overdose--drug overdoses. That is a
stunning statistic. We've got to do something about it. We've
already charged hundreds of people suspected of contributing to
the ongoing opioid crisis, including over 50 doctors for
opioid-related crime; some, very serious criminals. Sixteen of
these doctors prescribed more than 20.3 million pills
illegally.
ORGANIZED CRIME DRUG ENFORCEMENT TASK FORCES
Our Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Forces have also
indicted more than 6,500 defendants in opioid-related
investigations, and forfeited more than $150 million. With
powerful drugs like fentanyl and heroin on our streets, we
are--experience overdose deaths the likes of which we've never
seen before. This must end. We are out of time. We have to see
results now. And I truly believe we can make--change this
dynamic.
DRUGS AND THE SOUTHERN BORDER
Amazingly, in the last month alone, the DEA seized a total
of more than 90 kilograms, 2.2 pounds per kilogram, of
suspected fentanyl in cases from Detroit to New York to Boston.
Fentanyl is 50 times as powerful as heroin, and it's so
powerful that an amount equivalent to a pinch of salt is
powerful enough to be deadly. So, we must acknowledge that the
vast majority of fentanyl, methamphetamine, heroin, and cocaine
first come across our southern border. It almost all is coming
across the southern border. And we are working with our
Department of Homeland Security partners to reduce and
ultimately end illegal immigration, which will also help us to
take on transnational criminal organizations and reduce the
drugs flowing across the border. We're streamlining and
increasing prosecutions and targeting criminal aliens. Congress
has provided us, thankfully, enough funding for 100 new
immigration judges in the recent omnibus, which will help us
keep up with the caseload.
LEGAL ORIENTATION PROGRAM AND EXECUTIVE OFFICE FOR IMMIGRATION REVIEW
Mr. Chairman, I'd like to address one matter that I know is
important to the subcommittee, the Legal Orientation Program.
You and Senator Shaheen both raised it with me. I reviewed the
situation, and I have previously expressed some concerns about
the program. And the Executive Office for Immigration Review
has expressed its intent to pause two parts of the five-part
program, pending the results of a formal review of the program.
I recognize, however, that this subcommittee has spoken on this
matter. And, out of deference to the subcommittee, I've ordered
that there be no pause while the review is being conducted, and
I look forward to evaluating such findings as are produced and
will be in communication with this subcommittee when they are
available.
Our explicit goals for the Department of Justice are to
reduce violent crime, reduce the surging increase in homicides,
reduce overdose deaths, and to reduce prescription opioids. I
believe these priorities are the priorities of the American
people and, I believe, your priorities.
PRAISE OF U.S. LAW ENFORCEMENT
So, finally, let me say with all the strength that I can
muster, no nation has a finer group of law officers than those
who comprise the FBI, the DEA, the ATF, and United States
Marshals Service. They are now, now in 24 hours a day in every
corner of America, working courageously and faithfully to
protect this Nation and our people. And when we face criticism,
we're not going to be defensive. When questions arise, even if
misplaced, we will take necessary action to establish that
concerns are either not true or take strong action against any
wrongdoing. This Department, above all others, can never get
too big for its britches or think itself in any way as above
the law that we must apply to others. We know the Government
always wins when justice is done.
So, Mr. Chairman, I'm looking forward to discussing these
matters with you and Members of the subcommittee.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Jefferson B. Sessions III
Good afternoon, Chairman Moran, Ranking Member Shaheen and other
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. I am honored to appear
before you today to present the President's fiscal year 2019 budget for
the Department of Justice.
Let me start by thanking you for your strong support for the
Department in the recently completed fiscal year 2018 Omnibus
Appropriations bill. President Trump's fiscal year 2019 budget proposal
totals $28 billion for the Department of Justice to support Federal law
enforcement and the criminal justice priorities of our State, local,
and Tribal law enforcement partners. The request represents a
comprehensive investment in the Justice mission and includes increases
in funding to help us reduce violent crime, enforce the Nation's
immigration laws, combat the opioid epidemic, and continue our priority
commitment to national security.
The Department of Justice is facing a severe challenge. We must
confront rising violent crime and surging homicide rates. Illicit drug
production and supplies are up worldwide. Illicit drug prices are low,
supplies are high, and purity is at record levels. This is true for the
core dangerous drugs: fentanyl, heroin, methamphetamine, and cocaine.
In addition, the Nation is beginning to make reductions in opioid
prescriptions, and we must have further significant reductions in
manufacturing and prescribing highly addictive opioids.
Our DOJ team, along with our Federal, State, and local partners,
have high motivation and determination. We have been redeploying our
resources this past year to focus directly on these problems. Let me
say clearly, Mr. Chairman, you and this subcommittee have been strongly
supportive. We are determined to use every new dollar you have worked
to provide us to achieve the maximum benefit in our efforts against
these deadly drugs.
The President has ordered us to support State and local law
enforcement, dismantle transnational organized crime, and reduce crime.
For the last year, we have aggressively carried out that agenda and
have already seen notable successes that benefit the American people.
The key Department funding priorities include:
--Combating Violent Crime. The budget allocates an additional $109.2
million to support the President's initiatives to reduce
violent crime by targeting the worst of the worst transnational
criminal organizations, violent gangs, and drug traffickers
ravaging our Nation. A smart and sustained effort of this kind
with our State and local partners will produce good results.
--Drug Enforcement and the Opioid Crisis. The budget requests $295
million to combat the opioid epidemic that is destroying lives
and whole communities. It will allow us to target the drug
trafficking organizations, the drug companies, pharmacists, and
pharmacies that are moving too many prescription drugs into
America.
--Enforcing Immigration Laws. This budget requests an additional
$65.9 million to maintain the efficacy and efficiency of
immigration enforcement and adjudication programs and
processes. Of note, this budget requests 75 new immigration
judges (IJs) and support staff. Our goal is to responsibly end
the lawlessness in our system and offer a lawful system that
works to advance the national interest.
--State, Local, and Tribal Assistance. The budget provides $3.9
billion in discretionary and mandatory funding for State,
local, and Tribal law enforcement assistance, who comprise 85
percent of all law enforcement officers in America. Critical
programs aimed at protecting the life and safety of State and
local law enforcement personnel, including the Public Safety
Partnership Program and the Project Safe Neighborhood Program,
demonstrate our continuing commitment to supporting State,
local and Tribal law enforcement.
--Reprioritizing and Reshaping Resources for a More Efficient
Department. In line with the President's Executive order on a
``Comprehensive Plan for Reorganizing the Executive Branch,''
we are committed to establishing a leaner Federal Government
that reduces both bureaucracy and costs to the American
taxpayer. The Department is proposing a number of initiatives
to achieve savings, to reduce the size of government, and
maximize agency performance.
combating violent crime
Protecting the American people from violent crime is a top priority
for the Department of Justice. Unfortunately, in recent years, crime
has been on the rise in too many places across the country. FBI
statistics show that, in 2015 and 2016, the United States experienced
the largest increases in violent crime in a quarter-century.\1\ Over
those 2 years, violent crime increased by nearly 7 percent. Robberies,
assaults, and rapes all increased, and homicide increased by a shocking
20 percent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Dep't of Justice, Fed. Bureau of Investigation, Crime in
the United States, 2016: Table 1 & n.6, https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-
the-u.s/2016/crime-in-the-u.s.-2016/tables/table-1; for data years
prior to 1995, see U.S. Dep't of Justice, Fed. Bureau of Investigation,
UCR Data Tool, https://www.ucrdatatool.gov/index.cfm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2017, the Department made some great strides, including the
launch of the enhanced Project Safe Neighborhoods (PSN) initiative,
which brings together all levels of law enforcement and the communities
they serve to develop effective, locally based strategies to reduce
violent crime. Led by our 94 United States Attorney's Offices, PSN task
forces are hitting the streets across America to apprehend and bring
violent criminals to justice. I am asking Congress for additional PSN
funding for fiscal year 2019, totaling $140 million, because I believe
nothing will be more effective at reducing violent crime.
Under this program, I am asking a great deal of our United States
Attorneys. I am empowering them and holding them accountable for
results. To put them in the best position to impact and reduce violent
crime, I have directed the re-allocation of resources and will be
enlisting and deploying 300 additional violent crime prosecutors across
the United States this year. So far, the Department has brought cases
against the greatest number of violent criminals in at least 25 years--
since the Department began tracking a ``violent crime'' category.
Although preliminary numbers for 2017 show a decrease, violent crime
rates are still excessively high.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Press Release: Fed. Bureau of Investigation, FBI Releases
Preliminary Semiannual Crime Statistics for 2017, (Jan. 23, 2018),
https://www.fbi.gov/news/pressrel/press-releases/fbi-releases-
preliminary-semiannual-crime-statistics-for-2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The fiscal year 2019 budget also requests $109.2 million in program
enhancements to reduce violent crime and combat transnational criminal
organizations. These resources will enable the Department to dismantle
the worst criminal organizations, target the most violent offenders,
and protect the public. This includes increased funding for the Bureau
of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives' (ATF) National Integrated
Ballistic Information Network (NIBIN) in order to centralize the
correlation process that enables ballistic identification services for
law enforcement partners in a more accurate, efficient and streamlined
manner. Further, it supports expediting ATF's processing of National
Firearms Act (NFA) applications, which will allow for technical
advancements to ensure the most accurate and timely firearms
registrations to support the enforcement of the NFA and provide
certifications in support of criminal trials. Finally, it will provide
ATF additional resources to provide assistance to cities with surging
firearms violence by augmenting and enhancing ATF's regional Crime Gun
Intelligence Centers.
It will also provide funding to the Organized Crime and Drug
Enforcement Task Forces (OCDETF) with $4.6 million for the
establishment of a Co-Located Strike Force to target those
transnational criminal organizations that pose the greatest threat to
our national security and the safety of American citizens. The Criminal
Division (CRM) is also requesting $13 million for Mutual Legal
Assistance (MLAT) Reform. This critical funding will support 37
attorneys and 35 paralegals who support prosecutors domestically and
abroad by navigating foreign laws, treaties, and other requirements, to
secure the return of fugitives to face justice and to obtain the
evidence needed to convict them. The Office of International Affairs
(OIA) often seek evidence needed to thwart terrorist plots or seek the
removal of violent criminals hiding in America's cities. Finally, the
U.S. Marshals Service, the oldest American Federal law enforcement
agency tasked with apprehending dangerous and wanted fugitives, is
seeking $7.3 million for the development and implementation of a
comprehensive information technology (IT) integration project called
the ``Capture Initiative.'' This will consolidate operational data and
improve business and mission capabilities at the headquarters and in
the field, while ensuring their data is protected from cybersecurity
risks.
drug enforcement and the opioid crisis
The United States is in the midst of the deadliest drug epidemic in
American history. According to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), more than 63,600 Americans died from drug overdoses
in 2016, a 21 percent increase from the previous year.\3\ Over 42,200,
or approximately two-thirds, of these overdose deaths were caused by
heroin, fentanyl, and prescription opioids. The President declared this
scourge a National Public Health Emergency in October 2017, and the
Department remains committed to doing its part to protect the American
people from the impact of drugs and drug-related crime nationwide.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Hedegaard H, Warner M, Minino A. Drug Overdose Deaths in the
United States, 1999-2016. NCHS Data Brief, no 294. Hyattsville, MD:
National Center for Health Statistics. 2017. Available from: https://
www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db294.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The fiscal year 2019 budget requests $295 million in program
enhancements and transfers for the Drug Enforcement Administration
(DEA) to combat the opioid crisis and bolster drug enforcement efforts.
These resources will enable the Department to target those drug
trafficking organizations most responsible for the opioid epidemic and
drug-related violence in our communities, as well as ensure the life
and safety of first responders who are on the front lines protecting
the American people.
In fiscal year 2017, Congress funded the establishment of six
heroin enforcement teams, comprised of DEA Special Agents and State and
local task force officers. These teams have already begun to combat the
trafficking in heroin, fentanyl analogues and the violence associated
with drug trafficking that is ravaging our communities. DEA continues
to aggressively pursue enforcement actions against international and
domestic drug trafficking organizations, and in fiscal year 2019 we are
seeking $31.2 million to fund an additional eight new heroin
enforcement groups to be deployed to DEA Field Divisions that have
identified heroin as the first or second greatest threat to their area.
The funding will also increase the number of DEA Special Agents at
Field Divisions to target the Mexican Transnational Criminal
Organizations (TCOs) that pose the greatest drug threat to the United
States.
Further, the fiscal year 2019 request also supports $9.7 million
for DEA to expand its Fentanyl Signature Profiling Program (FSPP) as it
works to link fentanyl seizures to international and domestic
trafficking networks responsible for fueling the opioid crisis. It
would also provide funding for DEA's drug identification technology and
personal protective equipment for agents in the field to minimize
exposure to deadly opioids during enforcement actions and allow DEA to
convert the El Salvador Formally Vetted Unit to a Sensitive
Investigative Unit (SIU).
Finally, the President's budget proposes to permanently transfer
$254 million to DEA from the Office of National Drug Control Policy
(ONDCP) for facilitating coordination of the High Intensity Drug
Trafficking Areas (HIDTA) Program along with other drug enforcement
assets. Transferring the HIDTA grants to DEA will enable us to focus on
combating drug trafficking in areas where the threat is the greatest
and where there is a coordinated law enforcement presence.
enforce immigration laws
We are a strong, prosperous, and orderly nation and such a nation
must have a lawful system of immigration. Let no one contend that we
reject immigration and want to ``wall off America'' from all lawful
immigration. We admit 1.1 million immigrants lawfully to permanent
legal status--green card status--every year, the highest numbers in the
world. Indeed, at this unprecedented rate we will soon have the largest
percentage of non-native born in our Nation's history with the
percentage continuing to rise every year thereafter. Thus, the good and
decent people of this country are right to insist that this country
should end the illegality, create a rational immigration flow, and
protect the Nation from criminal aliens. It cannot be that someone who
illegally crosses the border and 2 days later arrives in Sacramento,
Dubuque, Louisville, or Central Islip is home free--never to be
removed.
It cannot be the policy of a great nation to reward those who
unlawfully enter its country with legal status, Social Security,
welfare, food stamps, and work permits. Meanwhile those who engage in
this process lawfully and patiently and wait their turn are
disadvantaged. Our citizens, want our Government to think about their
needs and to consider their interests. They have dreams too.
Immigration law is the province of the Federal Government. This
administration and this Justice Department are determined to make it
work fairly and effectively for the people.
The fiscal year 2019 President's budget strengthens the Nation's
security through stronger enforcement of the Nation's immigration laws.
The Department is requesting $65.9 million in immigration-related
program enhancements for fiscal year 2019, which will enhance border
security and immigration enforcement. These investments will also
improve our ability to conduct immigration hearings to help combat
illegal immigration to the United States by expanding capacity,
improving efficiency, and removing impediments to the timely
administration of justice. This budget supports the Department's
efforts, along with our partners at the Department of Homeland
Security, to fix our immigration system.
The Executive Office of Immigration Review (EOIR) oversees the
Nation's immigration courts and the Board of Immigrant Appeals. At the
beginning of fiscal year 2018, there were nearly 650,000 cases pending
nationwide, a 25 percent increase from fiscal year 2016 and by far the
largest pending caseload before the agency, marking the eleventh
consecutive year of increased backlogs. To maintain efficacy and
efficiency of immigration enforcement and adjudication programs, the
Department's request includes $39.8 million for 75 new immigration
judges (IJs) and support staff. Further, $25 million is included in
this request for EOIR to modernize its wholly paper-based case-related
system to provide for electronic submission of all case-related
information, establish Record of Proceedings (eROP), establish
electronic case adjudicatory aids for IJs, improve its case management
processes and end-to-end workflow, and eventually transition to a
paperless courtroom.
state, local, and tribal assistance
Federal law enforcement officers constitute only 15 percent of the
total number of law enforcement officers nationwide; therefore, 85
percent of the officer support relies upon strong partnership with
State and local law enforcement. The Department supports its partners
in State and local law enforcement, who have critical intelligence
about violent crime in their communities, and whose actions are crucial
in the fight against violent crime and the opioid epidemic. The fiscal
year 2019 budget continues its commitment to State, local and Tribal
law enforcement by investing approximately $3.9 billion in
discretionary and mandatory funding in programs to assist them. Funding
has been prioritized to meet the most pressing law enforcement
concerns--violent crime and opioid abuse--and to help the victims of
crime.
We are also confronting the State and local jurisdictions that have
undertaken to undo our immigration laws through so-called ``sanctuary
policies.'' Such policies undermine the moral authority of law and
undermine the safety of the jurisdictions that adopt them. Police are
forced to release criminal aliens back into the community--no matter
what their crimes. Think about that: Police may be forced to release
pedophiles, rapists, murderers, drug dealers, and arsonists back into
the communities where they had no right to be in the first place. They
should-- according to law and common sense--be processed and deported.
These policies hinder the work of Federal law enforcement; they are
contrary to the rule of law, and they have serious consequences.
Sanctuary jurisdictions feign outrage when they lose Federal funds
as a direct result of actions which contradict Federal law. Some have
even decided to go to court so that they can keep receiving taxpayer-
funded grants while continuing to impede Federal immigration
enforcement. We intend to fight this resolutely. We cannot continue
giving Federal grants to cities that actively undermine the safety of
Federal law officers and intentionally frustrate efforts to reduce
crime in their own cities. These jurisdictions that knowingly,
willfully, and purposefully release criminal aliens back into their
communities are sacrificing the lives and safety of American citizens
in the pursuit of an extreme open borders policy. It is extreme,
because if a jurisdiction will not deport someone who enters illegally
and then commits another crime, then who will they deport?
This is not just a bad policy; it is a direct challenge to the laws
of the United States. It places the lives of our fine law enforcement
officers at risk; I cannot and will not accept this increased risk
because certain elected officials want to make a statement. Our duty is
to protect public safety and protect taxpayer dollars and I plan to
fulfill those duties.
restructuring initiatives
The administration is committed to establishing a leaner, more
productive Federal Government that reduces both, bureaucracy and costs
to the American taxpayer. Since 2017, the Department of Justice has
undertaken efforts to refocus resources and return our efforts to our
core mission. To support the President's Executive order on
reorganizing the executive branch, the Department of Justice has begun
taking steps to streamline and improve its good stewardship of
taxpayers' dollars. As part of the fiscal year 2019 President's budget,
the Department is proposing a number of initiatives to achieve savings,
to reduce the size of government, and maximize agency performance.
Highlights of the restructuring initiatives include:
--The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives' (ATF)
responsibilities related to alcohol and tobacco enforcement
will transfer to the Department of Treasury's Alcohol and
Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau. ATF will retain its current
enforcement responsibilities for firearms and explosives, while
re-focusing their resources on violent crime. As part of that,
ATF will pursue a workforce refresh effort, leveraging
attrition from its retirement-eligible workforce to
reinvigorate a cadre of Special Agents and Investigators to
work on ATF's violent crime initiatives.
--The Bureau of Prisons (BOP) will shift to historical inmate-to-
staff ratios. It will also close two Regional Offices and two
stand-alone minimum-security prison camps, which is anticipated
to achieve over $122 million in savings.
--Beginning in fiscal year 2018, the Department will merge
administrative support and certain grant management staff for
the three Department grant offices. These grants benefit our
State and local partners who are on the front lines fighting
crime and battling the opioid crisis. The Department plans to
build one grants management system to streamline the grants
process. As part of this effort in fiscal year 2019, the
Department will consolidate the Office of Community Oriented
Policing (COPS) into the Bureau of Justice Assistance at the
Office of Justice Programs (OJP).
--The budget also proposes to transfer the Community Relations
Service (CRS) to the Civil Rights Division, who will then be
able to perform its community mediation work in a more
centralized manner and at a greater savings to the taxpayer.
--Finally as previously noted, the HIDTA grant program will transfer
from ONDCP to DEA. This change will eliminate redundancies
within Federal organizations by reallocating this program,
which supports States and communities fighting the scourge of
illegal drugs, into the same agency leading the enforcement
efforts in those communities.
conclusion
Chairman Moran, Ranking Member Shaheen and Members of the
subcommittee, it is my pleasure to highlight our efforts to be good
stewards of the resources and authorities bestowed on us as we
strengthen the Department's ability to ensure safety, equality, and
justice for all Americans. As Attorney General, I am committed to
making the Department of Justice run as efficiently and effectively as
possible, without adding to the burden of the American taxpayer. I
thank you for your past support of the Department's financial needs,
and for the opportunity to present our fiscal year 2019 budget request.
I look forward to working with you through the upcoming fiscal year to
ensure that the Department of Justice remains on solid financial
footing and can accomplish its multiple and varied missions
effectively.
Senator Moran. Mr. Attorney General, thank you very much.
Let me, first, use this as an opportunity to say how
wholeheartedly I agree with your assessment of the law
enforcement officials at the Department of Justice and across
the country, and how worthy they are of our respect and
support. And I appreciate the sentiments that you expressed on
their behalf. And I would assume I join all my colleagues in
indicating our full faith and belief in those who work every
day to protect the lives and safety of Americans here at home.
So, thank you for those strong words, and I commend you for
them.
RULE OF LAW AND LEGAL ORIENTATION PROGRAM
Secondly, let me thank you for your response. As I
indicated in my opening statement, Senator Shaheen and I
corresponded with you in regard to the pause of the Legal
Orientation Program. And I want to thank you for your
recognition of congressional words, actions. They're--the pause
would be in contravention of this subcommittee and the full
Appropriations Committee, and actually Congress's direction
that no pause occur. And I appreciate you again recognizing the
rule of law and your support for Members of this subcommittee
in our desire to see that program continue. So, thank you for
the response that you gave us here today. I'm pleased to hear
it.
Now, let me turn to my questions. Let me, first, say that
opening statements by other Members of the subcommittee can be
made part of your 7 minutes or could be made as a request by
unanimous consent to be made part of the record.
CENSUS CITIZENSHIP QUESTION
Let me ask about the Census. Mr. Attorney General, this
past December, the Department of Justice sent an official
letter to the Census Bureau requesting that it reinstate a
question on the citizenship status to the 2020 Census forms.
This subcommittee also has jurisdiction over the funding of the
Census. So, just let me give you the opportunity to explain why
the Department made this request. And will you elaborate on how
the data gathered would be used?
Attorney General Sessions. I would be pleased to discuss
it, as much as I can. The matter is in litigation, so I have
some handicap in discussing all matters that you might be
interested in.
The Census, I believe it's common sense and would be
appropriate to ask whether or not an individual being surveyed
is a citizen of the United States, or not. It had previously
been in the Census and remains a part of the annual survey
that's done. So, I think that's where we are. It can help us in
determining a number of issues, particularly in our Civil
Rights Division. And they--our attorneys have compiled some
legal reasons we think that would justify that question, and
would be pleased to send that to you.
[The information follows:]
December 12, 2017
Dr. Ron Jarmin
Performing the Non-Exclusive Functions and Duties of the Director
U.S. Census Bureau
United States Department of Commerce
Washington, D.C. 20233-0001
Re: Request To Reinstate Citizenship Question On 2020 Census
Questionnaire
Dear Dr. Jarmin:
The Department of Justice is committed to robust and evenhanded
enforcement of the Nation's civil rights laws and to free and fair
elections for all Americans. In furtherance of that commitment. I write
on behalf of the Department to formally request that the Census Bureau
reinstate on the 2020 Census questionnaire a question regarding
citizenship, formerly included in the so-called ``long form'' census.
This data is critical to the Department's enforcement of Section 2 of
the Voting Rights Act and its important protections against racial
discrimination in voting. To fully enforce those requirements, the
Department needs a reliable calculation of the citizen voting-age
population in localities where voting rights violations are alleged or
suspected. As demonstrated below, the decennial census questionnaire is
the most appropriate vehicle for collecting that data, and reinstating
a question on citizenship will best enable the Department to protect
all American citizens' voting rights under Section 2.
The Supreme Court has held that Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act
prohibits ``vote dilution'' by State and local jurisdictions engaged in
redistricting, which can occur when a racial group is improperly
deprived of a single-member district in which it could form a majority.
See Thornburg v. Gingles, 478 U.S. 30, 50 (1986). Multiple Federal
courts of appeals have held that, where citizenship rates are at issue
in a vote-dilution case, citizen voting-age population is the proper
metric for determining whether a racial group could constitute a
majority in a single-member district See, e.g., Reyes v. City of
Farmers Branch, 586 F.3d 1019, 1023-24 (5th Cir. 2009); Barnett v. City
of Chicago, 141 F.3d 699, 704 (7th Cir. 1998); Negrn v. City of Miami
Beach, 113 F.3d 1563, 1567-69 (11th Cir. 1997); Romero v. City of
Pomona, 883 F.2d 1418, 1426 (9th Cir. 1989), overruled in part on other
grounds by Townsend v. Holman Consulting Corp., 914 F.2d 1136, 1141
(9th Cir. 1990); see also LULAC v. Perry, 548 U.S. 399, 423-442 (2006)
(analyzing vote-dilution claim by reference to citizen voting-age
population).
The purpose of Section 2's vote-dilution prohibition ``is to
facilitate participation . . . in our political process'' by preventing
unlawful dilution of the vote on the basis of race. Campos v. City of
Houston, 113 F.3d 544, 548 (5th Cir. 1997). Importantly, ``[t]he plain
language of section 2 of the Voting Rights Act makes clear that its
protections apply to United States citizens.'' Id. Indeed, courts have
reasoned that ``[t]he right to vote is one of the badges of
citizenship'' and that ``[t]he dignity and very concept of citizenship
are diluted if noncitizens are allowed to vote.'' Barnett, 141 F.3d at
704. Thus, it would be the wrong result for a legislature or a court to
draw a single-member district in which a numerical racial minority
group in a jurisdiction was a majority of the total voting-age
population in that district but ``continued to be defeated at the
polls'' because it was not a majority of the citizen voting-age
population. Campos, 113 F.3d at 548.
These cases make clear that, in order to assess and enforce
compliance with Section 2's protection against discrimination in
voting, the Department needs to be able to obtain citizen voting-age
population data for census blocks, block groups, counties, towns, and
other locations where potential Section 2 violations are alleged or
suspected. From 1970 to 2000, the Census Bureau included a citizenship
question on the so-called ``long form'' questionnaire that it sent to
approximately one in every six households during each decennial census.
See, e.g., U.S. Census Bureau, Summary File 3: 2000 Census of
Population & Housing--Appendix B at B-7 (July 2007), available at
https://www.census.gov/prod/cen2000/doc/sf3.pdf (last visited Nov. 22,
2017); U.S. Census Bureau, Index of Questions, available at https://
www.census.gov/history/www/through_the_decades/index_of_questions/
(last visited Nov. 22, 2017). For years, the Department used the data
collected in response to that question in assessing compliance with
Section 2 and in litigation to enforce Section 2's protections against
racial discrimination in voting.
In the 2010 Census, however, no census questionnaire included a
question regarding citizenship. Rather, following the 2000 Census, the
Census Bureau discontinued the ``long form'' questionnaire and replaced
it with the American Community Survey (ACS). The ACS is a sampling
survey that is sent to only around one in every 38 households each year
and asks a variety of questions regarding demographic information,
including citizenship. See U.S. Census Bureau, American Community
Survey Information Guide at 6, available at https://www.census.gov/
content/dam/
Census/programs-surveys/acs/about/ACS Information Guide.pdf (last
visited Nov. 22, 2017). The ACS is currently the Census Bureau's only
survey that collects information regarding citizenship and estimates
citizen voting-age population.
The 2010 redistricting cycle was the first cycle in which the ACS
estimates provided the Census Bureau's only citizen voting-age
population data. The Department and State and local jurisdictions
therefore have used those ACS estimates for this redistricting cycle.
The ACS, however, does not yield the ideal data for such purposes for
several reasons:
--Jurisdictions conducting redistricting, and the Department in
enforcing Section 2, already use the total population data from
the census to determine compliance with the Constitution's one-
person, one-vote requirement, see Evenwel v. Abbott, 136 S. Ct.
1120 (Apr. 4, 2016). As a result, using the ACS citizenship
estimates means relying on two different data sets, the scope
and level of detail of which vary quite significantly.
--Because the ACS estimates are rolling and aggregated into 1-year,
3-year, and 5-year estimates, they do not align in time with
the decennial census data. Citizenship data from the decennial
census, by contrast, would align in time with the total and
voting-age population data from the census that jurisdictions
already use in redistricting.
--The ACS estimates are reported at a 90 percent confidence level,
and the margin of error increases as the sample size--and,
thus, the geographic area--decreases. See U.S. Census Bureau,
Glossary: Confidence interval (American Community Survey),
available at https://www.census.gOv/glossary/#term_
ConfidenceintervalAmericanCommunitySurvey (last visited
November 22, 2017). By contrast, decennial census data is a
full count of the population.
--Census data is reported to the census block level, while the
smallest unit reported in the ACS estimates is the census block
group. See American Community Survey Data 3, 5, 10.
Accordingly, redistricting jurisdictions and the Department are
required to perform further estimates and to interject further
uncertainty in order to approximate citizen voting-age
population at the level of a census block, which is the
fundamental building block of a redistricting plan. Having all
of the relevant population and citizenship data available in
one data set at the census block level would greatly assist the
redistricting process.
For all of these reasons, the Department believes that decennial
census questionnaire data regarding citizenship, if available, would be
more appropriate for use in redistricting and in Section 2 litigation
than the ACS citizenship estimates.
Accordingly, the Department formally requests that the Census
Bureau reinstate into the 2020 Census a question regarding citizenship.
We also request that the Census Bureau release this new data regarding
citizenship at the same time as it releases the other redistricting
data, by April 1 following the 2020 Census. At the same time, the
Department requests that the Bureau also maintain the citizenship
question on the ACS, since such question is necessary, inter alia, to
yield information for the periodic determinations made by the Bureau
under Section 203 of the Voting Rights Act, 52 U.S.C. Sec. 10503.
Please let me know if you have any questions about this letter or
wish to discuss this request I can be reached at (202) 514-3452, or at
[emailprotected]
Sincerely yours,
Arthur E. Gary
General Counsel
Justice Management Division
Senator Moran. General, thank you very much.
COPS REALIGNMENT TO OJP
Let me turn to the Community Oriented Policing Services
(COPS) Program. Your fiscal year 2019 request proposes transfer
the COPS office of the--I'm sorry--the COPS office to the
Department Office of Justice Programs. But, in executing this
transfer, the program itself will take a $176 million reduction
from fiscal year 2018 enacted levels. As you know, the COPS
Program has received broad bipartisan support from this
subcommittee in the past. And, Attorney General, could you
explain to me, to the subcommittee, why this restructuring is
useful or necessary?
Attorney General Sessions. Well, it is popular with this
subcommittee, and popular with the Congress. Most Presidents
often have not been as supportive as the Congress has. So, once
again, our budget is below the request you had asked. We do
believe that we can save money and be--provide more money for
the grants themselves by consolidating the COPS Program in the
Bureau of Justice--Office of Justice Programs and its
subcomponent, Bureau of Justice Statistics. They have the
infrastructure, the teamwork, and the capability of managing
grants. And we think that would be a nice step to improve
productivity and efficiency. It would not undermine the
program, in my view, in any way. It's very popular with our law
enforcement officers. And we also are creating a circumstance
and recommending that more of the money be available as a
priority to school resource officers to deal with violence in
schools.
Senator Moran. Thank you for your response.
HIGH INTENSITY DRUG TRAFFICKING AREAS (HIDTA)
Let me turn to HIDTA, the High Intensity Drug Trafficking
Areas. Your fiscal year 2019 request, you propose to transfer
the HIDTA Program from the Office of National Drug Control
Policy under the Executive Office of the President to the Drug
Enforcement Administration. So, HIDTA initiatives provide
assistance through Federal grants to State, local, and Tribal
law enforcement agencies operating in areas determined to be
critical drug trafficking regions of the United States,
including, unfortunately, several in Kansas. Often, these HIDTA
initiatives work hand in hand with the Drug Enforcement
Administration. I understand there are a large number of
special agents within the DEA that are solely dedicated to the
HIDTA Program. While I understand the desire and rationale of
supporting the transfer of this program to DEA, I also
recognize the concerns, expressed by some of my colleagues and
by certain law enforcement entities in Kansas, that this
transfer may hamper an important and successful grant program
by moving it to an agency with no grantmaking experience. Can
you address these concerns and elaborate on why you believe
that this programmatic shift is necessary?
Attorney General Sessions. Chairman Moran, the President
challenged all of us to seek to improve the efficiency and
productivity of the Government. You are correct that DEA and
the HIDTA organization have worked closely together for many,
many years--I guess, actually since the beginning. I remember
when it was created. The--HIDTA reports through, or to, the
ONDCP, the Office of National Drug Control Policy. That is a
policy function. Bill Bennett was the first, I believe,
Director. And it was supposed to coordinate the various Federal
agencies that deal with drugs and to make sure that our budgets
were properly constructed of all, whether it's State
Department, Defense Department, or Health and Human Services,
wherever money is being spent on drugs.
So, I think it is a better organizational structure, that
that function of ONDCP remain as its priority, and the actual
investigating and prosecuting cases be done through the DEA.
But, the HIDTA teams, the HIDTA people, the community leaders
that form the councils that lead the HIDTAs, will remain in
effect. The only difference would be that the grant money would
come out of--be managed from DEA. And that would, we hope,
engender an even closer relationship.
Senator Moran. General, thank you.
Now my opportunity to recognize the Ranking Member of the
subcommittee for her questioning.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
LEGAL ORIENTATION PROGRAM
And thank you, Attorney General Sessions, for your decision
on the Legal Orientation Program. I'm pleased to hear that you
have responded to the concerns that Senator Moran and I raised.
METHODOLOGY OF THE EFFICIENCY STUDY
I would just point out that one of the other items in that
letter was a request for information regarding the methodology
of the efficiency study that is underway. I hope that
information would be forthcoming to us as soon as that's
available.
Attorney General Sessions. I will make sure that happens.
[The information follows:]
The Department of Justice has provided its methodology for the
Legal Orientation Program (LOP) efficiency study to the Senate
Appropriations Committee under separate cover.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you.
HIDTA AND DEA AND GRANTS
I wanted to follow up on Senator Moran's question about the
HIDTA Program, because that has also been very important in New
Hampshire. I'm sure, when you were there, you heard how helpful
the program has been in addressing our opioid epidemic and
actually capturing some of the drugs that have been coming
across the border into New Hampshire. I appreciate your
interest in efficiency, although I've heard from the folks who
participate in HIDTA in New Hampshire that they are very happy
where they are. But, as Senator Moran pointed out and as you
acknowledged, the DEA is not a grant making agency. What is the
DEA's plan for managing funding with this proposed move?
Attorney General Sessions. Well, we at the Department of
Justice have tremendous experience in grant programs, in
managing. We will be very supportive of DEA, which is our
subordinate agency, in helping them to establish that kind of
activity. But, again, I would say the actual funding, of
course, will be Congress's decision. The leadership in the
HIDTA community organizations would remain the same, but their
grant money would be managed from DEA, which I do believe would
help make that a tighter and better relationship. They'd still
have their own independence and their own leadership teams.
But, the--I think it could enhance the--that. And I do believe
ONDCP probably never was created or expected to be a grant
program of this kind.
COST OF GRANT MAKING MECHANISM
Senator Shaheen. Is there any assessment of what the cost
of setting up that grant making mechanism would be within----
Attorney General Sessions. I believe----
Senator Shaheen [continuing]. The DEA?
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. There is some
expense in the initial setup, but I believe we can be able to
do the grant program at certainly no more expense than
currently exists, and maybe better, with our deep experience in
grant making in the Department of Justice. So, it would go from
the--basically, the White House ONDC office--ONDCP--to the
Department of Justice.
Senator Shaheen. Well, I look forward to hearing more about
that.
BYRNE JAG GRANTS
As I said in my opening statement, I am hearing from police
chiefs throughout New Hampshire about their concern that the
expected funding from the Byrne-JAG program has not yet been
forthcoming. The Seventh Circuit released its decision on April
19, which held that the Justice Department exceeded its legal
authority in placing conditions on Byrne-JAG. When you and I
discussed this matter on the phone, you pointed out that, win
or lose, those grants would go out. So, I just wondered what I
should tell the police chiefs in New Hampshire about when they
might expect funding.
COORDINATION WITH LOCAL, FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT REGARDING IMMIGRANTS
Attorney General Sessions. Senator Shaheen, we intend to
get that money out. Sooner is better than later. But, the
litigation is an important piece of litigation, and we placed
only the most minor of requirements on the grant program. We
asked our State and local partners, ``If you want to get the
Byrne law enforcement grant''--we asked them to do two things.
One was to, ``Give us notice 48 hours before an illegal alien
who you've arrested for some crime is released, and to allow us
to pick that individual up at the detention facility rather
than releasing them on the streets and having our ICE officers
and others have to try to find a criminal that needs to be
arrested.'' And that's a very dangerous thing, places law
officers at risk. That's what the Homeland Security officials
pleaded with us to ask for, so we pared it down to a minimal
thing we ask of them. We didn't ask the police to interview
people. We didn't ask them to go arrest people for us or
anything like that. Only to give us notice before release and
to allow us to pick the individual up, more--far more safely,
at the detention facility.
Senator Shaheen. Well, this is a longstanding
congressionally-mandated formula grant program. Why does DOJ
think it can place conditions on this program which has been
operating for so many years based on the mandate that Congress
has given it? Could you also address whether you plan to hold
funding for fiscal year 2018 in the same way that you've been
holding it for fiscal year 2017?
Attorney General Sessions. Well, to the first part of your
question, this is a statute Congress passed, 34 U.S.C.
10102(a)(6), and it says, ``The Assistant Attorney General of
OJP shall exercise such other powers and functions as may be
vested in the Assistant Attorney General pursuant to this
chapter or by delegation of the Attorney General, including
placing special conditions on all grants and determining
priority purposes for formula grants.'' So, we felt, when we
went to court, that these minor conditions for receiving a
Federal grant were very reasonable, and we're deeply
disappointed that the court has not, at least to this moment,
seen itself able to agree. And we'll, of course, abide by the
law, but we do want to review the situation and see if we
cannot improve it.
Senator Shaheen. I'm out of time, but just briefly, I know
DOJ filed another motion with the Seventh Circuit on April 23.
Do you expect to continue to go all the way up to the Supreme
Court with your motions if you're denied again the Seventh
Circuit?
Attorney General Sessions. I'll have to talk with our
lawyers. They worked hard on this case. And we've not seen--so,
one thing about it, it's one thing to deal with the merits,
it's another matter to deal with a preliminary injunction. So,
we have an injunction that I think went beyond the law, in the
sense that--the case was first raised in Chicago. It has its
own unique set of laws and policies. But, the judge issued an
order, then bound the entire United States. Many of those are
in--perfectly happy to comply with these requirements of the
Department of Justice. So, it's a frustrating matter. It's a
big deal. And I just would--I think--I have to say, I've been
appreciative of our law enforcement leaders, who I think, by
and large, agree that these minimum requirements are
legitimate. So, they've been patient with us. But, I am worried
about it. We're working hard to bring it to a conclusion.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you. I appreciate that. For States
like New Hampshire, where we have no sanctuary cities, it puts
us at a special disadvantage.
Senator Moran. Senator, thank you.
I now recognize the Vice Chairman of the full committee,
Senator Leahy.
Senator Leahy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
ATTORNEY GENERAL RECUSAL AND MICHAEL COHEN INVESTIGATION
Attorney General, last week I sent you a letter regarding
your commitment to recuse from ``any existing or future
investigations of any matters related in any way to the
campaigns for President''. Are you recused from the Federal
investigation of the President's attorney, Michael Cohen, which
reportedly involves matters directly related to the campaign,
including possible campaign finance violations?
Attorney General Sessions. Senator Leahy, I am honoring the
recusal in every case, in every matter that comes before the
Department of Justice. I committed to that in my confirmation
hearing, and I have honored that, and will continue to honor
that. In----
Senator Leahy. Did it include Cohen?
Attorney General Sessions. It is the policy of the
Department of Justice that those who've recuse themselves not
state the details of it or any--or confirm the existence of a
investigation, or the scope or nature of that investigation.
Senator Leahy. I understand----
Attorney General Sessions. And so, I feel like, following
the rules of the Department, which I'm trying to teach all of
our people to do, that I should not answer that question. It
would be inappropriate for me to do so.
Senator Leahy. I know the question was not a surprise to
you, and nor is your answer a surprise to me, but recusal here
is not discretionary. It's required by Justice Department
regulations when you have a ``political relationship'' with the
President, which you've already acknowledged, and the President
has a ``specific and substantial interest'' in the
investigation. Now, the Federal judge granted the President's
request to formally intervene in this matter, which is here in
Judge Kimba Wood's order. And I'll be glad to give you a copy
of this if you like. But, Judge Wood allows the President to
formally intervene in this matter, so he is a member--or he is
part of that investigation. And I would suggest he has a
``specific and substantial interest''. So, wouldn't--by Justice
Department regulations, doesn't that require you to be recused?
Attorney General Sessions. Senator Leahy, it--I am required
to be recused from any matter involving the substance of the
cases--matters you raised in your opening statement,
absolutely. And I will comply with that. But, to--it is not--it
is the policy of the Department that if you get into discussing
the details of those matters, you can reveal the existence,
scope, or breadth, or nature of a matter, they would be
inappropriate.
Senator Leahy. And so----
Attorney General Sessions. So, I think the best answer for
me, having given it some thought, is to say that I should not
announce that. In fact, recusals that happen all the time in
the Department are not made public, but they're internally
binding.
Senator Leahy. Have you sought any advice of career ethics
officials about whether you should or should not recuse
yourself in the Cohen matter?
Attorney General Sessions. I have sought advice on those
matters, and I have not met with the top ethics person on it,
but I can assure you I have not violated my recusal.
Senator Leahy. And you do agree that the Justice Department
regulations require recusal when you have a ``political
relationship'' with somebody who has a ``specific and
substantial interest'' in the investigation. That is basically
the regulation, is it not?
Attorney General Sessions. That is the regulation, I
believe, 600 some--part 1. But, that's the regulation that I
felt required me----
Senator Leahy. I know.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. To recuse myself.
ATTORNEY GENERAL RESIGNATION REGARDING FIRING OF DEPUTY ATTORNEY
GENERAL ROSENSTEIN
Senator Leahy. It was reported last weekend that you told
the White House Counsel you would consider resigning as
Attorney General if the President fired Deputy Attorney General
Rosenstein. I'm not going to ask about that conversation. But,
if the President were to improperly fire either the Deputy
Attorney General who supervises the Russia investigation or the
Special Counsel, would you resign in opposition?
Attorney General Sessions. Senator Leahy, that calls for a
speculative answer--or question calls for speculation. I just
am not able to do that.
Senator Leahy. And were you surprised by that question? You
don't have to answer that. Your smile answers the question.
LEGAL ORIENTATION PROGRAM
And, lastly, on the--you've been asked about the Legal
Orientation Program (LOP). Whatever study is being done there,
that will be open and transparent, will it not?
Attorney General Sessions. We will do so. And, look, I have
some doubts about that program. The committees believe in that
program. We'll talk about it and--before any action occurs.
Senator Leahy. Yes, because we have appropriated the money,
and we have directed the program to go forward. So, I would
hope that you do not take any action on it without being in
touch with both the senior Republicans, senior Democrats of the
committees that have instructed it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Mr. Vice Chairman, thank you very much.
Senator from Maine, Senator Collins.
Senator Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And let me,
first, congratulate you. And I very much look forward to
working with you and the Ranking Member.
ELDER FRAUD
Mr. Attorney General, before I turn to my questions, I want
to thank you for your leadership on an issue that matters
greatly to me. And that is fraud and scams that are directed
against our senior citizens. You've really taken a leadership
role on this. I know the Department announced, in February,
that more than 250 defendants had been charged with scamming
more than a million Americans, for a total amount in excess of
a half a billion dollars. It's an issue we've been trying to
get the Justice Department to pay attention to for years, and I
very much appreciate your leadership.
I'd now like to turn to my questions, which may not be
quite as pleasing to your ears as my thank you.
DEFERRED ACTION FOR CHILDHOOD ARRIVALS (DACA)
The administration has now lost its third Deferred Action
for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) case in Federal court. That
program and the fate of the group of young people for whom
there is a pretty widespread consensus that we should try to
help continues to be clouded by uncertainty. Given the repeated
failures in court and the fact that the President has
repeatedly indicated that border security remains a high
priority for him, wouldn't it make sense for the administration
to revisit the bipartisan DACA compromise that was proposed
earlier this year, that received 54 votes on the Senate floor,
which would have funded the President's border security program
in its entirety while providing a pathway to citizenship for
DACA young people who have good records?
Attorney General Sessions. Senator Collins, I do believe
there is an opportunity for legislation by Congress. I served
20 years on your side of the table. My good--my feeling is that
that's possible. I've said that in a number of hearings that
I've been in since I've been Attorney General. So, I think
that's possible.
I would say that two district courts, one in New York and
California, did issue injunctions stopping the simple removal
of the memoranda, really, is all it was, of the Homeland
Security to enact DACA. DACA was, basically, rejected by
Congress. Congress did not pass it. And the President had said
repeatedly he could not do it on his own. But, once he--it was
not passed in Congress, then the President got his Homeland
Security team to enact this matter. I think it was unlawful.
It's pretty much the finding of the Fifth Circuit in a related
case involving DACA. And there was a court in Maryland that
rejected this kind of injunction. So, three courts ruled on
this DACA, two said it was not sustainable, and one said it
was.
So, we believe that the right thing is legislation. I would
like to see law--look, I'll be frank. My view is, a plan that
will end the illegality along with some relief for the DACA
young people is possible. It can be done. And the President has
laid out a number of options, and it's been unfortunate that it
hasn't come together.
Senator Collins. Well, Mr. Attorney General, many of us on
this panel worked very hard to try to get that done and to put
DACA in law. And I think that, had the Department of Homeland
Security not issued a very misleading press release the night
before the vote, accompanied by a veto threat by the President,
we were there. At one point, I could count the 60 votes.
But, we want to legislate in that area. I agree with you
that it should be legislated. And I hope that, with the court
rulings, that there is an extra impetus for the administration
to work with us. And it's also an opportunity for the President
to get a very high priority of his in strengthening the border,
which we also need to do.
Attorney General Sessions. Yes.
Senator Collins. So, I thank you.
Attorney General Sessions. Senators, I--just let me say, I
think this is doable, but it cannot be done if we haven't fixed
the illegal immigration flow. And my concern about the bill
that you referred to was, it did not sufficiently close the
loopholes and fix some of the problems that we have. If we
could get that done, I think the possibility of a successful
legislation would be greater. That's what the President said.
And I think you--I think it could be done.
Senator Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Senator from Hawaii, Senator Schatz.
Senator Schatz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Congratulations,
Mr. Chairman. I'm looking forward to working with you. I will
miss you on the MILCON VA Subcommittee, but I understand and
forgive you.
CENSUS CITIZENSHIP QUESTION
But, Mr. Attorney General, thank you for being here. I want
to follow up on a question that Chairman Moran asked about the
citizenship question on the Census. Communities of color
advocacies--excuse me--advocacy organizations around the Census
are, frankly, worried that the presence of that question is
going to discourage participation in immigrant communities. And
I understand that it's on the long form, and I understand that
it's not without precedent that we're doing that. But, I have
two questions for you. First, how do you respond to those
communities of color who are worried that this will simply
scare people to not respond to the Census at all, number one?
And number two is, you've indicated that the Civil Rights
Division wants the data, and I'm wondering why.
Attorney General Sessions. I'll be glad to send you the
letter that they--we produced regarding this issue, detailing
the advantages of it--having the information. I do note that it
is being asked on the other survey. And I would suggest that--
I've learned it's the 12th question on the form--the last
question, I believe. It shouldn't scare people. They don't have
to answer it. And--really--and so, I would think that that's a
very reasonable thing. And I believe the concerns over it are
overblown.
[The information follows:]
December 12, 2017
Dr. Ron Jarmin
Performing the Non-Exclusive Functions and Duties of the Director
U.S. Census Bureau
United States Department of Commerce
Washington, D.C. 20233-0001
Re: Request To Reinstate Citizenship Question On 2020 Census
Questionnaire
Dear Dr. Jarmin:
The Department of Justice is committed to robust and evenhanded
enforcement of the Nation's civil rights laws and to free and fair
elections for all Americans. In furtherance of that commitment. I write
on behalf of the Department to formally request that the Census Bureau
reinstate on the 2020 Census questionnaire a question regarding
citizenship, formerly included in the so-called ``long form'' census.
This data is critical to the Department's enforcement of Section 2 of
the Voting Rights Act and its important protections against racial
discrimination in voting. To fully enforce those requirements, the
Department needs a reliable calculation of the citizen voting-age
population in localities where voting rights violations are alleged or
suspected. As demonstrated below, the decennial census questionnaire is
the most appropriate vehicle for collecting that data, and reinstating
a question on citizenship will best enable the Department to protect
all American citizens' voting rights under Section 2.
The Supreme Court has held that Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act
prohibits ``vote dilution'' by State and local jurisdictions engaged in
redistricting, which can occur when a racial group is improperly
deprived of a single-member district in which it could form a majority.
See Thornburg v. Gingles, 478 U.S. 30, 50 (1986). Multiple Federal
courts of appeals have held that, where citizenship rates are at issue
in a vote-dilution case, citizen voting-age population is the proper
metric for determining whether a racial group could constitute a
majority in a single-member district See, e.g., Reyes v. City of
Farmers Branch, 586 F.3d 1019, 1023-24 (5th Cir. 2009); Barnett v. City
of Chicago, 141 F.3d 699, 704 (7th Cir. 1998); Negrn v. City of Miami
Beach, 113 F.3d 1563, 1567-69 (11th Cir. 1997); Romero v. City of
Pomona, 883 F.2d 1418, 1426 (9th Cir. 1989), overruled in part on other
grounds by Townsend v. Holman Consulting Corp., 914 F.2d 1136, 1141
(9th Cir. 1990); see also LULAC v. Perry, 548 U.S. 399, 423-442 (2006)
(analyzing vote-dilution claim by reference to citizen voting-age
population).
The purpose of Section 2's vote-dilution prohibition ``is to
facilitate participation . . . in our political process'' by preventing
unlawful dilution of the vote on the basis of race. Campos v. City of
Houston, 113 F.3d 544, 548 (5th Cir. 1997). Importantly, ``[t]he plain
language of section 2 of the Voting Rights Act makes clear that its
protections apply to United States citizens.'' Id. Indeed, courts have
reasoned that ``[t]he right to vote is one of the badges of
citizenship'' and that ``[t]he dignity and very concept of citizenship
are diluted if noncitizens are allowed to vote.'' Barnett, 141 F.3d at
704. Thus, it would be the wrong result for a legislature or a court to
draw a single-member district in which a numerical racial minority
group in a jurisdiction was a majority of the total voting-age
population in that district but ``continued to be defeated at the
polls'' because it was not a majority of the citizen voting-age
population. Campos, 113 F.3d at 548.
These cases make clear that, in order to assess and enforce
compliance with Section 2's protection against discrimination in
voting, the Department needs to be able to obtain citizen voting-age
population data for census blocks, block groups, counties, towns, and
other locations where potential Section 2 violations are alleged or
suspected. From 1970 to 2000, the Census Bureau included a citizenship
question on the so-called ``long form'' questionnaire that it sent to
approximately one in every six households during each decennial census.
See, e.g., U.S. Census Bureau, Summary File 3: 2000 Census of
Population & Housing--Appendix B at B-7 (July 2007), available at
https://www.census.gov/prod/cen2000/doc/sf3.pdf (last visited Nov. 22,
2017); U.S. Census Bureau, Index of Questions, available at https://
www.census.gov/history/www/through_the_decades/index_of_questions/
(last visited Nov. 22, 2017). For years, the Department used the data
collected in response to that question in assessing compliance with
Section 2 and in litigation to enforce Section 2's protections against
racial discrimination in voting.
In the 2010 Census, however, no census questionnaire included a
question regarding citizenship. Rather, following the 2000 Census, the
Census Bureau discontinued the ``long form'' questionnaire and replaced
it with the American Community Survey (ACS). The ACS is a sampling
survey that is sent to only around one in every 38 households each year
and asks a variety of questions regarding demographic information,
including citizenship. See U.S. Census Bureau, American Community
Survey Information Guide at 6, available at https://www.census.gov/
content/dam/
Census/programs-surveys/acs/about/ACS Information Guide.pdf (last
visited Nov. 22, 2017). The ACS is currently the Census Bureau's only
survey that collects information regarding citizenship and estimates
citizen voting-age population.
The 2010 redistricting cycle was the first cycle in which the ACS
estimates provided the Census Bureau's only citizen voting-age
population data. The Department and State and local jurisdictions
therefore have used those ACS estimates for this redistricting cycle.
The ACS, however, does not yield the ideal data for such purposes for
several reasons:
--Jurisdictions conducting redistricting, and the Department in
enforcing Section 2, already use the total population data from
the census to determine compliance with the Constitution's one-
person, one-vote requirement, see Evenwel v. Abbott, 136 S. Ct.
1120 (Apr. 4, 2016). As a result, using the ACS citizenship
estimates means relying on two different data sets, the scope
and level of detail of which vary quite significantly.
--Because the ACS estimates are rolling and aggregated into 1-year,
3-year, and 5-year estimates, they do not align in time with
the decennial census data. Citizenship data from the decennial
census, by contrast, would align in time with the total and
voting-age population data from the census that jurisdictions
already use in redistricting.
--The ACS estimates are reported at a 90 percent confidence level,
and the margin of error increases as the sample size--and,
thus, the geographic area--decreases. See U.S. Census Bureau,
Glossary: Confidence interval (American Community Survey),
available at https://www.census.gOv/glossary/#term_
ConfidenceintervalAmericanCommunitySurvey (last visited
November 22, 2017). By contrast, decennial census data is a
full count of the population.
--Census data is reported to the census block level, while the
smallest unit reported in the ACS estimates is the census block
group. See American Community Survey Data 3, 5, 10.
Accordingly, redistricting jurisdictions and the Department are
required to perform further estimates and to interject further
uncertainty in order to approximate citizen voting-age
population at the level of a census block, which is the
fundamental building block of a redistricting plan. Having all
of the relevant population and citizenship data available in
one data set at the census block level would greatly assist the
redistricting process.
For all of these reasons, the Department believes that decennial
census questionnaire data regarding citizenship, if available, would be
more appropriate for use in redistricting and in Section 2 litigation
than the ACS citizenship estimates.
Accordingly, the Department formally requests that the Census
Bureau reinstate into the 2020 Census a question regarding citizenship.
We also request that the Census Bureau release this new data regarding
citizenship at the same time as it releases the other redistricting
data, by April 1 following the 2020 Census. At the same time, the
Department requests that the Bureau also maintain the citizenship
question on the ACS, since such question is necessary, inter alia, to
yield information for the periodic determinations made by the Bureau
under Section 203 of the Voting Rights Act, 52 U.S.C. Sec. 10503.
Please let me know if you have any questions about this letter or
wish to discuss this request I can be reached at (202) 514-3452, or at
[emailprotected]
Sincerely yours,
Arthur E. Gary
General Counsel
Justice Management Division
Senator Schatz. Okay. Let's move on.
OPIOID EPIDEMIC AND MEDICAL MARIJUANA
I really appreciate what you're doing on opioids, and I am
especially pleased that this subcommittee and others are
working in a bipartisan fashion to solve this problem. And I
want you to interpret the following line of questioning not in
an adversarial way.
I want to ask you about medical marijuana, and I want to
tell you that I'm the son of a principal investigator, and I
came to the question of medical marijuana with great
skepticism. But, there are credible scientific studies that
show that, where medical marijuana is legal, opioid overdose
deaths have gone down. And these studies are published in the
Journal of the American Medical Association and the RAND
Corporation, with the input from the National Institute on Drug
Abuse.
The opioid epidemic is a major crisis. And I'm wondering
whether you think, given your history as a successful
conservative politician with a certain set of beliefs about
marijuana, in particular, whether, given two things happening
at once--there's all kinds of new data that shows an inverse
correlation between the availability of medical marijuana and
opioid deaths and opioid prescriptions and opioid illegal
activity, and your commitment to try to reduce this opioid
epidemic--do you have at least an aperture to look at these
data and reconsider your opposition to medical marijuana and
marijuana in general?
Attorney General Sessions. Medical marijuana, as one
physician told me, whoever heard of taking a medicine when you
have no idea how much medicine you're taking and ingesting it
in the fashion that it is, which is, in itself, unhealthy.
However, I think there can be--there may well be some benefits
from medical marijuana, and it's perfectly appropriate to study
that. I do not believe, at this point, that--I think one study
that suggested there's no--that there's some sort of inverse
relationship between increased marijuana use and reducing of
deaths. I did see that. I've asked my staff to take a look at
it, because science is very important. And I don't believe that
will be sustained, in the long run. The American Medical
Association is absolutely resolutely opposed to marijuana use.
I think so is the Pediatric----
Senator Schatz. Mr. Attorney General----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Association.
They've----
Senator Schatz. Sure. My final----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Studied it over
years. So, it's a matter of science. And----
Senator Schatz. Sure.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. I think we should--
--
Senator Schatz. My final question----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Be free to discuss
it.
Senator Schatz. My final question. The DEA, in August of
2016, called for applications to produce more federally-
approved research-grade marijuana. Since then, the Department
of Justice has received 25 applications, but none of them have
been responded to either with an approval or denial. What is
the status of those applications?
Attorney General Sessions. We are moving forward, and we
will add--fairly soon, I believe, the paperwork and reviews
will be completed, and then we will add additional suppliers of
marijuana under the controlled circumstances. But, there is--a
lot of people didn't know, I didn't know--a treaty--
international treaty of which we are a member, that requires
certain controls in that process. And the previous proposal
violated that treaty. We've now gotten language I believe
complies with the treaty and will allow this process to go
forward.
Senator Schatz. If the Chair will indulge me, one final
comment.
We're all evolving on this issue, some quicker than others,
maybe some too quick. And I really believe that we have to do
this in the proper way. I think there are good civil rights
reasons for decriminalizing and for pursuing a Federalist
approach around this. But, if we're narrowly addressing the
question of whether or not this is medicine, then we do need
the Department of Justice, the FDA, and everybody to work
together to pursue that question, double-blind studies and all.
And I also think that we need to understand we are in a
humanitarian crisis when it comes to the opioid epidemic, which
means that we may have to cast aside some of the things that
we've believed all of our lives as it relates to other drugs
and look at harm reduction. I appreciate you keeping an open
mind along those lines.
Thank you.
Attorney General Sessions. Thank you, Senator Schatz.
Senator Moran. Senator, thank you.
Senator from Oklahoma, Senator Lankford.
Senator Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me add to that conversation a little bit before we--
before I jump into a line of questions.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
I am one of the skeptical individuals that, so far, has not
evolved on this issue of marijuana. I have a hard time
believing that, if only more of our parents smoked more
marijuana, our kids would be so much better and our families
would be so much better, and employment would be so much better
if more of our employees smoked more marijuana. I just have a
hard time believing that.
And, as far as medicinal issues, this is an area the NIH
has done active work on. And NIH is--currently has several
billion dollars that the Appropriations Committee has allocated
to them to be able to study pain medications that are
nonaddictive, to try to address that. And that was entirely
appropriate to do. We have an opioid epidemic. I'd rather not
swap an opioid epidemic with addiction to marijuana and just
say we solved the problem. We didn't solve the problem, long
term.
And so, I'd love to be able to continue to maintain this.
There are ways to be able to manage all kinds of different
things to be able to manage pain. But, my preference would be
that our Nation doesn't become more and more addicted to
marijuana to be able to solve our opioid addiction.
ATF REORGANIZATION
With that, let me mention a couple of things. Budget
related. You have made some recommendations on combining some
entities and moving some things around, specifically with ATF.
And I'd like to get a chance to talk to you a little bit more
about that. What proposals are you making with ATF, in
particular, to be able to work on some efficiencies?
Attorney General Sessions. Well, the Alcohol, Tobacco, and
Firearms originally came out of the Department of Treasury. And
when--because revenuers collected revenue, the old moonshining-
chasing ATF guys collected--because you weren't paying taxes on
your moonshine. So, that's the history of it. But, over the
years, ATF has shifted far more to being the front-line agents
on violent crime, bombs, explosives, arson, and firearms. So,
that's where the trend has gone. So, this agreement, I think,
is a smart one. It moves the tax part of ATF that still exists
back to Treasury and keeps a leaner, more focused ATF on
firearms and explosives in the Department of Justice.
BUREAU OF PRISONS AND COMPONENT REALIGNMENT
Senator Lankford. How long do you think it would take to
make that transition?
Attorney General Sessions. I think we could do it within
the year, and we would expect to, if Congress would approve it.
ATF has accepted it. The--their leadership is supportive. So, I
believe it's something that would be good, be efficient, and a
smart realignment of resources.
Senator Lankford. Okay. Any other areas of realignment of
resources that you'd recommend with DEA, ATF, FBI, any of
those, as well, that you would recommend that are similar to
that?
Attorney General Sessions. Well, we've made a number of
recommendations for consolidation in the Bureau of Prisons.
We've made some within some of the regional offices of
Community Relations Service. We've had a number of other
changes that we are proposing.
Senator Lankford. All right. Well----
Attorney General Sessions. We believe that every dollar
that we can properly expend at the point of the spear
effectively carrying out the taxpayer desire rather than
feeding a bureaucracy is good for America. And that's our goal.
ATF AND FBI INVESTIGATIONS
Senator Lankford. Okay. That would be helpful.
Your predecessor, Eric Holder, and I had multiple
conversations over several years about an issue between ATF and
FBI and their processes of how they actually do an
investigation. FBI has one set of processes, ATF has another
set of processes. It came out most evident during the Fast and
Furious time period, around 2010 and 2011, when there was a
close examination of the processes that ATF went through to be
able to do that investigation for Fast and Furious, and the FBI
agents immediately stepped out and said, ``We would never be
allowed to do what ATF did.'' So, during that time period, a
lot of conversations that I had with Eric Holder was, Is there
a study to be able to look at and try to figure out if these
two processes need to be aligned, if ATF needs to have more
similar structure to what FBI does? How does that work? Eric
Holder, over and over again, told me, year after year, ``We're
going to take a look at it. We're going to take a look at it,''
but I don't think they ever did. I never got a report back to
try to finalize that. Could you help us take a look at that
again? This is not trying to hurt ATF, but trying to figure
out, if we've got good, established processes, why do we have
two different sets of processes in two different entities
there?
Attorney General Sessions. I would be glad to discuss----
Senator Lankford. Great.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. That with you and
see if--what kind of problems exist. I don't think there are
any process--processes that should have justified Fast and
Furious, where assault weapons are allowed to walk----
Senator Lankford. Right.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. As we call it,
across the border to----
Senator Lankford. Well, that was the number-one thing I
heard from FBI----
Attorney General Sessions. So, I don't know what--how that
happened yet. I know you've dug into it as--probably as deeply
as anybody in Congress. So, thank you for that.
Senator Lankford. Okay.
CRIME VICTIMS FUND
Let me ask one more strange question. Are we out of crime
victim needs? So, the Crime Victims Fund is out there. It has
about $10 billion sitting in it. Do we have that fully
established, all crime victim issues are taken care of, and we
don't need to allocate additional dollars towards that area?
Attorney General Sessions. No.
Senator Lankford. Well, that $10 billion has sat there and
has been used as what's called a Changes in Mandatory Program,
year after year.
Attorney General Sessions. CHIMPS.
Senator Lankford. And it's had this fake spending, year
after year. I did notice, in your budget, that you're
recommending that we not use that as a pay-for, that we set a
ceiling on that spending, save that money for crime victims,
and not try to shift that over to somewhere else.
Attorney General Sessions. Our budget would eliminate that
procedure. It's something I've opposed, but it's stuck. It's
been--perhaps as a Member of this subcommittee, something might
happen. But, it is a--it's something that's continued for a
long time. We propose fixing that problem.
Senator Lankford. Well, I met yesterday with a group of
crime victims, and they had a real concern that that money is
used, not for crime victims, but is used for a gimmick in
Congress. And they'd love to see that money actually go to
crime victim organizations and uses for that.
With that, I yield back.
Senator Moran. Senator, thank you.
Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And
congratulations to you. Look forward to working with you and
the Ranking Member and others.
Mr. Attorney General, welcome.
DACA
And I want to associate myself with the comments of Senator
Collins with respect to DACA. And that's obviously part of an
ongoing discussion, but we've got to address this critical
issue.
ROLE OF THE PARDON ATTORNEY
We all have an interest in protecting the integrity of the
Justice Department. And, as a Member of the Senate Judiciary
Committee, you made a statement at a hearing that I thoroughly
agree with. And I'm quoting, ``The power to pardon is a
legitimate power. It is one that ought to be exercised with
great care.'' And then you end it, saying, ``I believe in the
role of the Pardon Attorney,'' unquote. The Pardon Attorney is
an office within the DOJ, is it not?
Attorney General Sessions. It is a position in the
Department of Justice.
Senator Van Hollen. And can you think of any pardon, during
the 8 years of the Obama administration, that did not go
through the Office of the Pardon Attorney?
Attorney General Sessions. I don't recall. I know the--a
number did during the Clinton administration.
[The information follows:]
At the hearing on April 25, 2018, Senator Van Hollen asked: ``[C]an
you think of any pardon during the 8 years of the Obama administration
that didn't--that did not go through the Office of the Pardon
Attorney?'' I was unable to recall during the hearing. I have since
researched the matter and would like to supplement my testimony with
the following answer:
The Constitution provides the President with plenary power to
grant clemency by way of commutation, pardon, or remission of
restitution. The Office of the Pardon Attorney is a Department
of Justice component that processes clemency applications for
the President. There is, however, no requirement that the
President only grant clemency to individuals whose applications
have been processed by the Pardon Attorney. Senator Van Hollen
asked whether President Obama pardoned any individuals whose
applications were not processed by the Pardon Attorney. Based
on information provided by the Pardon Attorney, it is my
understanding that the Pardon Attorney did not process
applications for four Iranians (Nima Golestaneh, Bahram
Mechanic, Khosrow Afghahi, and Tooraj Faridi) who were pardoned
by President Obama in January of 2016.
Senator Van Hollen. I--starting with the Obama
administration.
Attorney General Sessions. Okay.
Senator Van Hollen. Two terms, 8 years.
Attorney General Sessions. I don't----
Senator Van Hollen. I don't think there was one.
Attorney General Sessions. I don't know, actually.
Senator Van Hollen. And I don't think there was a single
pardon during the presidency of George W. Bush that did not go
through the Office--the Pardon Office. And, you're right, the
comment you made was in connection with pardons made by
President Clinton. But, my question to you is, Do you stand by
that statement that you made, back during that hearing, that
the Pardon Attorney ought--the pardon power ought to be
exercised with great care, and that you believe in the role of
the Pardon Attorney in that process? Do you stand by that
statement?
Attorney General Sessions. I don't think that statement
needs modifying, but it's obviously in context that the
President of the United States clearly has a constitutional
power to----
Senator Van Hollen. I understand, Senator.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Execute pardons----
Senator Van Hollen. I----
Attorney General Sessions. Let me finish.
Senator Van Hollen. No----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Execute pardons
without inquiring of the Pardon Attorney.
Senator Van Hollen. And I'm not----
Attorney General Sessions. It's been done very frequently
in history.
Senator Van Hollen. Well, Mr. Attorney General, I'm not----
Attorney General Sessions. But, we do have a----
Senator Van Hollen. Mr. Attorney General--Mr. Chairman, if
I could--Mr. Chairman--I'm not disputing the President's pardon
authority. I'm----
Attorney General Sessions. Well----
Senator Van Hollen [continuing]. Actually--I'm just
quoting--
Attorney General Sessions. Well, let----
Senator Van Hollen [continuing]. A statement you made that
I agree with----
Attorney General Sessions. I'll----
Senator Van Hollen [continuing]. With respect to the role
of the Pardon Attorney. And, at the time, you made comments in
the hearings, saying that not going through that process was an
abuse of power. So, my question to you is whether or not you
think not going through the Pardon Attorney is an abuse of the
power--not an unauthorized power, but do you think it's an
inappropriate use of that power?
Attorney General Sessions. I don't know that I used that
phrase, ``abuse of power,'' because it's clearly not. It's
clearly within the power of the President to execute pardons
without the Pardon Attorney. If you're doing a lot of pardons,
and you want to have a lot of cases, and you want to have them
reviewed by independent force, the Pardon Attorney provides a
real asset to a chief executive before executing a pardon.
Senator Van Hollen. Did the pardon of Sheriff Joseph Arpaio
go through the Pardon Attorney Office?
Attorney General Sessions. I don't believe it did.
Senator Van Hollen. Yes. Did the----
Attorney General Sessions. Certainly----
Senator Van Hollen [continuing]. Pardon of Scooter Libby go
through that----
Attorney General Sessions. The----
Senator Van Hollen [continuing]. Office?
Attorney General Sessions. I don't believe it did.
Senator Van Hollen. Okay. But, do you agree with what you
said earlier, that that is the appropriate course of action for
a pardon? I'm not asking you what the President's authority is.
I'm asking you what you think the appropriate course of action
is to make sure that the public has confidence in the integrity
of the process.
Attorney General Sessions. There are opportunities that the
Pardon Attorney can be utilized very effectively, and it has
been, over time. But, I don't think it's in any way required
that any President seek the opinion of----
Senator Van Hollen. It's not a----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. The Pardon
Attorney.
Senator Van Hollen [continuing]. Requirement. I'm just--
you're--I'm quoting from the statement you made, saying it was
abuse of process in a particular case made by President
Clinton.
Let me ask you about something else that I also think we
agree on, in part, which----
Attorney General Sessions. Well, I would just say, the
pardons President Clinton made were stunning, shocking, and
unacceptable on the merits.
Senator Van Hollen. And----
Attorney General Sessions. But, the two--Arpaio was 80-some
years of age, and he was convicted of a misdemeanor.
Senator Van Hollen. Mr. Attorney General, I'm not----
Attorney General Sessions. And Mr. Libby is a well known--
--
Senator Van Hollen. In both cases----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Circumstances of
that case.
Senator Van Hollen. In both cases, as you know, they did
not go----
Attorney General Sessions. He contributed greatly to----
Senator Van Hollen [continuing]. Through what you described
was the appropriate process.
NATIONAL PUBLIC SAFETY PARTNERSHIP AND CITY OF BALTIMORE
Let me ask you about the National Public Safety
Partnership, PSP, which is a program established by the
administration to help fight violent crime, one that I support.
The City of Baltimore was invited to apply in a letter from the
Justice Department, back in 2017. The Justice Department said
to the City, ``We've concluded that your jurisdictions have
levels of violence that exceed the national average, and that
you're ready to receive the intensive assistance from the
Department.'' Then they got these three criteria that were
listed by the Department with respect to what you refer to as
sanctuary cities. And the City's application was denied.
Here's what I want to say at this point in time. Baltimore
City does not have jurisdiction over the detention centers in
Baltimore City. That's a State of Maryland decision. So, we may
have differences on the criteria you set out with. And, as
Senator Shaheen said, the Seventh Circuit has reviewed this,
and I think those decisions are going to apply also to your
criteria in the National Public Safety Partnership Program.
But, setting that aside, I hope you'll work with me on this--
Baltimore City. We have a violent crime problem, and the City
of Baltimore does not have--the laws are State laws regarding
DHS as--the access of the Department of Homeland Security to
their jails. So, I'd just ask for your commitment to see if we
can look for a way to see if they can qualify for the funds.
Attorney General Sessions. I would be glad to do that. We
have had some--I think more than one--at least one circumstance
in which the jail was run by somebody else other than the
jurisdiction that appeared to be. So, that created a problem
and actually led to the approval on the grant. So, I'll be glad
to look at that.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you.
Senator Moran. Senator, thank you.
Senator Murkowski.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, to both
you and the Ranking Member, know that I look forward to working
with you as you execute this appropriations bill through your
committee and move it onto the floor. Look forward to that
commitment.
Mr. Attorney General, it's good to see you again. Thank you
for the conversation last week.
MARIJUANA LEGALIZATION
I wanted to raise again with you the subject of marijuana.
Alaska is one of those States that has moved forward, not only
with the medical marijuana, but also the sale and cultivation
of recreational use, a very aggressive State regulation. This
was not something that I had supported through that statewide
initiative. In fact, I worked against it. But, it was passed
resoundedly through the State. My constituents expect me to
work to represent them.
ALASKA H.J. RES. 21
Mr. Chairman, I'd like unanimous consent to enter into the
record a resolution that was recently passed by the Alaska
Legislature.
Senator Moran. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
Senator Murkowski. This is H.J. Res. 21. It was passed
unanimously out of both houses, and it urges the Federal
Government to respect the authority of the State of Alaska to
regulate marijuana use, production, and distribution, and
generally respect States' rights.
Mr. Attorney General, we have talked about this in the
aftermath of your decision to withdraw the Cole Memorandum. I
had been disappointed with that, and expressed that I was
concerned that the Department of Justice was less than a full
partner with the States. I do understand that the White House
has expressed support for legislation that will respect State
supremacy when it comes to regulation, in the spirit of
Federalism. I think that that--the comments that were made by
my colleague from Hawaii, in terms of Members evolving on this,
is important, but I do think, as we're seeing the States move
forward, legislation like this is timely.
The States are telling us, though, that they need the
Department of Justice to be a partner in the orderly
administration of States' regulatory regimes, and not standing
in the way as an obstacle. So, I would--I understand your
position on this. Again, we've had many conversations. But, I
would hope that we could have your assurance that, within the
Department of Justice, that the Department will not be an
obstacle to the consideration of this sort of legislation that
may move forward.
Attorney General Sessions. Well, I can't make a commitment
about what position we would take at this time, until we know
exactly what's involved. But, it's not so much on a question of
supremacy as a question of simple law. Alaska can pass laws
about drugs that make certain drugs illegal that Washington
does not make illegal and, therefore, can't be prosecuted in
Federal court, but could be in Alaska. Likewise, the Federal
Government has passed some laws regarding marijuana that I'm
not able to remove from the books. The Congress--you--have
passed them. They're on the books. And I just feel like that
our priorities--look, I'll be frank--our priorities are
fentanyl, heroin, methamphetamine, cocaine. People are dying by
massive amounts as a result of those drugs. We have very few,
almost zero--virtually zero small marijuana cases. But, if
they're a big dealer and illegally acting and violating Federal
law, we--our Federal agents may work that case. I don't feel
like I'm able to give a pass, some protection, some sanctuary
for it. That's maybe the only difference we have at this point
on how----
Senator Murkowski. And I----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. It will play out.
Senator Murkowski [continuing]. I do understand that.
Again, I recognize that, if there is a venue or an opportunity
for us to advance legislation on this, that there is that open
door for conversation about, truly, the inherent conflicts that
we're seeing coming out of the States and working with--on the
Federal level.
Let me ask you another----
Attorney General Sessions. I would be glad to do that.
TRIBAL JUSTICE PROGRAMS
Senator Murkowski [continuing]. Another issue that I raised
with you earlier. And this is regarding support for Tribal
justice programs. In the fiscal year 2018 budget, we were able
to include a funding stream for victims of violent--Victims of
Crime Act funds for Tribes. It's a set-aside--it's a 5 percent
set-aside. It's about $130 million to help for victims on
Tribal lands. We had completed a study in Alaska--well,
actually, it was a broader study, it was a 2016 study from the
National Institute of Justice. More than four out of five
Alaskan Native and American Indian women report having
experienced violence in their lifetime. More than half report
having experienced sexual violence in their lifetime. Nearly 40
percent have experienced violence in the past year, 14 percent
who have experienced sexual violence in the last year. Our
statistics when it comes to Alaskan Native women and American
Indian women are horrible when it comes to domestic violence,
when it comes to the sexual assault. And so, I think that we
are making a small step forward with this small set-aside--
small set-aside--and first time ever to see anything going
towards those on Tribal lands and in Alaska, where we have
different issues, in the sense of not having Indian country,
but a recognition that we must address this. So, 5 percent, I
would like to see that increased. I would hope that we'd be
able to work with the Department of Justice to address this
issue, because we have not made a difference in reducing these
horrible statistics.
Attorney General Sessions. Senator Murkowski, thank you,
actually, for raising that. I'm hearing--I heard that before I
was confirmed. You and I talked about it. I've traveled the
country, meeting with U.S. Attorneys. I hear it a lot in their
districts. Just came back from Albuquerque, and we talked about
the Navajo Tribal lands and the problems that they have.
This budget, the President's budget, actually is frugal
compared to--it's a frugal budget, but it has more for Tribal
issues than the--even your 2018 budget. And it does it the way
you suggested, through set-asides. A 7 percent set-aside is
recommended for the Office of Justice Programs. All those
programs, 7 percent would be set aside for Tribal individuals
and 5 percent of the Crime Victims Fund. I believe Congress has
not yet got to those numbers.
But, I do agree with you that it is a very difficult
situation, and Alaska has a particularly unusual situation
without having specific Tribal lands that receive specific
funds from the Government. So, I will be glad to continue to
work with you on it.
Senator Murkowski. Good. And that's why so many of these
funds, whether it's the Byrne grants, the VAWA funding, the DNA
backlog, the Victim of Crime Act, the Crimes Against Children,
all of these grant fund opportunities are so significant for
us. So----
Attorney General Sessions. I did----
Senator Murkowski [continuing]. Put that on your list.
Attorney General Sessions. Let me--okay. I would note that,
just yesterday, I had a meeting with your United States
Attorney in--here in DC--Bryan Schroder. He's on our--my 15-
member Attorney Generals Advisory Committee. And he and U.S.
Attorney from Oklahoma--northern Oklahoma--chair the
Subcommittee on Indian Affairs. And they--we both talked about
this specifically--they would like to see us do some things
better than we have in the past. They're providing strong
leadership. And I know he'll be glad to share his thoughts with
you or your staff.
Senator Murkowski. Good. They're good guys. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Thank you, Senator.
Senator from California, Senator Feinstein.
Senator Feinstein. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome back, Attorney General. I'm sure you've missed
us terribly.
[Laughter.]
DEFERRED ACTION FOR CHILDHOOD ARRIVALS (DACA)
Senator Feinstein. I want to follow up on something that
Senator Collins said. Senator Collins and Senator Manchin
essentially convened a large group of bipartisan Senators on
the DACA situation to try to see if some proposal could be put
together. Virtually everything went down on the floor. And, in
conversations since, what I've learned is that, in negotiations
with the President, Senator Schumer tried to consummate a deal,
where the President essentially got what he wanted with respect
to border security if the DACA bill went through. Well, that
was clearly not successful. You referred to certain loopholes,
in your conversation with Senator Collins. I'm wondering if you
could be more precise, because we are really very interested
and involved in trying to find a solution.
Attorney General Sessions. Well, thank you. Your support
for this would be very important. I think there's a bipartisan
opportunity to join together and say, once and for all, we
believe we should have a lawful system of immigration, and
we're going to support things that actually work to help
achieve that. I've not so jokingly said, for years, Congress
will pass anything on immigration, as long as it doesn't work.
If it works, somehow it never passes. But, we've got the Flores
consent decree that's been in place for 20 years, that's
causing monumental problems, particularly in California. We
have the situation where you say, as the critics say, magic
words and you're in, backlog case systems, people get released
on bail, they don't show up for their hearings, and all of
that. There's a whole host of problems like that, that I think
most of----
Senator Feinstein. DACA----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Members of Congress
of both parties would probably work to fix.
Senator Feinstein. Well, is it the number? In the number--
in the bill that Senator Graham and Senator Durbin were
cosponsors of, I think the total number was 3.3 million. Was
that the problem----
Attorney General Sessions. That is a big----
Senator Feinstein. I don't----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Number. Yes,
that's----
Senator Feinstein [continuing]. Believe the problem----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. A problem.
Senator Feinstein [continuing]. Was in the bill, because it
was discussed and discussed and discussed, and then it all came
a cropper in the votes. So, it would be very helpful if you
could be helpful to us and just identify some specifics that we
could look at and try to put something together.
Attorney General Sessions. Well, I think that's----
Senator Feinstein. Would you do that?
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. That's certainly a
fair request, yes----
Senator Feinstein. Okay.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. I will.
Senator Feinstein. Okay.
BUMP STOCKS
Let me go on, then, to bump stocks. DOJ recently started
the rulemaking process to ban bump stocks under the National
Firearms Act. And I have it in my assault weapons bill, which
has some 29-30 cosponsors right now. But, ATF has said, for
years, it can't ban bump stocks because the National Firearms
Act doesn't allow it. ATF repeated this position in April of
2017, and has repeatedly stated in public that ATF cannot ban
bump stocks under current law. That's why we have proposed
legislation to do so. How long do you expect this rulemaking to
take? And if you find out what we found out, will you support a
legal ban?
Attorney General Sessions. I would need to review the
legislation, but we have done intensive legal research. It
always seemed to me that a bump stock converts a gun to,
effectively, a fully automatic weapon. How can this be a close
call? However, I acknowledge that the lawyers at ATF did a lot
research. It's a lot of complicated--it's a complicated matter.
And they concluded it was not. And we've continued to review
that. We believe we've changed that view in the Department of
Justice. And we believe the regulation could be effective to
solve the problem. And it's up for comment now, made public.
Hopefully, that would move forward and would solve the problem.
Senator Feinstein. By when do you expect the rulemaking
will conclude?
Attorney General Sessions. I think it won't be much longer.
I'm not sure, but I think in just a few months--90 days, I
believe, is what's left on the----
Senator Feinstein. Okay.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Time.
Senator Feinstein. Thank you.
FBI NATIONAL INSTANT CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK SYSTEM (NICS) DATABASE
The Justice Department announced a policy change, 1 month
ago, indicating that it would remove records of certain
fugitives from the FBI's NICS gun background check databases.
Now, previously, all fugitives were recorded in the NICS
database so they couldn't buy guns. Now only fugitives who
cross State lines are included in the database. I understand
that local law enforcement organizations have strongly opposed
the change. It's puzzling to me as to why the Department would
do that, why you would want armed fugitives.
Attorney General Sessions. Well, the issue I'm most
familiar with is the one involving whether or not a warrant for
your arrest, and a person is, therefore, a fugitive if they're
running from arrest, but haven't been convicted. The statute is
pretty clear, you have to be convicted before you can have a
gun--your Second Amendment right to possess a----
Senator Feinstein. Even in the----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Firearm.
Senator Feinstein [continuing]. Case that the fugitive had
committed a major felony?
Attorney General Sessions. Apparently, that is the law. In
other words, you lose your right if you've----
Senator Feinstein. These are----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Been convicted----
Senator Feinstein [continuing]. Fugitives who----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Of----
Senator Feinstein [continuing]. Crossed State lines. I
don't understand what the Department sees is the need to do
this.
Attorney General Sessions. Well, I am--I would just--
Senator Feinstein. Why----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Say I will review
the State----
Senator Feinstein [continuing]. Has me worried.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Line question. I
should know--be able to answer that, but I'm not able to. But,
I do know the warrant problem is a product of statutory
language.
Senator Feinstein. Okay. I'm over my time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Thank you, Senator Feinstein.
Senator from Arkansas.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. I--no, it's--I'm correct.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Attorney General Sessions, for being here.
And we do appreciate your hard work and the great job that
you're doing.
Attorney General Sessions. Thank you.
BYRNE JAG GRANTS
Senator Boozman. I'd like to talk a little bit about the
Byrne JAG, also, in the sense that in Arkansas we are doing a
good job of helping you in your efforts regarding following the
law, you know, being helpful. As I go around the State, though,
and I talk to my county sheriffs, I talk to my local law
enforcement and individuals regarding the importance of this,
this is not a whole lot of money, but it really is the
difference in being able to stand up the Drug Task Force forces
that they have. You know, these are small departments. I'm out
and about as much as anybody, as were you when you were a
Senator representing your folks. But, when you talk to the
people that are on the ground, again, not having this funding
really is making a big difference in a very negative way. Can
you talk about, for those States, for those individuals that
are doing a good job, when it's going to get released?
Attorney General Sessions. Senator Boozman, it's just
maddening to us that people who totally support our ICE
officers and allow them to do the minimal things they ask of
local law enforcement can't get this money. So, what happened
was, a suit was filed in Chicago that said that they may or may
not be in violation of our grant conditions. And they not only
wanted to block us from denying Chicago, they denied the
whole--the judge issued a nationwide injunction. And Chicago's
law and circumstances are unique. All these other people who
comply with the Department of Justice, all the other people
that have other and different laws and backgrounds, are
enjoined by the same single Federal judge, one out of 600. Now
the whole process is stopped. And law enforcement has been
impacted. And we are determined to try to deal with this issue
in an appropriate way.
It's painful for me not to see the money go out,
particularly to the people who want to help us and work with us
every day. But, they've been pretty supportive and
understanding, I've got to say, although I know it's difficult
for them. So, I hear you. We're working on it. It's a high
priority of mine.
Senator Boozman. Okay. We appreciate that. And it is
important, an important issue.
DRUG COURTS
Another thing that I'd like to talk to you a little bit
about is the--when we look at the fiscal year 2019 budget
request, it will reduce the Drug Court funding by more than 40
percent, reduce Veterans Treatment Courts by 70 percent. When
you look at the recidivism rate as a result of being in Drug
Court, it's dramatically lower than those people being
incarcerated. Also, when you put somebody in jail--they're
required to work when they're in Drug Court, but when you put
somebody in jail, not only are you--you're--the recidivism rate
and all that, but also the family is going to wind up probably
on some sort of public welfare assistance because you've lost
an income earner. And so, I'd really appreciate it if you'd
look at that and--just kind of review that, look at the
statistics. I think those programs--if there's an answer,
instead of reducing those programs, I think they should be
increased dramatically.
Attorney General Sessions. Well, Congress works its will.
And the--we have a tight budget, and we--but, I do agree with
you, Senator Boozman. I helped initiate the----
Senator Boozman. Right.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Establishment of a
Drug Court in Mobile, Alabama, in the early 1980s----
Senator Boozman. Right.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. One of the first in
the country. And it's still in existence. And I think it's a
positive thing, in general. I've kept up with it over the
years. It's--it deals with the kind of State cases that are
often--are smaller offenders, addicted offenders, single
mothers, single fathers, whatever, that it's just a difficult
time. And some of them can work their way through that Drug
Court and stay with their families and save the cost of
incarceration.
Senator Boozman. You're exactly right. And, again, have to
work, have to stay clean, with a drug test, where the judge has
the hammer, you know, to actually----
Attorney General Sessions. Right.
Senator Boozman [continuing]. Put them in prison. So----
Attorney General Sessions. If they misbehave, the judge----
Senator Boozman. Exactly.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. They come before
the judge repeatedly, and he addresses them directly. It has a
real impact.
Senator Boozman. Well, thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman----
Attorney General Sessions. Thank you.
Senator Boozman [continuing]. Madam Chair.
Senator Shaheen [presiding]. Thank you, Senator Boozman.
Senator Manchin. Yes, Senator Manchin.
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Sessions. Good to have you here.
Let me say, first of all, I want to thank you. We had a
major drug raid, and you all were very much involved in that
and made it happen, and I personally want to thank you for the
State of West Virginia. It was a major drug raid between
Detroit and Huntington, West Virginia. You all led it, you were
involved in it. We had all agencies working together. It made a
big, big impression. It made a big help on us. So, thank you
for that, sir.
Attorney General Sessions. Thank you.
BOP AUGMENTATION
Senator Manchin. Also, I want to say that the Bureau of
Prisons routinely uses a process known as augmentation to
assign custodial duties to noncorrectional staff--teachers,
plumbers, fill gaps in staffing, and all that. At the Hazelton
Federal Corrections Center--Hazelton Federal Corrections Center
in West Virginia--there have been over 60 major security
incidents since the beginning of this year, including one
inmate--inmate's death earlier this month. Now, I shot--fought
to ensure that the recently passed omnibus bill included
language directing the Bureau of--to curtail its over-reliance
on augmentation, people who then have these types of
experiences, and instead hire additional full-time correctional
staff before continuing to augment existing staff. So, despite
all this, the Director of Bureau of Prisons, Mr. Mark Inch,
sent a memo out last week stating that, ``Augmentation is an
important mechanism used by our agency to operate safely and
efficiently.'' So, only thing I can ask, Mr. Sessions, is, What
do we have to do to get Mr. Inch's attention in that and ask
for some help?
Attorney General Sessions. Well, the augmentation has gone
on for a long time, Senator Manchin.
Senator Manchin. Yes.
Attorney General Sessions. And it's established policy. And
everybody that participates in augmentation is supposed to, and
I believe is, also trained, and they--in the incarceration
management, number one.
Senator Manchin. This is----
Attorney General Sessions. So, I think----
Senator Manchin. This is a tough one.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. That this really--
--
Senator Manchin. This is a tough prison.
Attorney General Sessions. What?
Senator Manchin. This is a tough prison, here.
Attorney General Sessions. Well, facts could be different--
--
Senator Manchin. Sure.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. In different
situations, but the augmentation program, to eliminate that
would be highly expensive. I mean, you would have to hire
entirely new guard for one person to spend 2 hours through the
lunchroom helping----
Senator Manchin. I gotcha.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Keep an eye on
things.
Senator Manchin. We're just understaffed. I think that's
it, in a nutshell, in that prison, with the amount of
population base we have. If you could just look into that, sir,
and if your staff could give us the attention we need, then
we'd be greatly appreciative, because they're having serious
problems there. And the staff morale is low. We're having a
hard time keeping people now because of the danger. That's all
we're asking for.
Attorney General Sessions. All right.
Senator Manchin. And I know you will do that, and I
appreciate it.
FBI AGENT/POLICE PAY AND BENEFITS DISPARITIES
I have another one, too, which is important. I'm proud to
have FBI presence in Clarksburg, West Virginia. As you know,
the NICS unit is there. This facility performs a wide variety
of functions, such as housing the Criminal Justice Information
System, where the FBI's National Instant Criminal Background
Check System is located, working in conjunction with WVU,
implementing the cutting-edge study of biometrics in the field
of criminal justice, being a resource for law enforcement,
cybersecurity, and combating cybercrime. In order to protect
the important work conducted at these facilities, there are
approximately 75 police officers assigned to the site in
Clarksburg. Additionally, there are about 173 other officers
serving at sites in Washington, DC, Quantico, Virginia, and New
York City. Because of an inadvertent error committed while
drafting the legislation intended to establish the FBI police
force, these officers, these 70--they're not being--receiving
the same pay and benefits that they are entitled to with what
jobs they're doing. I think it's a snafu when all this was
written.
I mentioned this to Director Wray yesterday, so he knows it
and his staff has it, but I wanted to also put it on your radar
screen, sir. So, I would just like to have the--you know, your
help, if you will, on this, because it's just an unfairness in
the system. We've been trying to correct--and this was done in
2002. We have the code, the section, everything else that--
whoever you want us to work with on your staff, too, to check
that out, I'd be happy to do.
Attorney General Sessions. Well, that's a reasonable
request, and we'll follow up with Director Wray. And if we can
be of assistance, we will.
OPIOID EPIDEMIC
Senator Manchin. The opioid addiction that we have--and
we've talked about this before--trying to change the law back
to where the DEA can do its job--you and I have talked about--
--
Attorney General Sessions. Right.
Senator Manchin. I think we've given--and you were telling
me you need the language from us to do that. Or do you have the
ability to change that?
Attorney General Sessions. I appreciate the conversations
we've had on it. I thought we were--had reached an accord on
the language. But, if not, I'll be glad to follow up and see if
we can't get that done.
Senator Manchin. Yes. Okay.
Attorney General Sessions. I appreciate your interest and
leadership on it.
Senator Manchin. Well, we're ground zero. West Virginia is
number one. We had 909 deaths, out of a population of 1,800,000
people. So, we're just off the charts. And--but, your attention
is going to be greatly appreciated, but it's helping immensely.
This drug raid made a big difference. And we can do more.
Attorney General Sessions. U.S. Attorney Mike Stuart is----
Senator Manchin. Mike's----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. So excited. I got a
letter from him, and it reminded me when I was young U.S.
Attorney----
Senator Manchin. You got a----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. But he was on
steroids, I told him, compared to me. He was so excited.
Senator Manchin. We've got a good guy there.
Attorney General Sessions. He is really fired up to do--
make some changes there. And we're going to support him.
Senator Manchin. Yes, he's well liked. He's well liked, and
he'll do a good job. We're really proud to have Mike.
Thank you, sir.
Attorney General Sessions. Thank you.
Senator Moran [presiding]. Senator from South Carolina,
Senator Graham.
Senator Graham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Attorney General, I think you're doing a very good job
for the country, and many of us up here have your back, and I
want you to know that.
Attorney General Sessions. Thank you.
BUDGET REDUCTION FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
Senator Graham. As to the budget, it's a 6-percent
reduction over fiscal year 2018 levels. Do you think now is the
time to reduce the Department of Justice's budget, given the
threats we face?
Attorney General Sessions. Well, we submitted a frugal
budget. It comes through the Office of Management and Budget,
in trying to achieve a total number for the government.
Senator Graham. Well, let me ask you----
Attorney General Sessions. I would just follow up to say it
was submitted before the 2018----
Senator Graham. Okay.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Appropriations, and
did, in fact, raise--spent--raise--helped us give us----
Senator Graham. Yes.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Some money extra.
Senator Graham. So, the money you got extra, you think you
can spend it wisely to make----
Attorney General Sessions. We're going to work very hard to
do that.
Senator Graham. Okay, thank you.
Attorney General Sessions. Absolutely.
THE WIRE ACT
Senator Graham. All right. The Wire Act, I know you've
recused yourself from reviewing the Wire Act. Is that correct?
Attorney General Sessions. That's correct.
Senator Graham. I talked to Mr. Rosenstein about that,
months ago. And Senator Feinstein--are very worried that this
bizarre interpretation of the Wire Act by the Obama
administration is going to lead to holy hell ungoverned spaces
when it comes to Internet gambling. Could you please tell him
to give me an answer. Or do I have to tell him?
Attorney General Sessions. Deputy Rosenstein?
Senator Graham. Rosenstein, yes.
Attorney General Sessions. I will pass----
Senator Graham. Okay.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Along your----
Senator Graham. Okay. Other than----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Request.
Senator Graham [continuing]. That one glitch, do you agree
with me he's doing a good job?
Attorney General Sessions. He works every day to do the job
that he is called upon to do that got dropped in his----
Senator Graham. Do you have confidence in him?
Attorney General Sessions. I do have confidence in him.
Senator Graham. I do, too. Thank you.
GUANTANAMO BAY
Guantanamo Bay (GITMO). The President issued an executive
order saying he would use GITMO when appropriate. Do you agree
with that?
Attorney General Sessions. Yes.
Senator Graham. Do you think we're ever going to use it in
my lifetime?
Attorney General Sessions. Nobody--well, you and I have
spent a lot of time working on it together, since I've been
Attorney General and before.
Senator Graham. Right.
Attorney General Sessions. So--I don't know.
Senator Graham. Well, I just would----
Attorney General Sessions. I'll just have to be honest with
you.
Senator Graham. You have been----
Attorney General Sessions. It could be, certainly, if----
Senator Graham. Yes.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. We have a surge
and----
Senator Graham. Right.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Arrest these----
Senator Graham. Well, we've got 489 prisoners that we've
captured from our operations around Raqqa. They're going to get
out of jail. They're in a makeshift prison held by the Syrian
Democratic Forces. It's not a nation-state, and these are
really hardcore killers, some of them. Two of them are with the
Beatles. You've heard of the Beatles, right? Not the rock
group, but the beheaders.
Attorney General Sessions. I do know the Beatles.
Senator Graham. Okay. Well, two of these people are in our
custody. They're insisting on a fair process. I intend to give
them one. But, they cut off the heads of an--of American
citizens and our allies. And I know where you're at. I would
appreciate it if you would push the administration to live up
to the President's promise to use it wisely when it comes to
GITMO. Would you please do that?
Attorney General Sessions. I will remain focused on that.
THE WAR ON TERROR
Senator Graham. Okay. Now, when it comes to the war on
terror, Raqqa may have been taken back, but we've got to hold
it. From your point of view, the threat streams that you're
aware of, are they growing regarding radical Islam threat
toward the homeland?
Attorney General Sessions. We don't think there's been any
significant reduction. I do believe General Mattis deserves
credit for his tactics of crushing ISIS, and I think a lot
fewer of them got out than perhaps they intended, which means
there are fewer of them available to come to America to kill
Americans. But, we'll--I think time will tell how many come out
of that war zone and attack us.
Senator Graham. Is this a priority----
Attorney General Sessions. There's definitely many that
prefer to do that, and desire to do that.
Senator Graham. Is this a priority of your Department, to
make sure that we--we're up and running when it comes to these
threats?
Attorney General Sessions. It is. The FBI may--almost a
third of its budget is national security matters. I asked them,
``Was that enough?'' some time ago, and I was told the right
answer.
Senator Graham. So----
Attorney General Sessions. And the answer was, ``Well,
we've got enough, because we'll assign anybody doing anything
to focus on terrorism if it's a threat to us. It's our number-
one priority.''
Senator Graham. One of the tools they use to recruit out of
area, out of theater, is the social media outlets, like
Facebook and other social media devices. They use it actively
to recruit. I know you're aware of a recent dustup with
Cambridge Analytica, but a terrorist organization using social
media to recruit terrorism in our own backyard, would you
support Congress weighing in and trying to find some control
over this?
Attorney General Sessions. Senator Graham, I think it's a
growing, real problem. I--FBI has a great deal of insight into
this program. We want to encourage them to be forthcoming about
ideas to deal with the future. But, you are correct, it needs
more attention.
Senator Graham. Congratulations on the CLOUD Act. It really
helps our ally, Great Britain. And your office was terrific.
Thank you.
Attorney General Sessions. And Senator Graham was the
number-one advocate for that, which--it was one of our top
priorities in Department of Justice, and will--and, without
your help, it would not have passed.
Senator Moran. Senator Coons.
Senator Coons. Thank you, Chairman Moran. And welcome to
your new position here at CJS. I look forward to working with
you and with Ranking Member Shaheen.
And, Mr. Attorney General, welcome. I enjoyed working with
Senator Graham, and I'm glad we made progress on the CLOUD Act.
I do think it was an important step forward.
I have three questions I'd like to ask, if I might. I think
I'm the last man standing, so we'll work through them, if we
could. And then, I think we're at the end.
Senator Moran. As long as they occur within 5 minutes----
Senator Coons. I will do my----
Senator Moran [continuing]. You're recognized.
[Laughter.]
Senator Coons [continuing]. Level best.
NICS DENIAL NOTIFICATION ACT
First, as you know, Attorney General, my home community of
Wilmington has faced significant levels of gun violence,
something the Department has worked with us on in the past.
I've tried to find ways that we, in the Federal Government, can
help local law enforcement confront this challenge. So, I'm
working with Senator Toomey, of Pennsylvania. We have crafted
and introduced a bill, the NICS Denial Notification Act, which
recognizes that if someone who is a person prohibited--
convicted felon, adjudicated mentally ill, convicted of
domestic violence--goes into a gun shop, fills out their
background check form, says, ``Yes, I can buy a gun,'' and
they're denied, that's information that would be helpful for
local law enforcement to know. Would you agree that that's
helpful for State and local law enforcement?
Attorney General Sessions. Yes, it could be.
Senator Coons. There were 120,000 NICS denials last year.
The State of Pennsylvania, State of Virginia, they run it
through the--the State police run it, so they know when there's
a NICS denial, and they have prosecuted hundreds of people. My
home State, and about 30 others, it's run independently of
State law enforcement. All this bill would do is to require
notification to State law enforcement when there is a denial of
a NICS application. Do you think that would be a constructive
step forward, in terms of empowering State and local law
enforcement to take timely action, where a person prohibited is
trying to get access to a weapon?
Attorney General Sessions. I would be pleased to review
that. I'm aware that you are offering something of that nature,
but I haven't studied it. I think it's got potential and would
be pleased to do so. We also are directing our United States
Attorneys to prosecute more aggressively people who lie to get
a gun. And some of those are caught on the--well, most of them
are--NICS denials are, basically, people who have lied when
they----
Senator Coons. That's right. The were lie-and-try----
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Seek it.
Senator Coons [continuing]. Offenses.
Attorney General Sessions. We call it the lie-and-try----
Senator Coons. Yes.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. That's correct.
Senator Coons. Well, I look forward to working with you on
that.
HIGH INTENSITY DRUG TRAFFICKING AREA (HIDTA)
One other thing I wanted to ask is about HIDTA, the High-
Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas Program under ONDCP. I worked
hard to make sure New Castle County, Delaware, which is our
northernmost county, was included in the Philadelphia/Camden
HIDTA area. And I'm concerned about changes you're proposing to
the program that, as I understand it, would lead it to focus on
enforcement activities, but not combating addiction. HIDTA and
other ONDCP programs have balanced enforcement with community
efforts to try and fight addiction. Why reinvent the wheel when
ONDCP, in my view, has already been providing needed assistance
to communities across the country?
Attorney General Sessions. This has been a matter discussed
for many years. We've been asked to reorganize the Government
to make it more effective. The HIDTA investigative teams that
are funded through this grant program have been a part of the
ONDCP, the Office of Drug Control Policy. It was set up as a
policy entity, and a little bit like the National Security
Council that says, ``We're spending all this money. Let's make
sure all these departments are doing it the right--in a
coordinated way.'' So, we think that ONDCP needs to focus back
on that, and that the actual management in the field of task
forces that prosecute and investigate drug use is better
coordinated with the DEA. But, the HIDTA officials, the people
of the local communities that serve on the HIDTA boards would
be retained. The grant money would simply be managed by DEA.
And I think it would create a closer working relationship.
Senator Coons. I look forward to looking into that further.
We may disagree on exactly how to manage it, but I agree with
you, it's a longstanding debate.
MICHAEL COHEN INVESTIGATION
Let me close with just a few questions about the U.S.
Attorneys Office in the Southern District and the investigation
of Michael Cohen. If I understood correctly your exchange with
Senator Leahy earlier--I just want to make sure I understand.
If you discover any connection between this investigation into
Mr. Cohen and the ongoing investigation into allegations of
Russian interference or anything related to the 2016 election,
would you recuse yourself?
Attorney General Sessions. Yes.
Senator Coons. Thank you. And have you discussed that
investigation into Mr. Cohen with anyone outside of DOJ,
including the President?
Attorney General Sessions. I don't think in any
significant--well, I'll just say this. The communications I
might have to anyone in the White House, I believe are the kind
of communications that should not be revealed. I believe I have
the right to--and responsibility to maintain confidence in
those. So, I just am not able to go down that road.
Senator Coons. So, in exerting executive privilege there--
asserting executive privilege there, I'll move forward.
A last question. Has the President or anyone in the
administration discussed with you the possibility of President
Trump pardoning Michael Cohen?
Attorney General Sessions. I am not able to reveal the
contents of any communications I might have with the President
of the United States or his top staff.
Senator Coons. Given the previous conversation you had with
Senator Van Hollen, it's my hope that, if President Trump
proceeded to pardon Michael Cohen, in violation of longstanding
policy, and did not consult with the Pardon Attorney, did not
consult with DOJ, that you would express strong objection to
that and would consider resigning if that step were taken.
Hopefully, it will not come to that.
Thank you for the chance to question you today, and thank
you for your service, Mr. Attorney General.
Attorney General Sessions. Thank you, Senator Coons.
Senator Moran. Mr. Attorney General, we're about to
conclude our hearing. We're going to have a quick round. I was
hoping that Senator Coons would leave before I indicated the
potential of a second round, but--Senator Coons, anything you
want to add to what you've questioned the Attorney General?
Senator Coons. Thank you very much for the opportunity. No,
I have completed my questions.
Senator Moran. Very good.
I'll recognize Senator Shaheen.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
TRIALS FOR INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM SUSPECTS
I want to follow up on the issue that Senator Graham raised
about Guantanamo. He specifically mentioned the Beatles. On
March 5, I sent the Justice Department a letter based on
discussions that we had with the families of the Americans who
were killed, we think, by the Beatles, one of whom was a
constituent of mine, James Foley, but also included Steven
Sotloff and Kayla Mueller. One of the things that we heard very
strongly from the families of those Americans murdered by those
terrorists--executed, really--is that they wanted to see that
the people who killed them were brought to justice. They didn't
feel like putting them in Guantanamo, where no one would know
and other terrorists would not be able to see that they were
brought to justice and held accountable for their deeds, was an
appropriate way to deal with them. So, I wonder if today you
can tell me if you, as the Attorney General, and the Justice
Department will advocate with this administration that those
terrorists be brought to justice either in some international
venue or in civilian courts in the United States.
Attorney General Sessions. Well, I believe I can say with
certainty they will be brought to justice. There has been a
discussion. Senator Graham, for example, believes--and he's
studied this for years; he's actually, on his military duty,
spent time at prisons in----
Senator Shaheen. Right.
Attorney General Sessions [continuing]. Afghanistan and
places, so he's an expert--but, he thinks the normal and best
procedure is for people to be brought to Guantanamo, where
they're not--they're--as prisoners of war, that they can be
interrogated as normal prisoners of war, they're not provided
attorneys, and they're not set for trial and don't get
discovery and--of the government. And then, if a decision is
made to bring them to the United States for trial or tried by
military commission in Guantanamo, that's the best approach. I
have advocated that with him in--when I was in the Senate. So,
that's my general view of it.
We have had success bringing--trying a lot of these cases
in Federal court. Even though the rules of evidence are
stricter, the discovery rules require the government to produce
more evidence, sometimes could tend to reveal the--how they got
caught and our techniques of catching them, and our
intelligence that way.
So there's no dispute about these individuals being brought
to trial. I have been disappointed, frankly, that the British--
they were British citizens, they renounced their citizenship,
or rejected, had it pulled, but that they are not willing to
try the cases, but tend to want to tell us how to try them.
So--and they have certain evidence----
So, it's a complex matter. We are spending a good deal of
time on it. I believe you can say with confidence that we
expect to have these individuals tried and held accountable for
their horrific acts.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you. As you point out, we've been
successful in Federal court when we've brought those terrorist
cases. In fact, we've been more successful in civilian courts
than in military tribunals. I would urge you and the
administration to take into account the wishes of the families,
who lost their loved ones because of those terrorists, and not
provide another opportunity for terrorists to be able to use
Guantanamo as a recruiting tool. I certainly hope you will do
that.
SPECIAL COUNCIL AND FIRING AUTHORITY
I would like to change the subject now. There have been a
number of questions here regarding your recusal from issues
relating to the 2016 presidential campaign and the work of
Special Counselor Mueller. I have a couple of general questions
that I hope you can answer despite your recusal from questions
regarding the Mueller investigation.
Outside of misconduct, dereliction of duty, incapacity,
conflict of interest, or other good cause, the conditions
outlined in 28 C.F.R. 600, can the Attorney General, or his
designee, fire a Special Counsel?
Attorney General Sessions. Well, let me just say this. I
expected somebody would press this, but I am recused from that
matter, and this thing--one matter at stake, and I'm recused
from that. So, I believe it is not appropriate for me to opine
or give my thoughts at this point, given the fact that I'm
recused. So, I appreciate your inquiry, but I think it is not
appropriate for me to comment.
Senator Shaheen. Will you also not comment on whether, in
your legal view, the President can fire a Special Counsel
appointed under the same regulation?
Attorney General Sessions. I feel the same way about that
question.
Senator Shaheen. Okay.
Mr. Chairman, if I can just ask one more question. I know
I'm over my time.
Senator Moran. Please continue.
CENSUS CITIZENSHIP QUESTION
Senator Shaheen. I want to go back to the Census questions.
There have been some questions about the citizenship question
that is to be included in the next Census. Now, my
understanding is that the last time this question was included
in the Census was in 1950. And so, I have a question about why
now the Justice Department feels like it needs to include that
question. The answer that I've been given is that it's used in
enforcing the Voting Rights Act. Since we haven't used it since
1950, why is it necessary now? Does the Justice Department plan
on using the information from the question for immigration
enforcement?
Attorney General Sessions. Well, we've submitted a written
statement about that. The matter is under litigation today, and
I am reluctant--and it's really--wouldn't be appropriate for me
to discuss the merits and argue the pros and cons about it, if
you'll forgive me on that. But, we have a written document to
the Census Bureau, and they are--we are representing them in
court.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Thank you, Senator Shaheen.
Senator from Louisiana, Senator Kennedy.
Senator Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General, I think you're doing a wonderful job. I wanted to
tell you that first.
Attorney General Sessions. Thank you.
Senator Kennedy. You're a better man than I am. I can tell
you, I--you've shown a lot of patience. You know, first they
want you to recuse yourself, and then they want you to answer
questions about it.
IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT
You and I have talked about this before. You know, we are a
nation of immigrants, which we're proud of. You know, I think
we've let in more folks from other countries in our--into our
country than any other nation. And it's--I'm flattered that
people want to come here. I mean, when's the last time you read
about somebody trying to sneak into China? You know, they want
to come here. And that's great. But, we're a nation of laws,
and we're not following our laws on immigration. Is there
anything we can do about sanctuary cities, in terms of
legislation, that would help you?
Attorney General Sessions. Absolutely. For example, there--
I think we could authorize explicitly--I didn't--I thought it
was already sufficiently authorized, but you'd explicitly
authorize or pass legislation that mandates a cooperative
relationship with State and local areas. Also----
Senator Kennedy. I would have thought that would be
implicit.
Attorney General Sessions. I----
Senator Kennedy. No?
Attorney General Sessions. But, you know, Senator Kennedy,
there's nothing like the improvement we've seen in law
enforcement. You have--in Louisiana, you've got cities, you've
got parishes in cities, in all these--jurisdictions each have
their borders and their jails, and we honor each other's holds
and hold people til somebody can come over and pick them up
because they've got charges in another jurisdiction or another
State or to the Federal Government. And this is an ideological,
open-borders, radical policy that a city or a county refuses--
after they've apprehended somebody who's entered the country
unlawfully, who's committed perhaps a major crime, they refuse
to honor the ICE officers when they come to pick them up. And
that means the ICE officers have to go out in the community,
place themselves and maybe neighbors at risk to try to
apprehend sometimes dangerous criminals. And I cannot agree to
that. I cannot accept having our officers placed at that kind
of risk. And it's important matters, not a little matter. And I
think these cities need to reevaluate what they're saying. I
don't think they know what they're saying. I don't think they
understand the implications of their refusal to cooperate with
brother and sister law officers like our ICE officers. We
cooperate with them. And that's why we've been so--that's been
a part of the 30-year decline in crime, is this partnership
between Federal and State officers. This is the biggest breach
of that relationship I've seen in my 40 years of law
enforcement.
SPECIAL COUNSEL AND RULE OF LAW
Senator Kennedy. Well, it just strikes me--I mean, we've
talked a lot lately about the rule of law and the Mueller
investigation, which I'm not going to ask you to comment on,
because you did correctly recuse yourself. We talked a lot
about the rule of law, but it doesn't seem to apply when we
talk about immigration laws. I mean, there are parts of
immigration law I don't agree with, but I'm going to follow it.
Now, I'm going to try to help my colleagues in Federal, State,
or local government to follow it until we change it, if we ever
change it. And I just don't get it. I'm sorry, I don't. I mean,
I understand the politics of it. But, when you have the mayor
of a city pick up the phone and, you know, tip off some folks
who are in violation of Federal law, that they may be arrested,
you know, the Federal agents are coming in, I don't understand
a world like that. I don't.
Attorney General Sessions. Well, if a person can cross the
border on Monday and end up in San Francisco on Wednesday,
hauling dope and gets arrested with cocaine or heroin, why
would the city not want ICE, after they've served their time,
to take them out of the country like the law contemplates? I
find, like you, that's amazing.
Senator Kennedy. We're----
Attorney General Sessions. I also want to thank you----
Senator Kennedy [continuing]. Spending billions and
billions--I think I saw a figure of 36 billion--I'm sure that--
that may be inaccurate; I'm--my memory's bad, but--that we
spend on border enforcement. But, if you get through--and, I'm
sorry, I'm not saying if you can make it to New Orleans, you're
home free. And I know our mayor disagrees with us on that, but
it's an attitude.
But, anyway, if there's--I'll call you separately. I want
to stay within my time. But, thank you for your service.
Attorney General Sessions. Thank you. And thank you for
being alert to this issue and helping us, and raising it.
Senator Moran. General Sessions, I think we're about to
conclude. Let me ask just a couple of followup questions, if--
that I have.
IMMIGRATION JUDGES
The Department has requested funding for 75 new immigration
judges and support staff to help alleviate the immigration
court system backlog. As you would know, this subcommittee
provided funding for 100 additional immigration judges in the
fiscal year 2018 omnibus. Can you explain how these additions
will enable the court to decrease that backlog? And also, speak
to the expedited hearing process that the Department has
developed.
Attorney General Sessions. We've had a real problem for a
number of years. In 2014, we only had 284 judges. With this
funding, we believe we'll hit 559. That still may not be the
optimum number, but it is a monumental improvement. We simply
have more and more individuals who are making facial claims for
asylum or other relief that justifies hearings. And it just--
it's placing more and more stress on it. We have to be able to
have prompt hearings, give people fair adjudication. And
really, they need to be held in custody until the hearing is
over, because, when you release them from custody because you
can't bring them to speedy trial that they're entitled to, you
can be ordered by the courts to release them, and they aren't
coming back for trial. It's a loophole of monumental
proportions, and there are a number of them. But, that's one of
the biggest. And the judge--more judges will--I can't tell you
how appreciative we are to the Congress for doing that. It also
helps the legitimate immigrant claimant to get his--his or her
case heard promptly.
EXECUTIVE OFFICE FOR IMMIGRATION REVIEW CASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
Senator Moran. Well, General, I have a lot to learn in this
new capacity. One of the surprises was to learn that the
Executive Office of Immigration Review utilizes a management
system that's based on paper. And your request includes $25
million to develop an electronic case management system. Can
you tell us about how this will work and what a difference it
will make?
Attorney General Sessions. We are looking to get more
productivity and more legitimate and a better decisionmaking
process from our judges. And we think the $25 million will pay
for itself many times over. And we would appreciate that
reform. And I believe it will help the system considerably.
Senator Moran. Is this a onetime request, or there'll be
requests for additional funding for this purpose in the future?
Attorney General Sessions. I think the initial cost will be
the most significant. Whether we'll have the annual cost in the
budget line item or not, I don't know. Probably so.
Senator Moran. Are you aware of other places within your
Department in which you're still operating off of a paper-based
system?
Attorney General Sessions. I think the--we're working to
improve the ATF process by which firearms and their serial
numbers are noted. That's not sufficiently computerized,
either. And it slows that down and costs money, we think, in
the long run. So, we'd like to be able to get a much quicker
turnaround on that. And we are planning to improve that system,
also.
[The information follows:]
At the hearing on April 25, 2018, Chairman Moran asked: ``Are you
aware of other places within your Department in which you're still
operating off--off of a paper-based system?'' I responded: ``I think
the--we're working to improve the ATF process by which firearms and
their serial numbers are noted. That's not sufficiently computerized
either. And it slows down, and costs money, we think, in the long run.
So we'd like to be able to get a much quicker turnaround on that. And
we--we're planning to improve that system also.'' I believe this
response requires further clarification as to the ATF process to which
I was referring, and as to the steps the Department is taking to
improve the efficiency of that process. Consequently, I would like to
supplement my testimony with the following information:
The paper-based ATF process that the Department is working to
make more efficient is the crime gun tracing process. ATF is
the only U.S. law enforcement agency with the authority to
trace firearms; it fulfils this duty through its National
Tracing Center in Martinsburg, West Virginia. The NTC receives
an average of 20 million paper records per year from Federal
Firearms Licensees. These records consist primarily of FFL Out
of Business Records (OBR), OBR records are critical to the
firearms tracing process, and ATF images these records as a
``picture'', which is not searchable using automated
technology. As a result, when a trace is conducted, ATF
manually searches these records to look for the relevant serial
number. The process of manually searching images for firearm
serial numbers is obviously inefficient, and can result in
incomplete traces due to manual error.
To improve the efficiency and accuracy during a crime gun
trace, the Department is exploring ways to use new technologies
to ``tag'' the serial number field in the image of those
records, so that automated (computerized) means may be used to
assist solely in the review of the serial number field of the
record image. If we are able to develop this technology,
significant cost savings would be realized, human error would
be reduced, and trace results on crime guns would be more
quickly provided to law enforcement.
Consistent with long-standing appropriations restrictions on
consolidation or centralization of FFL records, the use of
``tag'' technology would be strictly limited to the serial
number field of an image, and would not allow for the automated
or computerized search of record fields containing firearm
owner information. The Department does not intend to seek any
change to the current appropriations restrictions as they apply
to consolidation or centralization of records used in the
firearm tracing process.
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE FISCAL YEAR 2018 SPEND PLAN
Senator Moran. Let me ask, finally, about a spend plan. I
look forward to receiving the Department's spend plan that's
required by Section 532 of the CJS bill. As you know, several
programs within the Department, such as veteran courts and
Tribal assistant grants programs, received a significant
increase. We talked a bit about that in the conversation that
you had with one of my colleagues. They received a $14 million
increase and $35 million increase, respectively. As we also
indicated, there's a--Fix NICS and STOP Act were passed in the
omnibus bill, and--which I hope will be outlined in your spend
plan how you intend to spend and implement those laws. And
additionally, the Appropriations Committee included 3.3 billion
to fight against opioid and prescription drug abuse crisis. Of
this amount, 299.5 million was specifically included for the
Department to fund anti-opioid grant programs. Can you speak to
the type of comprehensive planning and initiatives the
Department has undertaken to ensure those--these investments
will have a maximum benefit?
Attorney General Sessions. I can. We're excited about that.
I will share to you, Chairman and Ranking Member, we are
determined to use that money quickly. We don't need New
Hampshire waiting--or without having this deaths reduced. And
we've got a series of ideas with DEA how to improve it, such
as, we can extend people from 57 to 60, age 60. If we just go
through the normal hiring process, we may be 2 or 3 years
before we get to the numbers that we are authorized to get to.
So, we could do that. We can take--even people who have already
retired can work 20 years--20 hours a week. We're thinking
about contracting with State and local police departments to--
with people who have retired from them--experienced narcotics
officers, many of them highly trained and very experienced--we
could contract with them. And the DEA has, at my request and
meeting with Ron Patterson and--Rob Patterson, he's on top of
it. Well, we're going to have 400 added to task forces that
we'll be able to fund that.
So, I guess what I--we, by--May 7, I believe is the day, we
are--intend to have you a plan. Deputy Rosenstein and I have
talked about it. Lee Loftus, our JMD leader, is behind me and
helping me. He's been at this for many years. We're determined
to try to meet that goal and have plans that we can use the
money you've given us, and not 3 years from now, but now,
because we face a crisis.
Senator Moran. General, thank you. I had expected that--
perhaps a more pro forma response to my question. And I'm
pleased to see that you're moving with alacrity. That's a--an
encouraging development. Let us know how we can be of help. We
want to see the results when we authorize the spending.
Attorney General Sessions. Thank you.
OPIOID EPIDEMIC
Senator Moran. I think--oh, let me ask just this final
question about that. On this opioid battle, how well can you
assure me of the cooperation and coordination between the
Department of Justice and other Federal agencies in this
battle?
Attorney General Sessions. Well, the President reached a
bipartisan solution, I understand, to spend 6 billion
additional dollars on the opioid crisis. That is a sizable
increase, no doubt about it. We are getting only a small part
of it. I don't know exactly what percentage, but it's certainly
not the major. I expect that the prevention program, which I
totally support, will be funded. But, it doesn't need an
unlimited amount of money. You can run a very good prevention
program for a reasonable amount of money. And you've got
treatment, which is very expensive. And I'm sure that will get
more money. There'll be some research--and I'm talking about
FDA, the Department of Homeland Security, the Department of
Health and Human Services, VA--all of them have roles to play,
and others, in the drug matters. And I would say you're
entitled to keep an eye on all of us, and probably need to,
because when you run a massive department, and you get some
more money for a certain project, and the Secretary's got a
million challenges to deal with, and sometimes things don't get
done with the alacrity we'd like to see.
Senator Moran. We have a funding responsibility, as a
Congress. We have an oversight of equal value, in my view. And
we need do both better.
General, thank you very much. I appreciate your testimony.
It's been a long afternoon, I'm sure, for you, but I appreciate
the responses that you've given.
I always ask a--when I chair a hearing, the witnesses if
they have anything they'd like to add for the record, something
they want to correct, something they want to add, a question
that they didn't feel like they were--that they'd been asked,
that they'd like to answer. You may feel like you've been asked
everything.
Attorney General Sessions. Well, I don't have much to add,
except I would appreciate it, if I have misspoken in any way,
I'll try to correct that. And I thank you, because really the
2018 appropriations was beneficial, and it provided us
additional resources, and we are going to do our best to use
them as you would like us to.
Senator Moran. General, thank you very much.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
If there are no further questions this afternoon--the
Senators may submit additional questions to the subcommittee's
official for the--for the subcommittee's official hearing
record. We request the Department of Justice respond within 30
days.
[The following questions were not asked at the hearing, but
were submitted to the Department for response subsequent to the
hearing:]
Questions Submitted to Hon. Jeff Sessions
Questions Submitted by Senator Richard C. Shelby
madoff victim fund
Question 1a. Attorney General Sessions, last year I asked Deputy
Attorney General Rod Rosenstein about the delay in issuing and the
methodology used to determine distribution amounts from the Madoff
Victims Fund. I also followed up with a letter on this matter on July
20, 2017. The Fund was created by the Department in 2012 to recompense
victims of the Madoff Ponzi scheme. Despite recovering approximately $4
billion, up to this point only roughly $1.3 billion has been
distributed to victims. The delay in distribution is concerning, and
even more troubling in light of the fees paid to the Special Master,
who is tasked with administering payments to victims.
Please explain, in detail, the process for approving; disapproving;
reconsidering disapproved claims; and the payment of approved claims
from the Madoff Victims Fund.
Answer.
In order to return seized funds to victims of crime, the
Department of Justice (Department) follows the Petition for Remission
process set forth at 28 C.F.R. Part 9. Pursuant to those regulations,
the Department, the Criminal Division, the Money Laundering and Asset
Recovery Section (MLARS) and the United States Attorney's Office for
the Southern District of New York (SDNY) selected Richard C. Breeden
Fund Services, LLC to serve as Special Master to administer the Madoff
remission process. The District Court for the Southern District of New
York granted the government's motion to forego restitution in favor of
remission, agreeing that calculation of restitution would be
impracticable and that the government's appointment of a special master
to review individual victim claims would be more efficient and cost-
effective.
MLARS and SDNY worked with the Special Master to develop the Madoff
Victims Fund (MVF) and a distribution plan. Claim forms and a website
were developed and published in 2013, and an April 2014 deadline for
filing petitions with MVF was set. Since that time, the Special Master
and Department personnel have been hard at work evaluating more than
65,400 petitions claiming approximately $78 billion in losses on
Madoff-related investments. Petitions came from individuals and
entities in 137 countries. As part of that process, the Special Master
and his team have reviewed more than 403,000 individual Madoff
transactions in 13 currencies, and evaluated approximately 4.5 million
pages of back-up documentation. As part of that review, the Special
Master identified almost 31,000 petitions (for losses totaling
approximately $27 billion) that were incomplete--meaning that nearly
half of the petitioners were notified of the deficiencies and given an
opportunity to address the deficiency and file an eligible claim. While
this took more time, it ensured the process was available to more
eligible victims.
The extensive review process is necessary to confirm which
petitions are eligible and that the amount claimed is accurate. Because
the total amount available to compensate victims is only about $4
billion--and petitioners claimed $78 billion in losses--ineligible or
overstated petitions pose a serious risk of diluting the potential
recoveries of eligible victims. Similarly, if the Department had begun
making payments before potentially eligible victims had been given an
opportunity to address deficiencies, it would have risked running out
of funds before paying some eligible victims.
The Department has now largely completed its review, and has issued
rulings on approximately 62,000 petitions, approving over 39,000. To
date, MLARS has approved transfer of over $1.3 billion from the U.S.
Marshals Service for distribution to approved victims with an eligible
loss. It is important to note that sufficient reserves must be withheld
from distribution to account for any pending appeals, collateral
recovery adjustments, and claims that remain under review. Additional
information regarding the ongoing MVF remission review can be found at
www.madoffvictimfund.com.
Question 1b. Please provide the total amounts recovered by the
Department, paid to the victims, and paid to the Special Master. If
payments to the Special Master are not distributed solely from the
Fund, please describe the source of these payments and provide the
total amount of fees paid to date.
Answer.
The Department has recovered approximately $4 billion
dollars through various civil and criminal forfeiture actions related
to the Madoff fraud scheme. Over $1.31 billion has been distributed to
victims, and the Department intends to distribute billions more. The
special master has been paid $51.4 million from the forfeited funds--
representing under 4 percent of the total paid to victims to date.
Question 1c. What processes and mechanisms does the Department have
in place to oversee the distributions to the victims?
Answer.
The Department is well-versed in implementing the
remission process and rendering decisions under the remission
regulations. Career attorneys at MLARS review hundreds of individual
victim remission petitions each year and manage multiple claims
administration contracts that cover tens of thousands of additional
petitions.
When the Department hires a claims administrator, it also imposes
additional oversight. MLARS coordinates with the administrator to
ensure the distribution plan comports with the regulations, and any
documents or information provided by the administrator to petitioners
are approved by MLARS. No decisions are conveyed to a petitioner until
MLARS issues a decision on the petition. Ultimate responsibility for
the remission decisions rests with the Department, not the
administrator.
MLARS attorneys and financial personnel conduct site visits at both
the contractor's offices and the bank selected to make payments. In the
Madoff matter, MLARS staff conducted site visits at the Special
Master's office and the bank at various stages throughout the remission
process. MLARS also conducts audits at various stages of the remission
process to review the recommendations and cleared checks.
Question 1d. What processes and mechanisms does the Department have
in place to oversee and assess the reasonableness of the fees paid to
the Special Master?
Answer.
In accordance with the Federal Acquisition Regulation
(FAR), a warranted Department of Justice Contracting Officer makes the
determination that the rates associated with the Special Master
contract are fair and reasonable prior to any contract action. As part
of each determination, the Contracting Officer is responsible for
conducting price analysis that clearly demonstrates that the proposed
price is reasonable in comparison with current or recent prices for the
same or similar services.
Question 1e. How has the Department factored in potential future
distributions to victims that will based on settlements distributed
from the SIPA Trustee?
Answer.
The Department and the Special Master have coordinated
with the SIPA Trustee from the onset of the remission process. Data
regarding the bankruptcy claims and subsequent payments has been shared
with the Special Master on multiple occasions to ensure that no
petitioner receives a payment from MVF funds if his total recovery from
any source exceeds the MVF approved pro rata amount--which is currently
40 percent. In addition, the Department is holding funds in reserve for
approved petitioners who are awaiting potential future distributions
from the SIPA Trustee, intermediary funds, or other pending litigation.
If future SIPA Trustee distributions occur, the petitioners will
receive a payment from MVF only to the extent necessary to provide
recovery up to the approved pro rata amount. MVF also requires
petitioners to provide collateral recovery updates prior to each
distribution of MVF funds.
Question 1f. How are the Department and the SIPA Trustee
communicating to avoid double costs or payments? Please describe in
detail the processes and mechanisms in place to ensure this line of
communication is open and adequately used.
Answer.
The remission petitioners and the bankruptcy claimants do
not, for the most part, overlap. MVF has already approved over 39,000
petitions, while only approximately 2,600 bankruptcy claims have been
approved. The legal standards for remission and SIPC recoveries are not
the same and eligibility for filing differs. To the extent there is
overlap, the Special Master has reviewed data from the SIPA Trustee to
streamline MVF's claim process and ensure no double recovery occurs.
As explained above, the Department and the Special Master have
coordinated with the SIPA Trustee from the onset of the remission
process. Data regarding the bankruptcy claims and subsequent payments
has been shared with the Special Master on multiple occasions to ensure
that no petitioner receives a payment from MVF funds if his total
recovery from any source exceeds the MVF approved pro rata amount--
which is currently 40 percent. If future SIPA Trustee distributions
occur, the petitioners will receive a payment from MVF only to the
extent necessary to provide recovery up to the approved pro rata
amount. MVF also requires petitioners to provide collateral recovery
updates prior to each distribution of MVF funds.
atf--american table of distances
Question 2a. It is my understanding that the Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) uses the American Table of
Distances (ATD) to determine where explosives storage magazines can be
located.
Does the ATF use the American Table of Distances to determine where
explosives storage magazines may be located? If so, please explain the
Bureau's current measurement process and list any other metrics the ATF
may use to determine safe distances for the storage of explosive
magazines.
Answer.
ATF adopted the American Table of Distances (developed by
the Institute of Makers of Explosives (IME)) for the storage of
explosive materials in 1971. The table is used by ATF to determine
required distances from magazines containing high explosives or
blasting agents to potential receptors such as other magazines,
inhabited buildings, highways, and passenger railways. This table uses
the weight of explosive materials in storage on one axis, and the type
of receptor on the other axis.
ATF subsequently adopted the IME's appendix to the American Table
of Distances, designed to calculate appropriate separation distances
between high explosives, blasting agents, and stores of ammonium
nitrate. In addition, ATF has adopted a Department of Defense table of
distances for low explosives storage and a display fireworks table of
distances modeled after a National Fire Protection Association table.
Question 2b. What other metrics are used by the explosives industry
to measure safe storage distances? As technology improves and continues
to advance, is ATF looking to alternative metrics or more efficient
models, such as quantitative risk assessment, to measure how explosives
will react?
Answer.
In recent years, individuals in the explosives industry
have explored the use of quantitative risk assessment (QRA) for siting
explosives storage magazines. The IME has involved ATF in discussions
about the testing, modeling, and development of a QRA tool called the
Institute of Makers of Explosives Safety Analysis for Risk (IMESAFR).
Based upon such discussions, ATF has approved variances for use of the
tool, and ATF continues to explore the possibility of adopting a QRA
process for siting explosives magazines.
The IMESAFR program has its roots in the Safety Analysis for Risk
(SAFR) software originally developed for the U.S. Department of Defense
for assessing risk in its explosives operations. IMESAFR incorporates
statistical analysis, computer modeling, and test data to provide, in
part, a risk level to persons occupying buildings and traveling in
vehicles near explosives operations. The IMESAFR model calculates risk
in terms of the statistical expectation for loss of life from an
explosives event. IMESAFR is currently the only explosives quantitative
risk assessment program that ATF is aware of.
Question 2c. Would a change in measuring method require a statutory
or regulatory modification?
Answer.
Yes. In order for ATF to change or add methods used to
calculate required distances from magazines to receptors, a regulatory
change would be required. Currently, the regulations at 27 CFR, Part
555 (Commerce in Explosives) contain specific references to the tables
described above, and offer no alternative, except by variance.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jerry Moran
Question 1a. On December 12, 2017, The Modernizing Government
Technology (MGT) Act was signed into law by the President of the United
States. This Act authorizes CFO Act agencies (including DOJ) to
establish IT working capital funds which may be used to streamline IT
systems, replace legacy products, and support transitions to cloud
computing for up to 3 years in order to further modernization efforts.
This Act also creates a separate centralized Technology Modernization
Fund (TMF) within the Department of the Treasury, to be managed by the
General Services Administrator, as well as the government wide
Technology Modernization Board (Board). The fiscal year 2018 omnibus
appropriated $100 million to the TMF, and the Board has received
applications from nine agencies to use this funding.
The Department of Justice's fiscal year 2019 budget request
included $31.7 million for Justice Information Sharing Technology
(JIST). The Department's CIO uses these appropriated dollars to ensure
that IT investments are well-planned and align with the Department's
overall strategy.
Please explain how outdated, legacy IT systems have impacted the
Department's ability to execute its mission? Has this hindered the
Department's law enforcement role?
Answer.
The Department continues to effectively carry out its
mission objectives through leveraging all operational IT assets. The
Department remains committed to modernizing and replacing key mission
and business IT systems. Similar to the challenges identified in the
Report to the President on Federal IT Modernization, legacy IT systems,
built with unsupported code, contain inherent vulnerabilities, such as
out-of-support software, that increase an agency's risk for cyber-
attacks and impede innovation.
Legacy IT systems do not hinder the Department's law enforcement
role generally, though outdated IT systems and reliance on paper
processes results in significant inefficiencies in processing cases at
EOIR. The Department continues to make progress by leveraging multiple
mechanisms for investing and maintaining IT infrastructure. Some of the
key system replacement and modernization projects underway within the
Department's law enforcement components are:
--FBI: National Crime Information Center (NCIC) modernization is
delivering new search capabilities and name-matching algorithms
to the system deployed nearly 20 years ago. Enhancements to the
National Instant Background Check System (NICS) enable faster
and more accurate determination of gun purchase eligibility.
Modernization of Next Generation Identification (NGI)
infrastructure will improve response, biometrics analysis, and
identity confirmation.
--USMS: Capture program is replacing multiple end-of-life case
management systems for custody management, prisoner transport,
and fugitive case management built on custom code. The new
system uses a modern, industry standard business process
management system (BPMS) platform that enables system-to-system
interoperability and information sharing.
--ATF: Spartan is a business process modernization effort that
includes the development of a case management system to replace
a suite of applications, originally deployed in 1998, for
criminal investigations and industry regulatory inspections.
This single solution designed to replace the current systems
will more effectively bring together ATF elements to carry out
its mission. Spartan is being developed using the same BPMS
technology platform being employed on six projects across the
Department, including USMS Capture program and FBI New NICS.
This technology platform simplifies solution support within
ATF, and enables code sharing and cost avoidance for the
Department.
--EOIR: The $25 million enhancement request submitted in the
President's fiscal year 2019 budget for the EOIR Courts and
Appeals System (ECAS) will enable electronic filing of
documents, create an electronic record of proceeding, and
integrate state-of-the-art information management capabilities
for Immigration Judges. These updates will reduce EOIR's
reliance on paper processes, ensure that all parties can
readily access official documents, leading to greater
efficiencies that will reduce the backlog of immigration court
cases.
--BOP: The BOP is conducting market research to modernize its Sentry
prisoner management system, by analyzing options for migrating
from a mainframe-based system to a micro-services architecture
compatible with a cloud platform.
Question 1b. If so, how does the Department plan to replace these
problematic systems?
Answer.
Please see my response to question 1c.
Question 1c. Given the recent enactment of the Modernizing
Government Technology Act, has the Department considered submitting an
application to the centralized Technology Modernization Board or
establishing a Working Capital Fund with the sole mission of replacing
legacy IT systems? If not, why?
Answer.
The Department does not plan to establish a new
Modernizing Government Technology Act (MGT) working capital fund (WCF).
Currently, the Department funds IT modernization through three primary
means: (1) component requested appropriations; (2) the Justice
Information Sharing Technology (JIST) appropriated account; and (3)
special use accounts, such as the Working Capital Fund.
Component requested appropriations are the principal funding source
for mission- specific IT modernization requirements. An example is the
fiscal year 2019 request from the Executive Office for Immigration
Review for a $25 million IT modernization program increase to develop
an electronic filing, case management, document management, and
schedule management system.
The JIST account is the principal source for capitalizing
enterprise-oriented and shared-service IT capabilities, as well as for
cybersecurity investments. The JIST account is an annual, no-year fund
under the direct control of the DOJ CIO. Funds are used to support
multiyear projects for strategic investments critical to the
Department's federated IT enterprise. Further, the JIST appropriation
account currently includes a provision authorizing the Attorney General
to transfer up to $35.4 million into this account from other Department
sources to fund enterprise IT investments. The House Appropriations
Committee, Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related
Agencies, in its fiscal year 2019 appropriations mark-up proposes
increasing this transfer authority to $50 million.
Finally, special use funds such as Unobligated Balance Transfers
(UBT) enable remaining balances on DOJ expiring appropriations to be
deposited into a special account. Funding may be withdrawn and applied
toward priority IT investments and modernization with congressional
notification. UBT allocations are currently capped at $30 million per
fiscal year.
JIST transfer authority, and the use of UBT allocations, enhance
the Department's ability to address IT modernization needs through
existing accounts.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Patrick J. Leahy
Question 1a. Under the terms of your March 2017 recusal, you are
recused ``from any existing or future investigations of any matters
related in any way to the campaigns for President.'' As I stated to you
at the April 25, 2018, hearing, recusal is not discretionary; it is
required by the clear terms of 28 C.F.R. Sec. 452.
You have acknowledged that your March 2017 recusal was required
under the regulations. Do you thus confirm that you have a ``political
relationship'' with President Trump and/or then-candidate Trump?
Answer.
This question calls for the personal knowledge of and is
specifically directed to former Attorney General Jeff Sessions. As
such, it would be inappropriate for the Department to respond to this
question at this time.
Question 1b. Yes or no: Given that he has successfully intervened
in the case, and it stems from an investigation involving his campaign,
does President Trump have a specific and substantial interest in the
criminal case against Michael Cohen?
Answer.
Consistent with longstanding policy, the Department is
unable to answer this question as it relates to an ongoing
investigation.
Question 2a. In March, you fired the 21 year veteran and non-
political Deputy Director of the FBI for lacking candor. I have seen
the underlying reports and understand the seriousness of the
allegations. Yet the President was goading you to fire him, counting
down the days until his retirement. The President has attacked Mr.
McCabe no less than 17 times on Twitter. He even reportedly told Mr.
McCabe on the phone to ask his wife what it felt like to be a loser,
referring to her failed run for State Senate in Virginia.
You fired Mr. McCabe just 26 hours before he was going to retire.
It was also just hours after he was able to present his side of the
story to the FBI. Are you aware of any other example of an Attorney
General terminating a career employee on the same day that employee was
able to present his or her case for leniency?
Answer.
After an extensive and fair investigation and according to
Department of Justice procedure, the Department's Office of the
Inspector General (OIG) provided its report on allegations of
misconduct by Mr. McCabe to the FBI's Office of Professional
Responsibility (OPR). The FBI's OPR then reviewed the report and
underlying documents and issued a disciplinary proposal recommending
the dismissal of Mr. McCabe. Pursuant to Department Order 1202, and
based on the report of the Inspector General, the findings of the FBI
Office of Professional Responsibility, and the recommendation of the
Department's senior career official, then Attorney General Jeff
Sessions followed the recommendation made by FBI's Office of
Professional Responsibility. The timing was a result of the
Department's receipt of the previously listed materials. To the extent
this question is specifically directed to or calls for the personal
knowledge of former Attorney General Sessions, it would be
inappropriate for the Department to respond further.
Question 3a. In January, the Departments of Justice and Homeland
Security released a report on foreign-born individuals convicted of
international terrorism since 9/11. The report has since been widely
misused to instill fear of immigrants to justify the President's
immigration agenda. In an interview on Fox News to discuss the release
of the report, you said, ``We know 73 percent of people arrested for
terrorism were born abroad. So, if they had been properly screened and
rejected, we wouldn't have had these attacks in our country.''
Do you stand by that statement?
Answer.
The Department stands by the content of the report, which
is accurate and based on a sound statistical foundation. Undoubtedly,
proper vetting and screening are critically important to our national
security. To the extent this question is specifically directed to
former Attorney General Jeff Sessions, it would be inappropriate for
the Department to respond further.
Question 3b. That statement is misleading for three reasons: (1)
you refer to ``terrorism'' generally, but the report in fact somehow
omits the very real threat of domestic terrorism; (2) the report
includes U.S. citizens; and (3) the report includes foreign defendants
who never stepped foot in this country except when they were extradited
here to face trial. Extradition is not immigration.
The White House still has that same misleading claim on its website
today. Will you commit to telling the White House to take it down?
Answer.
Please see my response to question 3a above.
Question 4. Acknowledging bipartisan concerns over the Department's
plans to temporarily pause the Legal Orientation Program (LOP), you
testified before us that LOP would instead continue to operate while
the Department studies its cost-effectiveness. However, there are still
serious concerns that the Department will attempt to skew the findings
of this new study in order to justify a more permanent downsizing or
termination of LOP.
Question 4a. Will the Department be conducting this new cost-
effectiveness study, or will it be conducted by an independent third
party?
Question 4b. If an independent third party is conducting the study,
will it be empowered to gather and analyze raw data about LOP, or will
it be instructed to analyze LOP data provided to it by the Department?
Question 4c. Will the Department commit to providing updates, on
demand, to the Senate Appropriations Committee and the Senate Judiciary
Committee about methodology, interim findings, or any other information
related to the new study?
Answer.
The study, broken into phases, is being conducted by a
team consisting of both contractors and career Federal employees within
EOIR, all of whom are trained analysts, statisticians, or operations
researchers. In carrying out the study, EOIR requested data from the
LOP contractor and from the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) that
it believed would make the study more analytically robust. The
Department repeatedly requested raw data from the LOP contractor since
its review commenced in November 2017 but did not receive all of the
data it requested. It also did not receive data from the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) until the review of Phase I was almost
finished. Accordingly, Phase I of the review proceeded with the data
available to EOIR at the time, and EOIR is currently re-running its
analytics from Phase I based on the data it received from DHS. The
results of the review will be provided to Congress.
Question 5a. Last year I offered an amendment to the CJS
appropriations bill--which was adopted by voice vote and had been
included in previous years--to ensure that the Justice Department would
not waste its finite enforcement resources on medical marijuana users
who are compliant with State law. You opposed my amendment, claiming
that it would let money launderers evade prosecution--which I find odd,
since I do not know of any State that allows money laundering.
In United States v. McIntosh, the Ninth Circuit held that
defendants asserting compliance with State laws are entitled to an
evidentiary hearing. Has your Department ever lost such a hearing? That
is, is there any example of a suspected money launderer or other bad
actor who successfully convinced a Federal judge he could not be liable
because he was compliant with a State medical marijuana law?
Answer.
In 2016, over one of my predecessor's objections, the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit interpreted an appropriations
rider regarding medical marijuana broadly to apply both to Department
actions that prevent States from implementing their laws regarding
medical marijuana and to Department prosecutions of certain individuals
and organizations that operate under those laws. United States v.
McIntosh, 833 F.3d 1163 (9th Cir. 2016). The court held that the
Department may not prosecute violations of the CSA with respect to
marijuana unless a court concludes that the individuals or
organizations are not in compliance with State medical marijuana law.
Then Attorney General Sessions wrote to congressional leaders last year
reiterating his predecessors' opposition to this rider, on the grounds
that he, like his predecessors, thought it would be ``unwise for
Congress to restrict the discretion of the Department to fund
particular prosecutions'' and that ``the Department must be in a
position to use all laws available to combat the transnational drug
organizations and dangerous drug traffickers who threaten American
lives.'' Although this letter did not explicitly refer to money
laundering (as does your question), it did provide an example of an
individual who held an active Colorado license for operating a medical
marijuana business but who also was the ringleader of a criminal
organization that shipped marijuana out of State. The letter also
stated that, ``in the Ninth Circuit, many individuals and organizations
that are operating in violation of the CSA and causing harm in their
communities may invoke the rider to thwart prosecution.''
That has come to pass. Numerous defendants have invoked this rider
and courts throughout the Ninth Circuit have held so-called ``McIntosh
hearings.'' In one particular case, United States v. Pisarski, two
defendants pleaded guilty to growing 32 kilograms, or 327 plants, and
intending to sell it to others. As the briefs and decisions in that
case explain, the defendants had $416,125 in cash, multiple firearms,
gold, silver, and an 18-foot tandem axle trailer on his property, all
of which, by the defendants' admissions, were derived from the
defendants' marijuana activities or intended to be used to facilitate
those activities. Some of the cash was bundled in $10,000 stacks and
wrapped in vacuum-sealed black plastic. The firearms and ammunition
consisted of a loaded Smith and Wesson .357 revolver, a Glock 21 .45
caliber pistol with a loaded magazine, an extra magazine, a Springfield
.22 caliber bolt-action rifle, and a high-capacity magazine. After the
guilty pleas, the district court halted the prosecution even though (1)
a California government official testified that the defendants had not
obtained required sellers' permits or reported sales taxes, (2) the
defendants' claimed they only sold small, excess amounts of marijuana
and yet provided no documentation that the $416,125 in cash and the
precious metals they possessed were offsets for their costs, as
required by State law, (3) the defendants failed to establish that the
members of the collectives to which they sold marijuana were qualified
patients, and (4) the California State attorney general had previously
issued guidelines stating that the circumstances under which the
defendants operated were indicia of unlawful operations. The government
has appealed.
Question 6a. You and I were prosecutors before we entered politics.
We both know better than most how courts work. Which is why I was taken
aback when the Department announced that it would impose numeric quotas
on immigration judges as part of their annual performance reviews. As a
former prosecutor, you should know that if proceedings become tainted
with even the appearance of unfairness because of quotas, there will be
surely be an uptick in appeals.
Has the Department considered the unintended consequence of
mounting appeals as a result of these quotas? Wouldn't that directly
undermine their purported efficiency-based rationale?
Answer.
The performance measures reflect a considered policy
judgment regarding the efficiency that an experienced immigration judge
working a regular schedule should reasonably be able to achieve.
Similar measures are used for administrative judges at the Merit
Systems Protection Board, the Department of Interior, the Board of Land
Appeals, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, and the Railroad
Retirement Board. In fact, immigration courts themselves have operated
under case completion goals for years. Further, these measures are not
quotas, which are fixed numbers with no deviation. Rather, the measures
will be evaluated subject to six discrete factors, along with a seventh
catch-all factor, before making a determination about an immigration
judge's performance.
By regulation, immigration judges are required to adjudicate cases
``in a timely and impartial manner,'' and the Department expects
immigration judges to meet this responsibility. Suggestions that
immigration judges cannot render both timely and impartial decisions
create a false dichotomy that discredits the integrity and
professionalism of the entire immigration judge corps, including the
many immigration judges who can meet the performance measures.
Accordingly, because the Department expects immigration judges to
fulfill their duty to adjudicate cases both timely and impartially, we
do not expect that the performance measures will provide a valid basis
for appeal.
Question 7a. According to The Independent, the United Kingdom
government is considering agreeing to the transfer of Alexanda Kotey
and El Shafee Elsheikh to Guantanamo Bay, from their current reported
detention by U.S.-backed Kurdish groups in northern Syria.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/isis-jihadists-
the-beatles-latest-alexanda-kotey-el-shafee-elsheikh-donald-trump-
guantanamo-bay-a8205286.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
What plans, if any, does the Department have to bring these two
individuals to face trial in the United States, to incarcerate them in
Guantanamo Bay, or to otherwise transfer them from northern Syria?
Answer.
The Department of Justice and our partners in the
interagency are considering options for these individuals and will seek
the option that best protects the national security of the United
States.
Question 8a. On October 25, 2017, you appeared before the Senate
Judiciary Committee at an oversight hearing, after which you were asked
a number of written questions for you to answer under oath. Among these
questions, I asked you about 28 U.S.C. Sec. 540C, the provision
authorizing the establishment of the FBI Police. Senator Manchin and I
sent you a letter on February 9, 2018, which reiterated these
questions. I have yet to receive your response to either my October
2017 questions or my February 2018 letter with Senator Manchin.
Accordingly, please refer to the February 2018 letter and answer the
following:
Are there legislative or other impediments preventing the
Department from complying with Section 540C as written?
Answer.
Please see my response to Question 8c.
Question 8b. What steps is the Department taking to ensure that
uniformed FBI Police officers are not unfairly penalized through the
denial of salary and benefits (including pension) to which they would
be entitled if the FBI had established the FBI Police under Section
540C, as Congress intended?
Answer.
FBI Police are paid in accordance with the current law.
Question 8c. Has the Department, or any other component of the U.S.
Government, examined issues related to providing salary and benefits
(including pension) to uniformed officers of an FBI Police force
established under Section 540C? If so, please provide any conclusions
and any reports or other documentation produced thereby.
Answer.
Yes, the FBI has examined this issue. Normally, employees
engaged in protective duties, such as the FBI Police, are not
considered law enforcement officers for purposes of early retirement
under either the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS) or the Federal
Employees Retirement System (FERS). Statutory exceptions have been made
for other groups of employees engaged in protective duties, such as the
Secret Service Uniformed Division. The U.S. Code (at 28 U.S.C.
540C(b)(5)) requires that pay and benefits of FBI Police be equivalent
to members of the Secret Service Uniformed Division. However, the
definition of a law enforcement officer in FERS (5 U.S.C. 8401(17))
does not extend to members of the FBI Police.
Question 9a. Last month, the Seventh Circuit issued a ruling
effectively ending the Department's attempt to withhold law enforcement
funds from cities and States that declined to cooperate with Federal
immigration enforcement authorities. A unanimous panel concluded that
the Department could not lawfully impose conditions on funds that
Congress--with the power of the purse--has not imposed. As Vice
Chairman of the Committee that appropriated these funds, I can tell you
the court was correct. Yet your Department is now seeking a stay of the
decision not because it was wrongfully decided on the merits, but
instead on grounds that the nationwide injunction was too broad.
Is the Department's position that--in order to obtain these
critical law enforcement resources that Congress has appropriated to
keep our communities safe--you would force every impacted jurisdiction
to independently file suit?
Answer.
Many jurisdictions throughout the country readily provide
the modest law enforcement cooperation required by the reasonable Byrne
JAG conditions.
While Byrne JAG is still the subject of active, ongoing litigation,
the Department has released the vast majority of Byrne JAG awards for
fiscal year 2017. As of October 11, 2018, the Department has awarded
859 fiscal year 2017 Byrne JAG awards to jurisdictions with no
unresolved questions regarding their cooperation with the relevant
conditions. The Department is reviewing the remaining jurisdictions
that have not received awards and is working to resolve outstanding
expeditiously.
Question 10a. In response to Chairman Moran's question regarding
your Department's proposal to transfer the High Intensity Drug
Trafficking Area (HIDTA) Program to the Drug Enforcement Administration
(DEA), you said that the Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)
was probably not created to or expected to administer a grant of this
kind. However, Congress first established ONDCP in 1988 with the HIDTA
program deliberately under its jurisdiction. Congress reauthorized the
HIDTA Program and made its authority permanent as part of ONDCP in
1998. I do not accept your argument that ONDCP was not meant to be a
grant making agency when Congress clearly and deliberately authorized
it as such. In contrast, the DEA is not a grant making agency and would
need to adjust administratively to take on the task of managing and
administering a very large grant program. DEA is an operational law
enforcement entity that works alongside and in coordination with
HIDTAs, which serve as a coordination mechanism--a major reason why the
HIDTA Program has thrived at ONDCP. You concede that it is ONDCP's role
to coordinate and DEA's role to enforce.
Why does your budget, in direct contrast to Congress'
authorization, suggest funding HIDTAs through DEA even though DEA is
not a grant making entity and ONDCP has effectively administered HIDTA
for decades?
Answer.
While the Department's original intent had been to move
HIDTA into the DEA to consolidate drug enforcement efforts, we
understand that the fiscal year 2019 committee marks subsequently have
not funded the program within DOJ. This being the case, the Department
and the DEA will continue to work in close coordination with HIDTA to
combat drug trafficking.
Question 10b. Your budget includes no new positions or funding in
DEA to manage and administer the HIDTA grants, which, if transferred,
would be one of the largest grant programs at the Justice Department.
How do you expect DEA to properly and responsibly oversee those grants
with no dedicated staff or additional M&A funding? Do you intend to
have current DEA staff--who lack grant-making expertise--administer the
program and, if so, how many staff do you propose to dedicate to this?
What is the M&A cost estimate to effectively oversee the program?
Answer.
The fiscal year 2019 budget includes $254 million for the
HIDTA program, which includes $3.6 million for the National HIDTA
Assistance Center to assist in the administration of the HIDTA program.
Additionally, the Department of Justice has a well-established grant
program expertise, and DEA will draw on the tremendous experience of
these experts to further enhance the HIDTA program's effectiveness as a
powerful enforcement tool to combat drug trafficking in the United
States.
Question 10c. What evidence do you have that HIDTAs would be better
administered through DEA? What practical and applicable data can you
provide to this Committee in support of such a sweeping change?
Answer. The United States is in the midst of the worst drug
epidemic in history. The solution to this epidemic will not come from
one level of government alone, rather it will take the coordinated
efforts and resources of Federal, State, local, and Tribal governments
working together, and DEA offers such a coordination opportunity. While
the Department's original intent had been to move HIDTA into the DEA,
we understand that the fiscal year 2019 committee marks subsequently
have not funded the program within DOJ. This being the case, the
Department will continue to work in close coordination with HIDTA to
combat drug trafficking.
Question 10d. What evidence does DOJ have that the current HIDTA
program structure is insufficient, inefficient, or in need of any
changes?
Answer.
The Department's original intent had been to move HIDTA
into the DEA to take advantage of operational synergies at DEA, however
we understand that the fiscal year 2019 committee marks subsequently
have not funded the program within DOJ. This being the case, the
Department will continue to work in close coordination with HIDTA to
combat drug trafficking.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Shelley Moore Capito
Question 1a. In March I sent a letter to your office regarding the
decision to delay distribution of Byrne JAG Grants for fiscal year 2017
and the impact that this is having on localities in my State. While I
certainly agree with the Department's efforts to implement robust
enforcement of our Nation's immigration laws, my concern is that
withholding these funds from States like mine, who have no sanctuary
cities and have remained compliant with all relevant statutes, runs the
risk of disrupting local law enforcement's ability to protect public
safety. For instance, the city of Nitro, West Virginia employs a school
resource officer to protect the high school using Byrne JAG funding.
The delay in distributing these funds has resulted in a lot of
uncertainty from city officials as to how they are going to continue
funding this important resource. Additionally, my office has heard from
the West Virginia State Police, who have expressed similar concerns
regarding their ability to continue vital public safety programs, which
include efforts to combat the opioid epidemic ravaging our State.
Please provide some insight as to whether the Department has
considered resuming distribution of these funds and if so what the
timeline for that might be?
Answer. While Byrne JAG is still the subject of active, ongoing
litigation, the Department has released the vast majority of Byrne JAG
awards for fiscal year 2017. As of October 11, 2018, the Department has
awarded 859 fiscal year 2017 Byrne JAG awards to jurisdictions with no
unresolved questions regarding their cooperation with the relevant
conditions. The Department is reviewing the remaining jurisdictions
that have not received awards and is working to resolve outstanding
issues expeditiously.
Question 2a. The Department's budget calls for the elimination of
nearly 1,200 positions, 400 correctional officers, and the closure of
two standalone minimum security camps within the Bureau of Prisons.
Over the last few months I have heard from a number of BOP officials in
my State expressing their concerns over what they describe as dangerous
levels of understaffing. They argue that the positions being eliminated
have been intentionally left unfilled which has resulted in inmate-to-
staff ratios that jeopardize officer and inmate safety alike. Just a
few weeks ago an inmate was murdered during an altercation at USP
Hazelton in West Virginia. BOP has had to rely on wide-spread
augmentation of staff without adequate preparation and while staffing
levels continue to decrease, inmate levels remain relatively unchanged.
How does the Department reconcile these staffing cuts with the fact
that prison officials on the ground are characterizing staff shortages
as a direct threat to their safety?
Answer. The first priority of the Bureau of Prisons (BOP) is the
safety of staff, inmates, and the public. Over the past few years, the
number and rate of serious assaults on staff have declined by more than
33 percent. Additionally, the inmate population continues to decline,
from a high around 220,000 in 2013, to approximately 183,000 today.
Thus far in fiscal year 2018, the population has decreased by almost
3,000. At the minimum security level, BOP facilities have approximately
2,000 empty beds. In light of the significant decrease in the inmate
population that BOP has experienced over the last several years, BOP
has identified approximately 5,100 vacant authorized staff positions.
Many of the positions identified have been unfunded by Congress for a
number of years, including prior to the Federal hiring freeze imposed
in January 2017. The administration's proposed fiscal year 2019 budget
for BOP would eliminate 1,168 of the vacant positions. Therefore, the
proposed elimination of these positions will not result in the loss or
displacement of any staff members, or impact actual staffing levels at
BOP facilities.
Although prosecutions are on the rise for major crime categories
(such as weapons and drug trafficking offenses), it takes several
months, if not longer, for offenders to go through criminal proceedings
and ultimately get designated to Federal prisons after they are
convicted and sentenced. Accordingly, there are a significant number of
vacant positions that BOP is currently seeking to fill. The new hires
will further reduce the need for augmentation and overtime, and will
ensure that BOP facilities continue to operate safely.
Question 3a. The Office of National Drug Control Policy represents
a critical resource to my State with regards to the High Intensity Drug
Trafficking Areas Program and the Drug Free Communities Program. The
Department's budget calls for moving programs under the purview of
ONDCP into other agencies, and my concern is that doing so would
negatively alter the structure of these programs by reducing their
visibility on the State and local levels and possibly subjecting grant
distributions to bureaucratic delays.
Has the Department considered the impact of this move in light of
these concerns?
Answer. The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) is actively
involved in High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas (HIDTAs) throughout
the Nation. This involvement includes close coordination with State and
local law enforcement officers to identify and investigate the most
significant drug traffickers and suppliers threatening local
communities.
While the Department's original intent had been to, and enhance
their close working relationships with State and local counterparts, we
understand that the fiscal year 2019 committee marks subsequently have
not funded the program within DOJ. This being the case, the Department
and the DEA will continue to work in close coordination with HIDTA to
combat drug trafficking.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator James Lankford
Question 1a. Currently, there are two primary State and Local Law
Enforcement Assistance programs that provide grant funding to State and
local law enforcement to assist with DNA kit and sexual assault kit
(SAKs) backlogs--the statutorily authorized Debbie Smith DNA Backlog
Reduction grants administered by National Institute of Justice (NIJ)
and the statutorily unauthorized Sexual Assault Kit Initiative (SAKI)
administered by the Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA).
Please provide the following financial data for funds appropriated
to the Debbie Smith DNA Backlog Grant Program in fiscal year 2015,
fiscal year 2016, and fiscal year 2017:
Appropriated amount spent on/awarded for testing DNA and sexual
assault kits.
Answer.
The Department of Justice (DOJ) appropriations acts for
the specified fiscal years (2015, 2016, and 2017) did not contain any
funds appropriated pursuant to 34 U.S.C. Sec. 40701, the ``Debbie Smith
DNA Backlog Grant Program'' statute.\2\ Accordingly, the Department
awarded no grants under that statutory authority in those years.
Statutory authority for the National Institute of Justice's (NIJ) DNA
capacity enhancement and backlog reduction programs and activities, and
for the Bureau of Justice Assistance's (BJA) Sexual Assault Kit
Initiative (SAKI), respectively, has come--solely--from two, separate
appropriations line items enacted in the DOJ appropriations acts for
each of the fiscal years mentioned.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ In fact, no appropriations have been enacted (and no grants
have been made) to date pursuant to this statutory authority. The
enacted language--enacted in annual DOJ appropriations acts--that
provides the statutory authority for NIJ's backlog reduction and
capacity enhancement activities, in particular, has remained
substantially similar in each year over the past decade.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The fiscal year 2017 statutory authority for NIJ's DNA capacity
enhancement and backlog reduction programs and activities (enacted via
language substantially similar to the language enacted in the two
preceding fiscal years) makes funds available ``for a DNA analysis and
capacity enhancement program and for other local, State, and Federal
forensic activities, including the purposes authorized under [34 U.S.C.
Sec. 40701]'' (the ``DNA and forensic program appropriation'')
(Department of Justice Appropriations Act, 2017, Public Law No. 115-31,
131 Stat. 135, 204).
NIJ publishes an annual report, which it also provides to Congress,
on the activities it funds with the DNA and forensic program
appropriation. The report in each year includes a detailed discussion
and breakdown of activities funded for the covered fiscal year,
including the total amounts awarded by fiscal year under NIJ programs
that make funds available for DNA testing (including evidence from
sexual assault kits), among other things. Links to these reports for
fiscal years 2015 through 2017 are provided below.
Fiscal Year 2015 Funding for DNA Analysis, Capacity Enhancement And
Other Forensic Activities: https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/
249905.pdf
Fiscal Year 2016 Funding for DNA Analysis, Capacity Enhancement,
And Other Forensic Activities: https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/
250552.pdf
Fiscal Year 2017 Funding for DNA Analysis, Capacity Enhancement,
And Other Forensic Activities: https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/
251445.pdf
Question 1b. Appropriated amount spent on/awarded for each of the
authorized purposes for use of the funds under 34 U.S.C. Sec. 40701(a)
Answer.
Please see my response to Question 1a.
Question 1c. Appropriated amount spent on/awarded for each other
section of 34 U.S.C. Sec. 40701.
Answer.
Please see my response to Question 1a.
Question 1d. Appropriated amount spent on/awarded for all other
costs not included in 34 U.S.C. Sec. 40701.
Answer.
Please see my response to Question 1a.
Question 1e. Each amount under question 1a-1d, represented as a
percentage of total amount spent on the Debbie Smith DNA Backlog Grant
Program.
Answer.
Please see my response to Question 1a.
Question 2a. Please provide the following financial data on funds
used for the Sexual Assault Kit Initiative in fiscal year 2015, fiscal
year 2016, and fiscal year 2017:
Amount spent on/awarded for testing DNA and sexual assault kits.
Answer.
Between fiscal years 2015 and 2017, SAKI appropriations
have been authorized by each year's Department of Justice
appropriations act. This includes Public Law (Public Law) 113-235 in
fiscal year 2015, Public Law 114-113 in fiscal year 2016, and Public
Law 115-31 in fiscal year 2017. For example, the appropriations
language that supports SAKI in fiscal year 2017 makes funds available
``for a grant program for community-based sexual assault response
reform.'' (Department of Justice Appropriations Act, 2017, Public Law
No. 115-31, 131 Stat. 135, 204).
SAKI supports the Department's criminal justice priorities of
reducing violent crime and supporting law enforcement officers and
prosecutors by: (1) providing jurisdictions with resources to address
sexual assault kits (SAKs) in their custody that have not been
submitted to a forensic laboratory for testing with Combined DNA Index
System (CODIS)-eligible DNA methodologies; and (2) improving
investigation and prosecution in connection with evidence and cases
resulting from the testing process.
The goal of SAKI is the creation of a coordinated community
response that ensures just resolution to these cases, whenever
possible, through a victim-centered approach, and to build
jurisdictions' capacities to prevent the development of conditions that
lead to high numbers of unsubmitted SAKs. SAKI funding is intended to
help law enforcement and prosecutors address all of the challenges
associated with reducing the number of unsubmitted SAKs in their
jurisdictions. This will give these jurisdictions the evidence and
tools to solve and reduce violent crimes associated with sexual
assault, while achieving the long-term goal of improving the criminal
justice response to cases of sexual assault.
Unlike NIJ's backlog reduction efforts, SAKI is focused on locating
and testing previously unsubmitted evidence, rather than addressing
backlogs in the testing process. Grantees are permitted to spend up to
50 percent of their awards on testing of unsubmitted SAKs; their
remaining funds support other elements of the holistic SAKI approach
discussed above. Based on the amounts awarded to SAKI jurisdictions
between fiscal years 2015 and 2017, BJA estimates \3\ that:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ These amounts are estimates due to awards being made for a
holistic approach that supports multiple programmatic activities in
addition to testing of SAK evidence. These estimates were calculated by
determining the maximum amount allowed to be used for testing (50
percent of all site based awards).
--$15.1 million (41.6 percent of total SAKI awards) was spent on
testing of unsubmitted SAKs in fiscal year 2015;
--$15.7 million (38.9 percent of total SAKI awards) was spent on
testing in fiscal year 2016; and
--$17.6 million (47.4 percent of total SAKI awards) was spent on
testing in fiscal year 2017.
BJA's SAKI program webpage provides detailed information on SAKI
awards and activities funded in fiscal years 2015 through 2017: https:/
/www.bja.gov/ProgramDetails.aspx?Program_ID=117#horizontalTab1.
Question 2b. Amount spent on/awarded for all other uses than
testing sexual assaults kits--accounted for by use.
Answer.
Please see my response to Question 2a.
Question 2c. An identification of source and authority of funds for
each spend/award under questions 2a-2b.
Answer.
Please see my response to Question 2a.
Question 2c. Each amount under question 2a-2b, represented as a
percentage of total amount spent on SAKI.
Answer.
Please see my response to Question 2a.
Question 3a. Has DOJ explored the possibility of consolidating
these programs?
Why or why not?
Answer.
Please see my response to Question 3b.
Question 3b. Are there economies of scale, or otherwise
implementable best practices based on commonality of purpose, scope, or
practice, which can be pursued in the Debbie Smith DNA Backlog Grant
Program and the Sexual Assault Kit Initiative?
Answer.
The Department has explored the possibility of program
consolidation (with respect to programs and activities in relation to
sexual assault evidence kits) under both the current and previous
administrations and has determined that the various programs serve
different needs and are complementary. NIJ and BJA have engaged in
deliberate coordination with respect to these initiatives to avoid
unintentional program overlap. Therefore, though the two programs both
have components that can address DNA testing of sexual assault
evidence, the respective programs engage and focus on somewhat
different criminal justice system stakeholders--and on different stages
of the criminal justice process--and address distinct and separate
issues. In the event that future enactments may result in a
consolidation of activities, the Department would continue to strive to
ensure that it leverages program resources in this area to maximize
impact.
NIJ's DNA Capacity Enhancement and Backlog Reduction (DNA CEBR)
grants program has different objectives and purposes than BJA's Sexual
Assault Kit Initiative (SAKI). The DNA CEBR program funds States and
units of local government with existing crime laboratories that conduct
DNA analysis to process, record, screen, and analyze forensic DNA and/
or DNA database samples, and to increase the capacity of public
forensic DNA and DNA database laboratories to process more DNA samples,
thereby helping to reduce the number of forensic DNA and DNA database
samples awaiting analysis. The cases DNA CEBR grants fund have already
been submitted by the law enforcement agency to the crime laboratory
for DNA analysis. These cases include violent crime cases (such as
homicides and other violent assaults) and property crimes, not just
sexual assault kits (SAKs). As individual crime laboratory resources
and demands vary across the Nation, DNA CEBR grant recipients use their
own discretion to spend the funding for DNA laboratory capacity
enhancement purposes, for DNA analysis of evidence from all types of
casework (including sexual assault evidence, DNA database samples from
convicted offenders and, in applicable jurisdictions, arrestees), or
for any combination of the two, based on the recipient jurisdiction's
specifically-identified needs.
The main objectives of BJA's SAKI program are to (1) provide
jurisdictions with resources to address SAKs in their custody that have
not been submitted to a forensic laboratory for testing and (2) improve
investigation and prosecution in connection with evidence and cases
resulting from the testing process. The SAKI program ensures a
coordinated community response that seeks just resolutions to these
cases, whenever possible, through a victim-centered approach and to
build jurisdictions' capacities to prevent the development of
conditions that lead to high numbers of unsubmitted SAKs. And, unlike
DNA CEBR, SAKI funds can be used to analyze forensic evidence
associated with sexual assault cases besides DNA.
The overall goal of DNA CEBR, as stated above, is to enhance DNA
testing capacity in State and local crime laboratories while reducing
the numbers of forensic-DNA- and DNA-database samples awaiting testing.
SAKI is a resource intended to help law enforcement and prosecutors
address all of the challenges associated with SAKs that have never been
submitted to a forensic laboratory for testing.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Dianne Feinstein
lack of atf resources
Question 1a. I strongly believe that ATF is consistently
understaffed and underfunded, despite your assertions that DOJ will
prioritize investigating and prosecuting gun crimes.
What is also difficult is that year after year, the bills produced
by this subcommittee and its House counterpart include a number of
policy riders that limit the Federal Government's ability to enforce
existing gun laws. These provisions do everything from limiting ATF's
ability to make commonsense updates to its definitions, to requiring
sellers to report suspicious transactions, to properly classifying
dangerous ammunition.
Can you describe how these appropriations riders and the
underfunding of ATF impact the Department's ability to protect public
safety?
Answer. ATF is subject to several specific restrictions on its use
of appropriated funds. Some of these restrictions impose limits on
ATF's regulatory authority. Examples include riders that prohibit ATF
from using appropriated funds to require a physical inventory of
firearms held by a Federal Firearms Licensee (FFL), consolidate or
centralize FFL firearm acquisition or disposition information,
electronically retrieve FFL out of business record information by name
or personal identification code, or to change the definition of
``curios or relics'' in 27 C.F.R. 478.11. ATF exercises its existing
lawful authority to carry out its mission, including regulating
firearms in a manner consistent with statutory mandates. ATF has a
crucial public safety mission of reducing firearms violence, combating
firearms trafficking, and decreasing the risk posed to the public from
explosives, bombs and arson. To fulfill its mission, ATF must
continuously strive to maximize its limited resources. ATF is a lean,
efficient organization, and has consistently adapted to tight budgetary
circumstances. The Department's budget requests for ATF seek funding at
a level sufficient to sustain existing operations while enhancing
programs that most effectively combat violence related to firearms and
explosives.
Question 1b. How can you actually enforce existing laws when
Congress puts all of these obstacles in your way?
Answer. Notwithstanding these limits on its use of appropriated
funds, ATF exercises its existing lawful authority to carry out its
mission. In fiscal year 2018, the Justice Department charged more than
15,300 defendants with Federal firearms offenses, which is 17 percent
more than the previous record.
census citizenship question
Question 2a. On March 26, Commerce Secretary Ross issued a
memorandum directing the Census Bureau to add a question on citizenship
status on the 2020 Census. The memo stated that the citizenship
question was being included at the request of the Justice Department
because DOJ argued that census-level data on citizenship is needed to
enforce the Voting Rights Act.
This data has never been required on census forms sent to all
Americans since the passage of the Voting Rights Act. Why is it now
needed?
Answer. The Department made this request to reinstate a citizenship
question on the census in furtherance of its commitment to fair and
consistent enforcement of the Nation's voting rights laws. As explained
in the Department's letter, accurate citizenship data is ``critical to
the Department's enforcement of Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act and
its important protections against racial discrimination in voting. To
fully enforce those requirements, the Department needs a reliable
calculation of the citizen voting-age population in localities where
voting rights violations are alleged or suspected.''
Question 2b. What steps is your Department taking to protect voting
rights now and how would DOJ's voting rights actions change if this new
data is collected?
Answer. The Department of Justice is resolutely committed to the
robust and evenhanded enforcement of the Nation's civil rights laws and
to free and fair elections for all Americans. In February 2018, the
Department filed and resolved a voting rights case involving the State
of Arizona. Since January 2017, the Department has participated as a
party in three cases brought under Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act.
The Department has also successfully resolved three statewide cases and
under the National Voter Registration Act. Each of those resolutions
guarantees that Americans across the country will have a full and fair
opportunity to register to vote and to remain registered. Additionally,
the Department has filed three amicus curiae briefs in voting rights
cases, including a case alleging unconstitutional denials of the right
to vote and a case seeking equal access at polling places for members
of a language minority group in one of America's largest cities.
The Department also has continued our election monitoring program
as well as our outreach and enforcement work under Section 203 of the
Voting Rights Act.
Section 203 of the Voting Rights Act protects the rights of members
of language minority groups to participate in elections. The Department
is also protecting the rights of military and overseas voters under the
Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act (UOCAVA). The
Department has assisted several States in achieving UOCAVA compliance
in special elections in 2017 and 2018, and worked with States to
achieve UOCAVA compliance through the 2018 midterm elections.
The Department is working to ensure that all of this year's
elections are conducted in accordance with Federal law requirements. We
are actively working with States and localities to ensure that members
of language minority groups and our brave men and women in uniform have
a full and equal opportunity to cast their ballots.
With regard to how the Department will use this census data, the
Department's letter explained why ``the decennial census questionnaire
is the most appropriate vehicle for collecting [citizenship] data, and
reinstating a question on citizenship will best enable the Department
to protect all American citizens' voting rights under Section 2.'' As
you may know, ``[t]he Supreme Court . . . held that Section 2 of the
Voting Rights Act prohibits `vote dilution' by State and local
jurisdictions engaged in redistricting[.]'' Vote dilution can occur
``when a racial group is improperly deprived of a single-member
district in which it could form a majority.'' As many Federal courts of
appeals have held, ``where citizenship rates are at issue in a vote-
dilution case, citizen voting-age population is the proper metric for
determining whether a racial group could constitute a majority in a
single-member district[.]'' Thus, ``[t]hese cases make clear that, in
order to assess and enforce compliance with Section 2's protection
against discrimination in voting, the Department needs to be able to
obtain citizen voting-age population data for census blocks, block
groups, counties, towns, and other locations where potential Section 2
violations are alleged or suspected.''
Question 2c. Were you involved in making this recommendation? Did
the Department discuss this with the White House? If so, with whom?
Answer. Since the Department submitted its letter, at least six
lawsuits have been filed against the Department of Commerce challenging
its decision to reinstate a question regarding citizenship to the 2020
Census questionnaire. The Justice Department is defending these
lawsuits. In deference to the courts charged with hearing and resolving
pending litigation involving the United States, it is longstanding
Department policy not to comment on or discuss matters involved in
active litigation. To the extent this question is specifically directed
to former Attorney General Jeff Sessions, it would be inappropriate for
the Department to respond further.
doj rule to ban bump stocks
Question 3a. DOJ recently started the rulemaking process to ban
bump stocks under the National Firearms Act.
However, ATF has repeatedly said for years that it cannot ban bump
stocks, because the National Firearms Act does not allow it.
The ATF repeated this position as recently as April 2017, and the
ATF Director has repeatedly stated in public that the ATF cannot ban
bump-fire stocks under current law. That's why I proposed legislation
to change the law.
Do you expect that DOJ's bump stock rule will be challenged in
court?
Answer. On December 18, 2018, Acting Attorney General Matthew
Whitaker announced that the Department of Justice has amended the
regulations of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives
(ATF), clarifying that bump stocks fall within the definition of
``machinegun'' under Federal law, as such devices allow a shooter of a
semiautomatic firearm to initiate a continuous firing cycle with a
single pull of the trigger. The final rule will go into effect March
26, 2019; 90 days from the date of publication in the Federal Register.
A lawsuit challenging the rule was filed following the announcement in
December.
Question 3b. If DOJ's bump stock rule were struck down by the
courts, would you support legislation to ban bump stocks?
Answer. Should Congress choose to propose legislation on this
issue, the Department would be pleased to review it.
domestic violence crimes and guns
Question 4a. Domestic violence abusers who have been convicted of a
misdemeanor crime of domestic violence or who are subject to a
protection order are supposed to be prohibited from possessing firearms
or ammunition under Federal firearms law.
However, I understand that many domestic violence abusers are,
nevertheless, able to buy guns.
Local domestic violence programs often attempt to help victims by
seeking removal of the firearms, but they are unable to get assistance
from the DOJ and other Federal agencies. Similarly, local law
enforcement is often overwhelmed by the sheer numbers of firearms in
the possession of domestic violence offenders.
How will the DOJ improve their response to cases like these, which
are likely to lead to homicides?
Answer. ATF will continue to work with State and local law
enforcement to ensure that prohibited persons do not acquire or possess
firearms and ammunition. ATF will also continue to educate individuals
and organizations engaged in the business of the sale of firearms and
ammunition of their responsibilities under the law. ATF's authority to
seize firearms in such instances is limited to circumstances where it
can establish probable cause that the firearms are possessed in
violation of Federal law. ATF works closely with State and local
partners on a case-by-case basis to determine if sufficient Federal
seizure authority exists, and from that determination ATF proceeds
accordingly.
In addition, the Department's Office on Violence Against Women has
funded two technical assistance projects that address the safety
concerns associated with domestic violence involving firearms. First,
the National Resource Center on Domestic Violence and Firearms provides
information for communities on best practices to address the safety of
domestic violence victims where firearms are involved. Additionally,
the Firearms Safety Enhancement Project provides specific technical
assistance to identified communities to help them develop coordinated
community responses that enhance safety in domestic violence cases
involving firearms.
methamphetamine
Question 5a. In 2017, the vast majority of the nearly 29,000
kilograms of methamphetamine seized at the Southwest Border was seized
by the San Diego Sector.
Not surprisingly, San Diego has been especially hard hit by
methamphetamine abuse. In 2016, there were 377 meth-related deaths in
the county. This is the equivalent of one death every 23 hours.
That is why the COPS Anti-Methamphetamine Task Force grants--a
program I helped establish in 2014--is so important. This program
currently provides approximately $8 million to State law enforcement
agencies in 6 States to participate in meth-related investigative
activities.
Given the significant increase in methamphetamine use and
associated deaths, why does your budget propose eliminating funding for
this program?
Answer. The Department remains committed to its methamphetamine
related investigative and prosecutorial efforts. The budget does not
fund these grants to State and local level task forces; however, it
does include $10 million for DEA to continue its clandestine
methamphetamine laboratory cleanup. DEA also continues to train State
and local law enforcement personnel from across the Nation through its
clandestine lab course. Finally, DEA is committed to its robust
engagement and partnership with the Government of Mexico. Through this
partnership, we seek to stop the production and trafficking of
methamphetamine and to support clandestine lab training for Mexican law
enforcement personnel.
firing of deputy director mccabe
Question 6a. Last month, the Justice Department allowed the Senate
Judiciary Committee to review the Office of Professional Responsibility
report on former FBI Deputy Director Andrew McCabe that led to his
firing.
It's my understanding that Mr. McCabe submitted a response to the
allegations against him, but his response was not included in the
materials provided to the Senate Judiciary Committee.
It's important that we have the full record. Will you commit to
providing the Committee Mr. McCabe's response?
Answer. On June 6, 2018, the Department provided the Senate
Judiciary Committee with the FBI Office of Professional Responsibility
report on former FBI Deputy Director McCabe, the Memorandum to the
Attorney General from an Associate Deputy Attorney General, and the
decision by then Attorney General Sessions. On June 12, 2018, less than
one week later, Mr. McCabe's attorney filed a lawsuit against the
Department, the Department's Office of Inspector General, and the FBI.
In light of the pending litigation and to the extent this question
calls for the personal knowledge of former Attorney General Jeff
Sessions, it would not be appropriate to provide further comment or
documentation regarding this matter.
Question 6b. Can you give me another example where an employee has
been given just 7 days to respond to serious allegations of misconduct?
Answer. Federal law provides that when an agency has reasonable
cause to believe that an employee has committed a crime for which a
sentence of imprisonment may be imposed, and the agency is proposing
removal (or suspension), a shortened 7-day period applies in which the
employee may respond to the agency's proposed action. See 5 U.S.C.
Section 7513(b); 5 C.F.R. 752.404. This provision may be invoked even
in the absence of judicial action.
Question 6c. Is there another instance where an employee was fired
the same day that he or she responded?
Answer. The Department does not as general matter comment on
personnel decisions. Through an extraordinary accommodation in light of
the enormous public interest in this matter the Department made
available to the Senate Judiciary Committee the FBI Office of
Professional Responsibility report on former FBI Deputy Director
McCabe, the Memorandum to the Attorney General from an Associate Deputy
Attorney General, and the decision by then Attorney General Sessions.
disclosure of law enforcement information
Question 7a. Department officials have explained that providing the
public or Congress with information during an active investigation
``could compromise the reputational or privacy rights of uncharged
parties, undermine any ongoing investigations of those parties, and
give the misimpression that the Department's investigative steps are
susceptible to political influence.
What are the risks of Congress requiring the Department to report
on factual findings or investigative steps during an open
investigation?
Answer. Over many years and many changes of administration, the
Department has consistently articulated a concern that Congressional
involvement in ongoing criminal investigations could politicize the
criminal justice system or give the appearance of such, thus
threatening the integrity of those investigations. The Department's
longstanding policy of investigatory independence was more fully set
forth in a January 27, 2000 letter from Robert Raben, Assistant
Attorney General for the Office of Legislative Affairs, to John Linder,
then-Chairman of the Subcommittee on Rules and Organization of the
House Committee on Rules.
recusal from trump or clinton investigations
Question 8a. You previously committed to recusing yourself from
``any matters related in any way to the campaigns for President of the
United States,'' as well as issues related to Hillary Clinton's emails
or the Clinton Foundation.
In March, however, you announced that you had asked the Inspector
General and the U.S. Attorney in Utah to look into various matters
related to Uranium One and the Clinton Foundation.
How is your referral of these matters consistent with your previous
commitment to recuse from any matters involving the 2016 presidential
campaigns or the Clinton Foundation?
Answer. Mr. Huber was asked to look into a number of matters and to
report back to the Attorney General or Deputy Attorney General as
appropriate. Mr. Huber will report to the Department consistent with
the rules of professional responsibility and government ethics
regulations that govern Department attorneys. To the extent this
question is specifically directed to former Attorney General Jeff
Sessions, it would be inappropriate for the Department to respond
further.
handling of sexual harassment claims
Question 9a. A June 2017 Inspector General report found systemic
problems with how allegations of sexual misconduct were handled by the
Justice Department's Civil Division. The report details several serious
incidents of sexual misconduct.
In one instance, a senior male attorney groped two of his female
colleagues without their consent. Shortly thereafter, he was
transferred to another division and received no suspension or reduction
in pay.
What steps have you personally taken to ensure the Department of
Justice is free from sexual harassment and misconduct in the workplace?
Answer. On April 30, 2018, the Department issued a memorandum
directing heads of components to address sexual harassment and sexual
misconduct allegations with vigilance and seriousness. See https://
www.justice.gov/policies-and-
directives-effect-relating-and-duty-conduct-including-sexual-
misconduct. The directive was the result of the Department's intensive
efforts to address 2017 findings by Inspector General Horowitz
regarding how the Department handles claims of sexual harassment and
sexual misconduct. Components were directed to address such allegations
through:
--Enhancing the management, investigation, and tracking of
allegations of sexual harassment and sexual misconduct;
--Informing employees of how they can report allegations of sexual
harassment or sexual misconduct;
--Ensuring that allegations are reported to component management,
security offices, and OIG under applicable policies;
--Keeping employees informed of the progress of the component's
reviews of their allegations;
--Proposing and imposing consistent and serious discipline for
substantiated allegations;
--Considering ongoing investigations of sexual harassment and
misconduct allegations or prior disciplinary actions for sexual
harassment or misconduct when making decisions about awards
(monetary and otherwise), public recognition, or favorable
personnel actions (such as promotions); and
--Ensuring that employees are aware of the Department's policies
regarding harassment, sexual misconduct, and other related on-
and off-duty conduct.
With respect to disciplinary actions, the directive urges
components to propose strong and meaningful disciplinary action to
address substantiated allegations. For example, a penalty of at least a
15-day suspension (up to removal, including a demotion) should be
proposed where a substantiated incident of sexual harassment or
misconduct involves aggravating factors (such as sexual assault,
stalking, repetition, quid pro quo for official actions, any form of
voyeurism such as peeping, or retaliation for reporting prior
misconduct); or where the subject has a supervisory role
vis-a-vis the victim or was previously disciplined for sexual
harassment or misconduct.
Finally, the directive provides for annual reporting and
accountability, which will provide Department leadership greater
visibility into how allegations of sexual harassment and sexual
misconduct are handled.
With greater awareness of our policies prohibiting sexual
harassment and misconduct, as well as renewed vigilance for reporting,
investigating, and initiating consistent and decisive action on
substantiated allegations, the Department continues to strive for a
workplace free of sexual harassment and misconduct.
Question 9b. What are the penalties for employees who are involved
in sexual harassment or misconduct? Are they sufficient?
Answer. Please see my response to 9a.
Question 9c. A June 2017 DOJ IG report on sexual harassment found
the Civil Division engaged in a practice called ``pass the trash,''
where an employee accused of sexual misconduct would be transferred to
another division and not reprimanded or punished. The IG concluded that
this is in conflict with the Department of Justice's zero tolerance
policy for sexual harassment.
Are you familiar with the practice at DOJ called ``pass the
trash''?
Answer. Please see my response to 9a.
Question 9d. Are you aware of any Division at DOJ still engaging in
the ``pass the trash'' practice?
Answer. Please see my response to 9a.
Question 9e. Can you assure the Committee it is no longer in
practice anywhere in DOJ?
Answer. Please see my response to 9a.
Question 9f. Earlier this year, the Civil Rights Division launched
an initiative to combat sexual harassment in workplace.
What enforcement actions will the Civil Rights Division begun to
pursue under this Initiative?
Answer. In February 2018, the Division announced the launch of its
Sexual Harassment in the Workplace Initiative (Initiative). This
Initiative, which will be implemented by the Division's Employment
Litigation Section, is intended to tackle sexual harassment in public
sector workplaces. The Initiative focuses on local, State, and Federal
Government employers. Specifically, the Initiative seeks to assist
agencies with implementing policies and procedures designed to more
quickly and efficiently identify potential sexual harassment or
misconduct. The Initiative will also assist employers in the
enforcement of standing policies and procedures, and will initiate
interventions when necessary to improve the workplace for all
employees. As part of the Initiative, the Division will prioritize the
review and acceptance for litigation of sexual harassment charge
referrals from the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).
Since the start of the Initiative, the Division has filed one
enforcement action based on a charge of sex discrimination, and has
received a favorable verdict in the bench trial of a sexual harassment
case brought in Wyoming. In addition, the Division is conducting
several sexual harassment investigations, and pursuant to long-standing
Department policies, all information relating to these investigations
is confidential.
Question 9g. What new resources are being provided to this
initiative?
Answer. The Division will redirect existing attorney, paralegal,
and paraprofessional resources to staff the Sexual Harassment in the
Workplace Initiative. The Initiative staff members will work in
conjunction with the United States Attorney's Offices. The Division's
Employment Litigation Section has formed an internal taskforce that
will focus on implementing the goals of the Initiative.
Question 9h. According to the Department, this Initiative will also
develop policies for public sector employers to ensure that sexual
misconduct allegations are properly reported and that the perpetrators
face consequences.
Can you expand on the Department's plans for developing and
implementing these policies?
Answer. Division staff will work with employers, civil rights
advocates, and other Federal agencies, including the EEOC, to develop
model anti-sexual harassment policies and trainings for State and local
employers. The Division anticipates that these newly developed policies
and tailored, interactive trainings will promote transparency and
accountability within workplaces to prevent illegal harassment. The
model policies and trainings also seek to provide safeguards against
retaliation for persons who report sexual harassment. Additionally, the
Division's outreach efforts will provide information to employers about
their Title VII responsibilities and information to their employees
about their Title VII rights and remedies.
``engaging in the business'' investigations and prosecutions
Question 10a. The Department released a new guidance a couple of
years ago outlining how and when a gun seller is ``engaging in the
business'' of dealing firearms--and must therefore get a Federal
license and run background checks on all buyers.
The ATF and DOJ committed to a more robust enforcement of dealers
who illegally engage in the business without a license.
What has the Department done to fulfill this commitment since last
year? Please share any tangible statistics or anecdotes indicating an
increase in investigations.
Answer. Please see my response to Question 10b.
Question 10b. How has the Department changed its approach in order
to fulfill this commitment? Has there been an uptick in arrests made
for the ``engaging in the business'' charge?
Answer. ATF is committed to protecting our communities from violent
criminals, criminal organizations, the illegal use and trafficking of
firearms, and other Federal violations over which ATF has jurisdiction.
ATF has Criminal Enforcement groups enforcing Federal criminal laws
and Industry Operations Investigators (IOIs) regulating the firearms
industry. Special Agents and IOIs work collectively to accomplish our
mission. Special Agents and IOIs participate in many gun shows across
the Nation, educating the public on firearms laws and the requirements
to obtain a Federal Firearms License. Special Agents attempt to
identify and interdict any illicit firearms transfers. Special Agents
also attempt to identify individuals who are suspected of dealing in
firearms without the required Federal Firearms License. When these
individuals are identified, ATF takes all possible measures to stop any
further criminal activity.
Statistics indicate that the number of prosecutions for violations
of Title 18 USC 922(a)(1)(A), Dealing Firearms without a license, has
increased from 178 during fiscal year 2017 to 253 for fiscal year 2018.
handguns that fire rifle rounds
Question 11a. Over the past two decades, the gun industry has
developed handguns that can fire rifle rounds, penetrating the standard
body armor worn by law enforcement officers. This is extraordinarily
concerning to our law enforcement officers.
Do you believe such handguns represent a threat to law enforcement?
Answer. Handguns firing rifle cartridges produce and utilize a
higher chamber pressure than typical handgun ammunition and therefore
fire projectiles at a greater velocity. When compared to traditional
handguns keeping all other variables equal, Kevlar vests are less
likely to stop these projectiles. However, the likelihood of any
projectile penetrating a soft Kevlar vest is dependent on numerous
variables, including distance, type of projectile, barrel length, and
propellant powder load, among others.
Question 11b. Are such handguns generally subject to the National
Firearms Act?
Answer. No. These handguns are not NFA firearms.
Question 11c. What will be the Department's plan to address this
new type of weapon?
Answer. The Department will continue to regulate the production of
these firearms under the Gun Control Act.
ongoing lawsuits defended by doj
Question 12a. I understand that your budget request includes
additional funds for attorneys in the Federal Programs Branch of DOJ,
which defends against lawsuits. Can you please provide a status on the
additional amount of resources you would need going forward to defend
the following?
Lawsuits defending against DHS' Travel Ban?
Answer. The litigation challenging the President's Executive Orders
and Memoranda designed to protect the American people from terrorist
attacks by foreign nationals admitted to the United States is now
winding down at the district court level.
Question 12b. Lawsuits challenging the President's alleged
acceptance of ``emoluments,'' in violation of the ``emoluments clause''
in the Constitution?
Answer. There are currently three lawsuits alleging violations of
the Foreign and Domestic Emoluments Clauses of the Constitution
whenever the President's businesses receive any benefit from foreign
and domestic government instrumentalities. One case is currently on
appeal to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, after a
U.S. District Court dismissed the complaint. The remaining two cases
are pending before district courts in Maryland and the District of
Columbia. In both cases, dispositive motions have been fully briefed
and arguments on the pending motions were held in early June.
Question 12c. Lawsuits challenging the bump stock ban rule that the
DOJ is proposing?
Answer. On March 29, 2018, the Department of Justice issued a
notice of proposed rulemaking to amend the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
Firearms, and Explosives regulations to clarify that ``bump fire''
stocks, slide-fire devices, and devices with certain similar
characteristics (bump-stock-type devices) are ``machineguns'' as
defined by the National Firearms Act of 1934 (NFA) and the Gun Control
Act of 1968 (GCA), because such devices allow a shooter of a
semiautomatic firearm to initiate a continuous firing cycle with a
single pull of the trigger. The comment period closed at midnight on
June 27, 2018. ATF thoroughly assessed all comments received during the
comment period before determining the content of a final rule. On
December 18, 2018, Acting Attorney General Matthew Whitaker announced
that the Department of Justice had amended the necessary regulations
and that the final rule would go into effect March 26, 2019; 90 days
from the date of publication in the Federal Register. With respect to
fiscal year 2019, the Civil Division does not anticipate needing
additional resources beyond our current fiscal year 2018 base budget,
which funds necessary Automated Litigation Support (ALS) services, and
the fiscal year 2019 request for the purpose of defending any actions
challenging any final regulation promulgated thereafter.
Question 12d. Lawsuits involving border wall ``takings''--where the
Federal Government will have to ``take'' real property from landowners
on the Southern Wall?
Answer. Eminent domain proceedings to acquire real property are
coordinated through the Department's Environment and Natural Resources
Division (ENRD). Notably, ENRD has worked on land acquisition for
border security projects since the 1990s. At this time, the Department
anticipates supporting acquisition efforts for this fiscal year
primarily in the Southern District of Texas, and ENRD is closely
coordinating with that District to ensure adequate staffing to support
those activities. ENRD is examining options for addressing these needs
using existing appropriations and staffing levels, while also seeking
to hire at least 2 new personnel during this fiscal year to support
this work.
Question 12e. FOIA lawsuits brought against Federal agencies,
particularly with respect to ethics violations and the receipt of
improper benefits by the EPA Administrator, the HUD Secretary, and the
Interior Secretary?
Answer. In 2017, more than 560 cases were filed against Federal
agencies under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). This represents
an increase of approximately 29 percent over the prior calendar year,
and an increase of more than 123 percent compared to 10 years ago. The
Federal Programs Branch handled approximately 23 percent of the new
FOIA suits brought in 2017, an increase of 17 percent over the prior
year and a 99 percent increase compared to 10 years ago. The rising
caseload of FOIA litigation is a major driver for the fiscal year 2019
Federal Programs increase in the President's Budget. If this budget
increase is granted, the Civil Division will be better positioned to
address these cases.
funding for direct victim services
Question 13a. Many victim service providers that receive Victim of
Crime Act (VOCA) assistance funds have stated they need training and
technical assistance to manage funds they receive to comply with
auditing requirements, on top of the important work they do in
providing direct assistance to victims.
What is DOJ doing to ensure that they have the appropriate training
and technical assistance to manage the funds?
Answer. The Department, through the Office for Victims of Crime
(OVC), works to ensure that every victim has access to a well-trained,
knowledgeable service provider.
Recognizing the responsibility as a steward of public funds, the
Department provides numerous opportunities to improve management and
monitoring of Crime Victim Funds awarded to grantees. Grantees can use
a portion of their administrative funds, up to 5 percent of their total
funding, to provide training and technical assistance. Further, the
Department has given other grants specifically for training and
technical assistance. For example, in 2015, State VOCA Victim
Assistance agencies received a discretionary grant to be used for
training. OVC recently posted a fiscal year 2018 solicitation (OVC
fiscal year 2018 Discretionary Training and Technical Assistance
Program for VOCA Victim Assistance Grantees) for a total of $12 million
that makes training funds available to the State agencies again.
In addition, the Department facilitates training through the OVC
Training and Technical Assistance Center. Cooperative agreements with
partner organizations and grantees further assist the field in building
its collective capacity to serve crime victims. The Department
continues to build service capacity by offering a schedule of regional
training and developmental support in critical areas such as needs
assessment, program design, strategic planning, and evaluation. OVC
continues to expand its outreach through in-person and Web-based
trainings. OVC also manages State and national conference support
programs that assist nonprofit organizations interested in hosting
conferences on victim-related issues. Further, OVC operates a
professional development scholarship program and maintains a speaker's
bureau and a database of consultants who are available to support OVC's
initiatives nationwide.
Question 13b. We have heard from victim service providers in
California and elsewhere that providing ``matching funds'' for
increased VOCA funds is a challenge and therefore prevents quality
service providers from applying for funds.
What is the Department doing to expedite match waivers to ensure
that victim service providers can apply for increased funds and provide
important victim services?
Answer. OVC routinely receives requests for match waivers for the
VOCA State Victim Assistance Formula Grant Program from State agencies.
It reviews these requests promptly and frequently grants them. The
waivers are typically processed within a few weeks of receipt.
Additionally, while many VOCA grant funds require a match by the
subgrantee, there are many options available beyond a cash match. For
example, in-kind and volunteer hours are options available to
subgrantees in lieu of a cash match.
unsustainable prison costs
Question 14a. Mr. Sessions, your Department's Budget requests $8.5
billion for Prisons and Detention Operations, which represents nearly
30 percent of the Department's total budget.
Do you believe that the continued growth of prison and detention
operations is sustainable going forward?
Answer. The Department will continue to monitor the inmate
population level and work with the administration and Congress to
ensure that BOP and USMS have adequate resources to continue to operate
safe and secure facilities. To the extent this question is specifically
directed for former Attorney General Sessions, it would be
inappropriate for the Department to respond further.
Question 14b. You issued a charging memorandum to all Federal
prosecutors, directing them to charge all of their cases with the most
punitive chargeable offense. This change in policy takes discretion
away from prosecutors, and I worry that it could lead to even higher
prison costs in the future.
How do you expect that this recent policy change will affect future
resource requirements for the Bureau of Prisons and Marshals Service?
Answer. The Department, BOP, and USMS continue to analyze the
impacts of these policies. The Department will continue to monitor the
inmate population level and work with the administration and Congress
to ensure that BOP and USMS have adequate resources to continue to
operate safe and secure facilities.
Over the past year, the USMS detention population has increased by
approximately 5,631 prisoners or 10.4 percent, from 53,991 on February
7, 2018 to 59,622 on February 7, 2019. Based on the number of prisoners
received and the increase in the detention population over the past
year, the USMS expects the number of prisoners to continue to increase
over the next 18-30 months.
The Department is monitoring these changes closely and is assessing
what effect these changes may have on resource allocation. To the
extent this question is specifically directed for former Attorney
General Jeff Sessions, it would be inappropriate for the Department to
respond further.
victim reporting of crimes in their communities
Question 15a. I have heard concerns from local police officers that
witnesses of violent crimes, and victims themselves, are reluctant to
come forward to assist in criminal investigations because of some of
the rhetoric that the President and this administration have used with
respect to the immigration status or religious affiliation of an
individual.
What is your strategy to make sure that all witnesses and victims
feel safe in reporting crimes?
Answer. Combating hate crimes is among the highest priorities for
the Department of Justice and the Civil Rights Division. The Department
is working with law enforcement and affected communities to investigate
and prosecute bias-motivated violence. We are also working to improve
our training and outreach regarding identification, reporting,
investigations, prosecutions of hate crimes.
Last year, the FBI participated in numerous hate crime trainings
and outreach events. The FBI also developed the National Training
Initiative (NTI), which aims to strengthen civil rights education
throughout the Nation by providing standardized training and materials
that field offices may provide their law enforcement partners, non-
governmental organizations (NGOs), and community groups. As part of the
NTI, the FBI conducts hundreds of seminars, workshops, and training
sessions for local law enforcement, minority and religious
organizations, and community groups to promote cooperation, reduce
civil rights abuses, and provide education about civil rights statutes.
Our U.S. Attorney's Offices have also engaged in direct outreach to
affected communities so that community leaders and others know who in
each office is responsible for carrying out the Department's commitment
to fighting hate crimes.
Earlier this year, the National Institute of Justice (NIJ) at the
Office of Justice Programs issued a solicitation for proposals for
research and evaluation to fill gaps in hate crimes research.
Applications were accepted through May 2018. NIJ made one award of
$840,649 to the University of New Hampshire to conduct a national
survey of hate crime incidents and victimization. The study will
provide detailed data about hate crimes, analyze local policies that
impact hate crime reporting, and identify successful investigation and
prosecution strategies.
Additionally, the September 2017 issue of the Community Policing
Dispatch, the e-newsletter by the Department's Office of Community
Oriented Policing Services (COPS Office), consolidated some of COPS'
most popular resources for combating bias-related crimes.
human trafficking and injunction authority
Question 16a. I want to congratulate the Department and all of its
law enforcement partners for recently taking down Backpage, a website
that has facilitated sex trafficking for years now. I have long urged
the Department to act--and was pleased to hear about the recent
takedown and guilty pleas.
While significant attention has been paid to the supply side of
human trafficking (breaking up trafficking rings, monitoring websites
like Backpage, and rescuing girls), I am concerned that we are still
not doing enough to reduce the demand, and address the problem of
trafficking over the Internet.
What is your strategy to address human trafficking over the
Internet?
Answer.
The Department shares your concern about human trafficking
over the Internet. According to the 2017 Federal Human Trafficking
Report prepared by the Human Trafficking Institute (available at
https://www.traffickingmatters.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/2017-
Federal-Human-Trafficking-Report-WEB-Low-Res.pdf), in 2017, the
overwhelming majority (84.3 percent) of pending Federal criminal sex
trafficking cases involved traffickers who used the Internet to
advertise victims and solicit purchasers for commercial sexual
services.
To address this, the Department is working in a variety ways to
combat Internet- facilitated sex trafficking, including sex trafficking
of minors and sex trafficking of adults by force, fraud, or coercion.
Sex traffickers utilize the Internet and social media in multiple ways,
not only to advertise victims to customers, but also to recruit and
groom vulnerable victims, and to intimidate victims and witnesses in an
effort to obstruct investigations and prosecutions of the traffickers'
enterprises. Experience has demonstrated that traffickers utilize
multiple websites and social media platforms for all of these wide-
ranging recruitment, advertising, and witness intimidation tactics. The
Department is actively working to combat all forms of Internet-
facilitated sex trafficking. Its strategies include:
--proactive investigations and enforcement operations to disrupt sex
traffickers' social media-based recruitment activities;
--intelligence-driven targeting, investigations, and enforcement
operations to detect trafficking indicators in the context of
Internet commercial sex advertising;
--proactive investigation of evolving trends in Internet commercial
sex advertising, including migration of advertising activity to
new platforms;
--prosecution of commercial sex purchasers;
--public awareness, prevention efforts, and innovative partnerships
aimed at protecting at-risk populations including children in
foster care, adults in drug rehabilitation facilities, and
individuals with intellectual disabilities;
--intensive training of Federal, State, local, Tribal, and
international law enforcement partners on advanced strategies
for detecting, investigating, and prosecuting Internet-
facilitated sex trafficking, including investigation and
prosecution of purchasers, advertisers, and facilitators;
--financial investigations that trace the proceeds of sex trafficking
and asset forfeiture to seize the proceeds of sex trafficking
and remove the tools of the trade; and
--working with survivor advocates to develop victim-centered, trauma-
informed strategies for identifying, stabilizing, and
protecting victims to prevent re- victimization.
The Department's comprehensive approach brings prosecutorial,
policy, and public awareness resources to bear and includes:
consolidating, sustaining and better deploying existing online tools
and intelligence aimed at identifying trafficking offenders and
victims, including children in the foster care system and other at-risk
individuals; augmenting and improving the efficiency of targeted
operations aimed at rescuing victims of sex trafficking and
apprehending those who exploit them, including customers; targeting
online advertisers who knowingly facilitate sex trafficking; using
asset forfeiture to seize websites domains used to enable sex
trafficking and take away the proceeds of sex trafficking; and
supporting an awareness campaign that encourages the public to assist
in interdicting these offenses.
Question 16b. I have worked on legislation to update trafficking
laws to include civil injunction authority to allow DOJ to bring civil
cases against traffickers to prevent them from trafficking young
victims, will you commit to using such authority?
Answer.
The Department will utilize all available tools to combat
the scourge of human trafficking.
human trafficking and restitution for victims
Question 17a. In a 2015 law review article, the Human Trafficking
Pro Bono Legal Center reported on the low rates of restitution orders
in human trafficking prosecutions. In a study of Federal human
trafficking cases brought over a four period, Federal courts failed to
order restitution in nearly two-thirds of cases involving sex
trafficking offenses.
They also found that the victims least likely to obtain restitution
orders were children trafficked in the sex industry. Less than one-in-
three defendants who commit sex trafficking offenses against children
were ordered to pay restitution to their victims.
Can you discuss your efforts to ensure that prosecutors are trained
to ensure that trafficking victims' receive restitution?
Answer.
As the NGO found, prosecutors requested restitution in 63
percent of human trafficking cases, while courts granted it in only 36
percent of cases. The Department remains committed to ensuring
prosecutors are trained to seek restitution orders from courts on
behalf of victims of human trafficking. In November 2016 and November
2017, the Department led human trafficking trainings at the National
Advocacy Center for Federal prosecutors, which contained specialized
segments that emphasized strategies for securing restitution orders. In
2018, the Department conducted trainings at the National Advocacy
Center that included presentations on restitution and forfeiture in
child exploitation cases. Additionally, restitution and forfeiture were
addressed at the 2017 National Law Enforcement Training on Child
Exploitation, which was attended by approximately 1,200 Federal, State,
local, and Tribal personnel. Federal prosecutors and law enforcement
participating in the Anti-trafficking Coordination Team (ACTeam)
Initiative also received training on mandatory restitution as part of
their Advanced Human Trafficking Training Program (AHTTP).
The Department includes presentations on enforcement of mandatory
restitution provisions in multiple training events each year for Human
Trafficking Task Forces, and Federal, State, local, and Tribal law
enforcement partners and prosecutors. In March 2017, the Department
held webinars entitled ``An Overview of Restitution in Human
Trafficking Cases'' and ``Common Obstacles to Obtaining Restitution in
Human Trafficking Cases.'' Additionally, in November 2017, the U.S.
Attorneys' Bulletin published an article entitled Mandatory
Restitution: Complying with the Trafficking Victims Protection Act''
and another entitled ``Follow the Money: Financial Crimes and
Forfeiture in Human Trafficking Prosecutions.''
In 2018, the Department produced forthcoming web-based on-demand
training resources accessible to Federal prosecutors nationwide to
disseminate best practices in enforcing the TVPA's mandatory
restitution provisions. Also in 2018, the Department created a working
group to refine strategies for successfully enforcing the TVPA's
mandatory restitution provision.
laundering money through real estate investments
Question 18a. Law enforcement have recently described ongoing
investigations into foreign buyers who use shell companies to buy
luxury real estate in America to launder money.
Can you describe whether this is a growing trend, how it is a
growing trend, and whether you are concerned about this trend going
forward?
Answer.
The pervasive use of front companies, shell companies,
nominees, or other means to conceal the true beneficial owners of
assets is one of the greatest loopholes in this country's anti-money
laundering (AML) regime. We consistently see bad actors using these
entities to disguise the ownership of dirty money derived from criminal
conduct.
The Financial Action Task Force's (FATF's) 2016 review of the
United States' AML/counter-terrorist financing (CTF) system highlighted
this issue as one of the most critical gaps in the United States' AML
regime.The result, FATF said, is that U.S. law enforcement authorities
``must often resort to resource-intensive and time-consuming
investigative and surveillance techniques.'' These techniques include
grand jury subpoenas, witness interviews, or foreign legal assistance
to unveil the true ownership of shell or front companies associated
with serious criminal conduct. This process can sometimes take years,
and, in some cases, law enforcement may never be able to determine the
owners of illicit proceeds.
With respect to real estate more specifically, the Department's
ongoing civil asset forfeiture action to recover more than a billion
dollars allegedly stolen from the Malaysian sovereign wealth fund,
1MDB, highlights how bad actors may use shell companies to buy luxury
properties in an effort to launder and hide their illegal gains. Our
publicly filed complaints in that matter allege that in 2014, the co-
conspirators misappropriated approximately $850 million in 1MDB funds
and diverted it to several offshore shell entities. From there, the
complaints allege, the funds stolen in 2014, in addition to money
stolen in prior years, were used to purchase, among other things, high-
end properties, as well as a 300-foot luxury yacht valued at over $260
million, certain movie rights, tens of millions of dollars of jewelry,
and artwork. See also the response below regarding Geographic Targeting
Orders.
Question 18b. What steps do you think law enforcement should take
to address this growing trend?
Answer.
The U.S. Department of the Treasury's (Treasury) Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) has issued and expanded Geographic
Targeting Orders (GTOs) in recent years focusing on the real estate
sector. The Department looks forward to learning more about the
information gathered by FinCEN, as well as to discussions on whether
additional steps may be warranted to address the money laundering risks
emanating from this and other at-risk sectors. In addition, the
Treasury's Customer Due Diligence Final Rule is a critical tool that
will make it more difficult for criminals to circumvent the law. The
Department looks forward to continued discussions with Treasury
regarding the effects of the CDD Rule since its implementation this
May.
Other steps are needed to ensure that criminals cannot hide behind
nominees, shell corporations, and other legal structures to frustrate
law enforcement. When law enforcement is able to obtain information on
the identities of the persons who ultimately own or control these legal
entities, it can better see the full network of criminal proceeds as
bad actors try to move money through our financial system. With proper
law enforcement access to beneficial ownership information, the
Department could bring more cases, more quickly, with more impact.
Question 18c. What steps do you think lawmakers should take to
address this trend?
Answer.
The Department looks forward to continued discussions with
its interagency partners, Congress, and industry members regarding
stronger laws that target individuals who seek to mask the ownership of
companies, accounts, and sources of funds.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Christopher A. Coons
Question 1a. On April 9, 2018, the F.B.I. executed searches of the
office, residence, and hotel room of Michael Cohen. It has been
reported that these searches and related investigation are being run
out of the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New
York. During the hearing you indicated that you would recuse yourself
from any involvement or oversight of this investigation if you learned
of any connection to the matters you have already recused yourself
from, namely any events surrounding the 2016 election.
Have you consulted with any career ethics officials at the
Department of Justice to determine if your recusal is warranted in the
ongoing Southern District of New York investigation into Mr. Cohen?
Please provide the dates of these discussions.
Answer. This question calls for the personal knowledge of and is
specifically directed to former Attorney General Jeff Sessions. As
such, it would be inappropriate for the Department to respond to this
question at this time.
Question 1b. Since the hearing, have you discovered any connection
between the investigation into Mr. Cohen and Special Counsel Mueller's
investigation that would cause you to recuse yourself?
Answer. Please see my response to Question 1a.
Question 2a. In your letter to President Trump dated May 9, 2017,
recommending the firing of FBI Director Comey, you stated, ``It is
essential that this Department of Justice clearly reaffirms its
commitment to longstanding principles that ensure the integrity and
fairness of Federal investigations and prosecutions.''
Do you agree with me that it would run counter to longstanding
Department of Justice practices that ensure integrity and fairness of
ongoing criminal investigations to discuss any aspect of an ongoing
criminal investigation with anyone outside of the Department?
Answer. The Department's long-standing policy is to keep
confidential all aspects of an ongoing investigation. Consistent with
this well-established policy, the Department's longstanding practice is
to decline to respond to all inquiries made during the pendency of a
matter, as to disclose non-public information relating to an ongoing
investigation would pose an inherent threat to the integrity of the
Department's law enforcement and litigation functions.
Question 2b. Since the hearing, have you discussed the ongoing
investigation into Mr. Cohen with the President or anyone outside of
the Department of Justice?
Answer. This question calls for the personal knowledge of and is
specifically directed to former Attorney General Jeff Sessions. As
such, it would be inappropriate for the Department to respond to this
question at this time.
Question 2c. Since the hearing, has the President or anyone in the
administration discussed with you the possibility of President Trump
pardoning Mr. Cohen?
Answer. Please see my response to Question 2b.
Question 2d. If you elect to not answer any of the questions above,
as you did during the hearing, please cite the specific justification
you are relying upon for your decision to not answer.
Answer. Please see my response to Question 2b.
Question 3a. The Violence Reduction Network (VRN) proved to be an
effective program for cities like Wilmington, Delaware to address
violent crime and to connect local police with cutting-edge law-
enforcement resources. For example, the clearance rates on homicides in
Wilmington jumped to the 50-54 percent range, from a 20 percent
clearance rate prior to VRN.
Moving forward, what is the Department going to do for cities, like
Wilmington, that made progress combatting violent crime with the help
of the Federal Government now that its participation in the VRN program
has ended?
Answer. The Department is continuing to provide training and
technical assistance through the National Public Safety Partnership
(PSP), administered by the Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA). Twelve
PSP sites were announced in June 2017, and the Department announced
five PSP sites in August 2018.
Both the former VRN and current PSP engagements are time-limited.
This is partially because both programs' goal is to develop locally
based resources and create a sustainable and enduring capacity to
combat violent crime at the local level. Nevertheless, the Department
has many additional resources to offer jurisdictions in need of
continuing support. For example, the Department offers a broad array of
training, technical assistance, and grant programs to support State,
local, and Tribal partners. BJA's National Training and Technical
Assistance Center provides no-cost training and technical assistance on
a wide- variety of criminal justice topics for criminal justice
practitioners, agencies, elected officials, community organizations,
and citizen advocates.
The BJA also provides training and technical assistance to eligible
law enforcement agencies through the National Resource and Technical
Assistance Center for Improving Law Enforcement Investigations on a
wide range of topics that are directly related to improving
investigatory practices. Through the Collaborative Reform Initiative
for Technical Assistance, the Office of Community Oriented Policing
Services provides tailored technical assistance and resources to State,
local, Territorial, and Tribal law enforcement. This Initiative is
conducted in collaboration with national law enforcement membership
associations and facilitates State and local law enforcement trainings
lead by experts in a range of public safety, crime reduction, and
community policing topics.
Additionally, the Department has reinvigorated and recommitted to
the Project Safe Neighborhoods (PSN) program, a nationwide violent
crime reduction program that uses evidence-based practices, targeted
enforcement, and community-based prevention programs to reduce violent
crime alongside State, local, and Tribal law enforcement and the
communities we serve.
Project Safe Neighborhoods (PSN) was originally created in 2001.
Within the first 5 years of PSN's implementation, violent crime was
reduced overall by 4.1 percent, with reductions of up to 40 percent in
certain areas. PSN is effective because it is an evidence-based program
that strategically deploys resources consistent with the specific
problems and needs of individual communities. One year into the
commencement of PSN's reinvigoration and its success has already began.
Public data from 60 major cities show that violent crime decreased by
nearly 5 percent in those cities in the first 6 months of 2018 compared
to the same period 1 year earlier. The Department is confident that the
funding provided to PSN will directly lead further decreases in violent
crime and ultimately increase the safety of Americans.
Question 3b. Can you commit to keeping critical staffing and
resources in place in cities like Wilmington to ensure any recent
improvements in metrics are preserved?
Answer. Reducing violent crime has been one of the top priorities
of the Department. In support of this priority, the Department has
redirected resources toward programs and positions that will strengthen
our efforts to improve the safety of communities across the country.
For example, the Department has expanded the Organized Crime and Drug
Enforcement Task Forces (OCDETF) Program to support local gang
investigations aimed at identifying connections between local gangs and
drug trafficking organizations at the national-level. The Department
has also prioritized the investigation and prosecution of the violent
criminal members of MS-13 by designating MS-13 as a ``priority
organization'' for its OCDETF Task Forces and by spearheading increased
international coordination between domestic law enforcement and its
partners in El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala. This prioritization
and coordination has resulted in the arrest of thousands of MS-13
members and their affiliates.
The Department has also greatly increased the number of Federal
prosecutors directed to focus on violent crime. In May 2018, the
Department announced the creation of 311 new Assistant United States
Attorney (AUSA) positions, the largest addition of Federal prosecutor
positions in decades. Of these new positions, 190 AUSAs across the
country will focus on violent crimes. This announcement follows the
creation of 40 additional AUSA positions in 27 locations across the
country in December 2017. All 40 of these previously created positions
are directed to focus on violent crime.
In addition to expanding the Department's own programs and
staffing, the Department continues to provide critical resource support
to State, local, and Tribal law enforcement partners. In fiscal year
2017, the Department awarded over $207 million in grants to support
State, local, and Tribal law enforcement, and violent crime reduction
efforts across the country. These grants provided funding to hire
additional officers, promote community policing, create additional
Crime Gun Intelligence Centers, enhance law enforcement technology and
information sharing, reduce the backlogs of DNA evidence in crime labs,
and provide needed training and technical assistance. These measures
will help ensure that every district, including the District of
Delaware, has access to the resources, technology, and training they
need to be successful.
The Department's National Institute of Justice (NIJ) is funding
research to continue development and improvement of violence reduction
strategies at the State and local levels. This includes research and
evaluation of strategies to reduce street gangs and gang violence, gun
violence, and persistent violence in communities.
Question 4a. Last month, there were several news reports that Ezra
Cohen-Watnick, who formerly worked at the White House National Security
Council, was hired at the Department of Justice to serve as your
national security adviser.
Was Mr. Cohen-Watnick hired to serve as your national security
advisor?
Answer. Mr. Cohen-Watnick is not a current employee of the
Department of Justice.
Questions 4b. Given Mr. Cohen-Watnick's prior involvement with
matters involving Congressman Nunes, has Mr. Cohen-Watnick recused
himself, like you have, from any involvement in the ongoing Special
Counsel's investigation?
Answer. Mr. Cohen-Watnick is not a current employee of the
Department of Justice.
Question 4c. Has Mr. Cohen-Watnick consulted with any career ethics
officials at the Department of Justice to determine if his recusal is
warranted? Please provide the dates of these discussions.
Answer. Mr. Cohen-Watnick is not a current employee of the
Department of Justice.
Question 5a. Former F.B.I. Director Comey has testified that, on
several occasions, President Trump went outside traditional Department
of Justice policies and channels to directly ask the director about
ongoing F.B.I. investigations.
What have you done to ensure that the President and other White
House officials use established channels and do not take actions that
may violate existing policies and/or seek to influence ongoing
investigations?
Answer. While the Department cannot speak to the specific event
referenced in your question as it calls for the personal knowledge of
former Attorney General Jeff Sessions, the Department of Justice is
governed by procedures that place limits on the communications between
the White House and the Department concerning ongoing investigations,
criminal prosecutions, and civil litigation. The Department is
committed to ensuring the integrity of its investigations,
prosecutions, and litigation and strives to prevent undue political
influence or the appearance thereof from compromising its core
functions.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Chris Van Hollen
repeal or modification of special counsel regulations
Question 1a. What is the Department of Justice's position on
whether the Administrative Procedure Act's rulemaking requirements for
public notice and comment apply to the regulations governing the
special counsel--28 CFR part 600?
Answer.
When the current regulations in Part 600 of 28 C.F.R. were
promulgated as a final rule, they were not subjected to notice-and-
comment rulemaking. The Department identified several reasons why the
usual requirements of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) for prior
notice and public comment were inapplicable. See 64 Fed. Reg. 37,038,
37,041 (July 9, 1999).
Question 1b. Do you have the authority to repeal or modify the
special counsel regulations unilaterally?
Answer.
The current regulations were promulgated by the Attorney
General as an exercise of his authority to, among other things
``prescribe regulations for the government of his department, the
conduct of its employees, [and] the distribution and performance of its
duties.'' 5 U.S.C. Sec. 301; see also 28 U.S.C. Sec. 509 (vesting in
the Attorney General nearly all functions of officers, employees, and
agencies of the Department of Justice); 28 U.S.C. Sec. 510 (authorizing
the Attorney General to ``make such provisions as he considers
appropriate authorizing the performance by any other officer, employee,
or agency of the Department of Justice of any function of the Attorney
General''). Consistent with the above listed statutory authority and
the APA, the special counsel regulations may be repealed or amended by
the Attorney General.
Question 1c. Does your recusal from ``campaign-related matters''
prohibit you from repealing or modifying the special counsel
regulations?
Answer.
This question calls for the personal knowledge of and is
specifically directed to former Attorney General Jeff Sessions. As
such, it would be inappropriate for the Department to respond to this
question at this time.
Question 1d. Does the president have the authority to repeal or
modify the special counsel regulations unilaterally?
Answer.
Please see my response to Question 1b.
Question 1e. Could you, or another administration official,
unilaterally repeal or modify the provision stipulating that the
Attorney General may only remove a special counsel for ``misconduct,
dereliction of duty, incapacity, conflict of interest, or for other
good cause, including violation of Departmental policies''?
Answer.
Please see my response to Question 1b.
Question 1f. Could you, or another administration official,
unilaterally change who has the authority to remove the special
counsel?
Answer.
Please see my response to Question 1b.
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
The subcommittee now stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:48 p.m., Wednesday, April 25, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene subject to the call of
the Chair.]