- PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2020 BUDGET
[Senate Hearing 116-321]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-321
PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2020 BUDGET
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
MARCH 14, 2019
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the Committee on Finance
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
43-323 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
CHUCK GRASSLEY, Iowa, Chairman
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho
RON WYDEN, Oregon
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
JOHN CORNYN, Texas
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
JOHN THUNE, South Dakota
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
RICHARD BURR, North Carolina
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
JOHNNY ISAKSON, Georgia
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
MICHAEL F. BENNET, Colorado
PATRICK J. TOOMEY, Pennsylvania
ROBERT P. CASEY, Jr., Pennsylvania
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
STEVE DAINES, Montana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
Kolan Davis, Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Joshua Sheinkman, Democratic Staff Director
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Grassley, Hon. Chuck, a U.S. Senator from Iowa, chairman,
Committee on Finance...........................................
1
Wyden, Hon. Ron, a U.S. Senator from Oregon......................
2
ADMINISTRATION WITNESS
Mnuchin, Hon. Steven T., Secretary, Department of the Treasury,
Washington, DC.................................................
4
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL
Cortez Masto, Hon. Catherine:
Letter from Seth Frotman to Hon. Mick Mulvaney, August 27,
2018.......................................................
31
Grassley, Hon. Chuck:
Opening statement............................................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
33
Mnuchin, Hon. Steven T.:
Testimony....................................................
4
Prepared statement...........................................
34
Responses to questions from committee members................
35
Whitehouse, Hon. Sheldon:
Submissions for the record...................................
53
Wyden, Hon. Ron:
Opening statement............................................
2
Prepared statement...........................................
59
Communication
Center for Fiscal Equity.........................................
61
(iii)
PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2020 BUDGET
----------
THURSDAY, MARCH 14, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Finance,
Washington, DC.
The hearing was convened, pursuant to notice, at 1:30 p.m.,
in room SD-215, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Chuck
Grassley (chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Roberts, Enzi, Portman, Scott, Cassidy,
Lankford, Daines, Wyden, Cantwell, Menendez, Carper, Casey,
Whitehouse, Hassan, and Cortez Masto.
Also present: Republican staff: Jeffrey Wrase, Deputy Chief
of Staff and Chief Economist; and Mark Warren, Chief Tax
Counsel. Democratic staff: Michael Evans, General Counsel; Adam
Carasso, Senior Economic Advisor; Daniel Goshorn, Investigator;
and Tiffany Smith, Tax Counsel.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CHUCK GRASSLEY, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
IOWA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Chairman. Welcome to everybody this afternoon and
particularly to Secretary of the Treasury Mnuchin.
The President's budget includes various proposals to
confront a variety of policy issues, whether that is runaway
spending, border security, national defense, the opioid
epidemic, or health-care costs--and all of the above and more.
The budget envisions receipts averaging 17.3 percent of GDP
over the next 10 years, slightly above the average of the past
50 years. It also has outlays averaging 20 percent over 10
years, about equal to the average of the last 50 years.
The budget contains some relatively minor tax proposals and
proposes spending restraint to help achieve budget savings of
around $2.8 trillion over 10 years. Those savings are
significant, even if they come to only a fraction of what some
recent proposals from the other side might end up costing. As
examples, Medicare-for-All or the Green New Deal, those
liberal-leaning proposals, would easily cost tens of trillions
of dollars over decades, bring harm to
employer-provided health insurance, and radically restructure
the American economy. They would add tens of trillions to the
debt.
The President's budget represents only a first step in our
budget process where we learn of the President's priorities and
proposals. As I often say, a President proposes, but Congress
disposes.
I can say that I agree that we must remain focused on
important goals, like reducing health-care costs, continuing to
rebuild the military, fighting against opioid abuse, and
addressing the security and humanitarian crisis at our southern
border. And of all of those I mentioned, three of the four, at
least, are very bipartisan.
I also know that this committee is ready to help accomplish
some goals, such as tackling issues surrounding high drug
prices, as well as the mystery in drug pricing, another very
bipartisan issue I believe we can accomplish.
I will note that the budget is being put forward in the
setting of a robust economy, an economy that has been
strengthening following enactment of tax reform. The economy
and tax reform are benefiting Americans across the board.
As you mentioned in your testimony, Secretary Mnuchin, the
tax rate cuts, doubling of the standard deduction, and expanded
child-care tax credits give real benefits to hardworking
middle-class American families, and tax reform is fueling the
economy.
During the Trump administration generally, and especially
since tax reform was enacted, economic growth has topped 3
percent, business investment has been strong, job creation has
been robust, real wage growth has accelerated--and we have not
seen this sort of picture for 10 years--and incomes have grown.
In 2018, we saw more job openings than the number of people
who are unemployed, and that signals a robust labor market.
Unemployment has been remarkably low overall, and especially as
the President can proudly point out, particularly among
Hispanic and African-American workers. And in my State of Iowa,
unemployment stands at a record low 2.4 percent, the lowest
rate of the 50 States.
All of those strong economic numbers mean that hardworking
Americans and their families are clearly benefiting from tax
reform.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Grassley appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Senator Wyden?
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. RON WYDEN,
A U.S. SENATOR FROM OREGON
Senator Wyden. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And today we are doing another round on the budget. Since
the Treasury budget is largely about taxes, and taxes pay for
the bulk of Federal programs, I want to begin with a hard look
at the overall picture. In my view, this is not a budget as
much as it is an economic smash-and-grab perpetrated on the
American people. And if you get rid of the Washington lingo,
what you have are cuts to Medicare, cuts to Medicaid, cuts to
Social Security, cuts to education, cuts to housing, cuts to
cancer research, cuts to job training, cuts to anti-hunger
programs, cuts to anti-poverty programs, and the list goes on.
Then you have the impact of the Trump tax law, hundreds of
billions of dollars in tax handouts to corporations and those
at the very top of the economic ladder, with an overall price
tag that will reach $2 trillion in a decade. The Secretary's
famously declared proposition that the tax law would pay for
itself and more was off by trillions of dollars.
The big effect of the Trump tax law has been to launch a
trillion-dollar stock buyback bonanza that has been a non-stop
joyride for corporate executives. That is because those
executives get much of their compensation in the form of
corporate stock.
So once again, you see the two tax systems in America, and
with the stock buyback bonanza, the executives get two special
breaks that are unavailable to a cop or a nurse. They can defer
their taxes on their stock holdings and they get a lower tax
rate on their salaries and bonuses.
In addition, new data released by Syracuse University shows
the effects of years of Republican austerity imposed on the
IRS. With audits of corporations and high earners steadily
dropping year after year, enforcement of the tax law is in the
worst shape it has been in in decades. Not in modern memory has
there been a better time to be a wealthy tax cheat in America.
So under Donald Trump, corporations and the wealthy do not
have to pay a fair share, and there is a pretty good chance
they can get away with paying virtually nothing at all. And it
should come as no surprise that deficits crossed the trillion-
dollar mark under unified Republican control of the government.
Unveiling the budget at a press briefing on Monday, the
acting OMB Director drummed up fears over what he called
``unsustainable national debt.'' He warned that ``annual
deficits are continuing to rise'' without recognizing what is
driving the increase. Echoing other Republican budget-cutters,
he said Washington has got a spending problem. And then it was
off to the races outlining exactly how the Trump administration
wants to dismantle the system that created a vibrant middle
class.
For too long, the full burden of Republican budget cuts has
fallen on the middle class and working families trying to get
there. It does not fall on special interests. It does not fall
on billionaires. And what the Trump administration put forward
is not anything resembling fair belt-tightening. It is not
even-handed reduction in spending. Middle-class families lose,
but the budget would send more taxpayer dollars to defense
contractors. It gives them even more than what the Pentagon
asked for.
The bottom line is, just about every warning that has come
from this side of the committee about the Republican tax cut
and its aftermath is proving to be true. The $4,000 raises
American workers were promised--nowhere to be found. The tax
handouts--not paying for themselves. New fed data projects the
economy is growing this quarter at a rate of 0.2 percent. The
experts at CBO, the nonpartisan budget office, forecast, as the
corporate tax cut sugar high wears off, economic growth will
slow to 1.7 percent in the years ahead.
And as the public has seen this week, the deficits driven
upward by the tax law are now considered the justification for
draconian budget cuts. A cycle that has gone on for decades has
taken a real toll on the middle class. It is long past time to
end it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Senator Wyden appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Our witness, the Secretary of Treasury, has
been very active with the President. Before he was elected, he
was finance chairman for the campaign and a senior economic
advisor. But he also has extensive experience in global
financial markets, U.S. Government securities, mortgages, money
markets, municipal bonds, and has held several successful
positions with private enterprises.
Secretary Mnuchin also is committed to a lot of activity to
help our society advance socially through philanthropic
activities like being a member of the boards of the Museum of
Contemporary Arts, the Los Angeles Whitney Museum of Arts, the
Hirshhorn Museum Sculpture Garden on the Mall, the UCLA Health
Systems Board, the New York Presbyterian Board, the Los Angeles
Police Foundation, and I will bet there is a lot longer list
some place.
He was born and raised in New York City, and has a degree
from Yale University.
You may proceed, please.
STATEMENT OF HON. STEVEN T. MNUCHIN, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF
THE TREASURY, WASHINGTON, DC
Secretary Mnuchin. Thank you.
Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the
committee, it is good to be here with you today.
I am pleased to report that President Trump's economic
program of tax cuts, regulatory relief, and improved trade
deals is working for the American people. During 2018, real GDP
increased by 3.1 percent, measured from the fourth quarter of
2017 to the fourth quarter of 2018. This is the highest Q4 to
Q4 growth rate since 2005. The unemployment rate remains
historically low at 3.8 percent, and earnings rose by over 3
percent in 2018, the highest nominal increase in a decade. More
Americans are entering the workforce because of a renewed sense
of optimism. The World Economic Forum's most recent Competitors
Report announced that the United States is the number one most
competitive economy in the world, receiving the top ranking for
the first time in 10 years.
Companies are investing hundreds of billions of dollars in
new and expanding business operations in the United States.
This is in large part because the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act made
our tax rate competitive, moved us from a worldwide system
towards a territorial system of taxation, and allowed immediate
expensing of capital expenditures. For hardworking families, it
also cut rates across the board, doubled the standard
deduction, and expanded the Child Tax Credit.
I would also like to highlight Opportunity Zones, a key
component of the TCJA. Opportunity Zones will help ensure that
Americans benefit from our economic expansion and robust job
market. They provide capital gains relief to encourage
investment in businesses located in distressed communities.
This policy has generated a great deal of enthusiasm.
These measures are fueling growth. Along with our efforts
to provide regulatory relief, in our trade negotiations we are
aiming to break down barriers to markets around the world.
As you know, China has gained many advantages through
unfair trade practices. This administration is committed to
rebalancing our trading relationship in order to level the
playing field for hardworking Americans. We are negotiating
with China on structural reforms to open their economy to our
companies and to protect critical technology and intellectual
property.
The administration is also prioritizing the U.S.-Mexico-
Canada Agreement. It is the most comprehensive trade agreement
ever negotiated and will modernize our trading relationship
with North America. The USMCA will create the highest standards
ever to protect intellectual property rights, support small and
medium-sized businesses, open markets for agriculture, and spur
manufacturing.
I encourage all members of Congress to support its passage,
because it will have a positive impact for American workers,
business owners, farmers, and families.
In addition to enhancing overall growth prospects, I want
to note the impact the administration's economic agenda will
have on our country's debt and deficits going forward. During
the last administration, analysts predicted the 2-percent
growth was the highest America could achieve and that it was
the new normal. We have already shown that we can and will do
better. An extra 1 percent of GDP growth per year means
trillions of dollars of additional economic activity and more
revenue to the government.
Turning to the budget, the policies and priorities of the
President's fiscal year budget will continue to foster strong
economic growth, reduce spending, and create a more sustainable
fiscal outlook for our country by reducing the deficit as a
share of GDP.
Of special interest to this committee, the Treasury portion
of the budget includes $290 million for the Business Systems
Modernization account, funding which is foundational for a new
6-year IRS IT modernization plan. Investment in the
modernization of IRS information technology systems and
infrastructure will protect the integrity of our tax system and
improve customer service for taxpayers.
I am pleased to continue working with you on policies that
will help to create jobs and increase wages for the American
people. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Mnuchin appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. We will start our questioning now and will
have 5-minute rounds, and I want to keep this going while we
have the vote. So I hope somebody will volunteer to chair while
I go vote.
Instead of reading a long introduction on my first
statement, I am going to put that in the record.
But basically it is the fact that I think the tax reform
has benefited the average American, particularly middle-income
people, and you have accusations that the middle-income worker
was left behind. So to me, the facts are pretty clear that all
Americans, especially workers in the middle class, are
benefiting from the tax reform and other policies of this
administration. So given this difference of opinion about the
tax bill, Mr. Secretary, can you help me understand how workers
were left behind, as the accusation is?
Secretary Mnuchin. Mr. Chairman, I cannot help you on that.
I think that workers have done quite well, and they are doing
substantially better both through tax cuts, increased wages,
and more jobs.
The Chairman. Yes. Did you misunderstand my question? I was
not criticizing that it was not helping the workers.
Secretary Mnuchin. No, I understand.
The Chairman. Okay.
Secretary Mnuchin. You were asking me if I could explain
how it was not helping the worker.
The Chairman. Okay.
Mr. Secretary, we have heard a lot about the size of the
tax reforms, and I have already said, look at the bottom line
of your tax form this year versus last year, and you will know
whether you had a tax increase or not, or tax decrease or not.
And you cannot tell it from your refund. Even the National
Taxpayer Advocate has said there is no evidence to support such
claims made by the Democrats.
So would you care to set the record straight and explain
the process followed for updating the withholding tables,
because there were some accusations that there were political
manipulations of it to make the tax reform look better for some
people.
Secretary Mnuchin. Mr. Chairman, we tried to carefully
adjust the withholding tables so that hardworking taxpayers
would have the benefit of tax cuts last year and have money in
their pockets.
Now, let me just walk you through some examples. First of
all, I know there has been a lot of attention, but the average
tax refund this year is the same as last year. Notwithstanding
that, we would have expected that they would have gone down
because taxpayers had less taxes.
So for example, an average married couple with one job and
two children under age 17 who had $75,000 of income in 2017,
they would have had a tax of $3,800. In 2018, they would have
had a tax of $1,700. So their taxes--they would have saved
$2,000 or about 55 percent. If that taxpayer had been withheld
the same in both years, their refunds would have been down 55
percent.
So again, the average refunds, so far, are flat. So if
anything, I think the data shows that we did not adjust the
withholding tables enough.
The Chairman. I want to talk about the SALT deduction being
limited to $10,000. In general, this limitation increases the
progressivity of the tax code and allows for targeting larger
tax cuts than otherwise would have been the case for middle-
income families. Yet the same people who have criticized the
recent tax reform as tax cuts for the wealthy are now seeking
to repeal the cap which would overwhelmingly only benefit
millionaires and billionaires.
Indeed, according to the liberal Tax Policy Center, nearly
57 percent of the benefits from repealing the SALT cap would go
to the top 1 percent of the taxpayers, and more than a quarter
of the benefits would go to the top one-tenth of 1 percent
alone. Are these numbers consistent with Treasury's
understanding of who would stand to benefit from the repeal of
the SALT cap?
Secretary Mnuchin. I do believe they are, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Okay.
It appears as though the President's budget assumes that
the tax cuts and reforms benefiting individuals and small
businesses are permanent. And I hope that becomes more than
just an assumption. Anything less than permanence of this bill
would equate to an eventual tax hike for millions of
individuals. The $2,000 child credit would revert to $1,000.
The nearly doubled standard deduction and lower overall rates
would revert to prior laws. The new provision for small
business of a 20-percent above-the-line deduction would no
longer exist.
So my last question is, Mr. Secretary, in Treasury's
estimate, what would the expiration of these policies mean in
terms of tax increases on individual families and job creators?
And what would this mean to our economy generally?
Secretary Mnuchin. Mr. Chairman, if we do not continue
those tax cuts, it would reverse the tax cuts to middle-income
families and significant child tax credits. And it would have
an impact on the economy.
The Chairman. Okay.
Senator Wyden?
Senator Wyden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all on the stock buybacks, Mr. Secretary, I am not
going to ask a question just because, you know, time is short.
I told you I think this buyback bonanza, a trillion dollars'
worth, is just a non-stop joyride for corporate executives.
And it just looks to me like this is classic trickle-down
economics, that what you all are basically saying is well,
maybe at some point the middle-class person might get an itty-
bitty slice of the well-to-do's pie. I just disagree profoundly
with that proposition.
Now, let me go to my questions. First, with respect to
ethics, I am trying to make sense out of your uncertified 2017
ethics form. And the government has not been able to certify it
yet. And I gather that there are some questions about why.
One of the assets you report is a receivable from the Alan
G. Mnuchin Trust--that is your brother--and is valued at
between $25 and $50 million. Another is a receivable from
Stormchaser Partners, which I gather is your wife. What can you
tell us about these receivables, and what is their relation to
the assets you certified you had divested in 2017?
Secretary Mnuchin. Thank you, Senator.
So first, let me just clarify. My forms were filed timely,
and they were certified by the career Designated Agency Ethics
Official at Treasury, who is the person that I consult with on
a regular basis.
Senator Wyden. But the Office of Government Ethics has not
certified.
Secretary Mnuchin. Mr. Senator, I am just explaining,
please.
So again, I deal with the career Designated Agency Ethics
Advisor. I am fully in compliance. It was fully certified by
that person.
I do understand that it has not yet been certified by OGE.
I understand the Treasury is working with OGE. There have been
discussions in regards to their certification. But I have been
advised by the people at Treasury that I am fully in
compliance, and I have no ethical issue.
Senator Wyden. We will wait for that. I hope that is the
case. And until I see it, what we have wondered is whether
there has been an exchange of an asset for a loan, rather than
divestment. So we will await those results.
I want to turn now, if I might, to the question of the
sanctions deal, and particularly, Mr. Deripaska. Now the
Treasury Department's decision to lift sanctions on the big
aluminum manufacturer involved a variety of entities related to
the sanctioned Russian oligarch, Mr. Deripaska.
So I just want to ask you about a few issues here. Now
according to reports, under the sanctions relief deal almost
$100 million worth of shares in EN+--really an entity linked to
Deripaska and Rusal--were transferred to a trust for
Deripaska's children. Are you aware of this report?
Secretary Mnuchin. I am aware.
Senator Wyden. Do you dispute the report?
Secretary Mnuchin. Again, I do not have it in front of me.
So I cannot comment on it.
Senator Wyden. Well, the name of the trust was ``Liberi,''
which is the Latin word for children. It is a real head-
scratcher how this came to pass, because it sure looks like Mr.
Deripaska's children are benefiting from sanctions efforts
meant to punish him.
So I am trying to make sense out of this. I mean this
really resembles a Keystone Cops-level sanction enforcement.
How did this pass muster there at Treasury?
Secretary Mnuchin. Bear with me. We are just pulling the
information, but I can assure you it was not a Keystone Cops
effort. This is something--as you know--the career people at
Treasury worked on for a very, very long period of time.
Our objective--and we believe the sanctions worked--was to
decrease his ownership, put in compliance, and now have the
board controlled by a majority of Americans and Europeans.
Senator Wyden. Let us do this, because my time is going to
expire. I am puzzled how something like this could pass
Treasury's muster. I am concerned that Deripaska's kids are
benefiting from a sanctions effort meant to punish him.
Mr. Secretary, will you respond to my questions here today
on Mr. Deripaska within 7 business days so we can get this
resolved?
Secretary Mnuchin. Absolutely, and I can assure you--and I
am happy to not only respond, but to come up and meet with you
and your staff if you want us to go through the details that
his children did in no way benefit from sanctions.
Senator Wyden. It does not look like it to me at this
point, and we are going to have to exchange----
Secretary Mnuchin. When we have more time, I would be happy
to walk you through it.
Senator Wyden. That will be fine.
Secretary Mnuchin. Thank you.
The Chairman. Senator Scott?
Senator Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here this afternoon
with us. I want to ask you a couple questions that I think are
probably easy to answer ``yes'' or ``no,'' and some of them you
have already stated in your opening statement. So I assume that
the answer will likely be ``yes'' on many of the questions.
But are you aware of the fact that in February the Federal
receipts were up 10 percent?
Secretary Mnuchin. Yes.
Senator Scott. With lower tax rates, we actually saw an
increase in our revenues. Therefore, if we were to control our
spending, we would find ourselves on the right path. Is that an
accurate assumption?
Secretary Mnuchin. That is accurate. And I just want to
highlight that the tax cut act was designed to stimulate the
economy and, because of automatic expensing, would specifically
lower revenues in the first year with additional revenues going
forward.
So not only were revenues up, but there was the impact we
had expected of additional costs in the beginning.
Senator Scott. I would assume, then, that we should expect
more good news as we move forward because, as you think of the
Laffer Curve, as we reduce the impediments on growth in our
economy, we should expect that we will see even more growth in
our economy.
Secretary Mnuchin. Yes.
Senator Scott. That would probably help explain the fact
that our GDP growth in 2018 was 3.1 percent?
Secretary Mnuchin. Yes.
Senator Scott. It would also reinforce the fact that the
earnings for our workers--we have seen a lag in their growth
financially, individually--have lagged behind. And now for the
first time in more than a decade, we saw their earnings grow
over 3 percent?
Secretary Mnuchin. That is correct.
Senator Scott. And since 2017, we have seen the creation of
about 5.2 million jobs?
Secretary Mnuchin. That is about correct.
Senator Scott. And since the passage of the tax reform,
about half of those jobs have been created?
Secretary Mnuchin. Yes; you are on a roll.
Senator Scott. Okay.
So doubling the Child Tax Credit is a positive thing for
folks with kids?
Secretary Mnuchin. Absolutely. It was a significant way of
getting tax cuts to hardworking families.
Senator Scott. And then making more of it refundable also
is an interesting and positive incentive as well?
Secretary Mnuchin. Correct.
Senator Scott. Looking at the positive results for single
parents--as we have discussed on a number of occasions, I was
raised by a single mom. If you look at the average single
mother around the country making wages around $40,000--which
according to the IRS is the average wage for a single mother--
her share of Federal taxes has been cut at least in half, some
say as high as 73 percent.
Secretary Mnuchin. That is about right.
Senator Scott. I would love to have an entire hearing, Mr.
Chairman, contrasting the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act versus a Green
New Deal. These questions may be harder to answer because I am
not sure that there is an answer that we know yet. But, if the
Green New Deal's price tag is $93 trillion, how does that help
create jobs in the private sector?
Secretary Mnuchin. I do not know how it would create jobs,
and I do not know how we would possibly pay for it.
Senator Scott. That would be a harder question to answer.
Secretary Mnuchin. It would be indeed.
Senator Scott. Yes, sir.
My thought is that, as we look at the Green New Deal, and
if you look at the, as I call them, cross tabs within the
information in the Green New Deal, it to me is undoubtedly a
regressive tax on the poor from my perspective and reading of
the Green New Deal. Would you have any information on that?
Secretary Mnuchin. I think not only is it a tax on the
poor, but it is an enormous brake on the entire economy.
Senator Scott. I certainly hope we have the opportunity to
have this conversation and this debate in a hearing in the
Finance Committee several times in the next 2 years.
Changing subjects to the Opportunity Zones, I assume that
you are aware that I am a fan of the Opportunity Zones.
Secretary Mnuchin. Not only am I aware you are a fan, but I
want to personally thank you, Senator Scott, because you have
been an important part of this. This never would have occurred
without you. So thank you very much for your contributions.
Senator Scott. Thank you, sir.
Yesterday your team sent OIRA* a second set of proposed
regulations on qualified opportunity funds. As you know,
Congress intended for the Opportunity Zones to provide a new
lifeline of equity capital to operating businesses in low-
income communities in addition to certainly creating
opportunities for real estate investments. Much of the market
for operating business has been frozen due to the need for
additional clarity on rules which thus far have not been
provided. I know you are aware of the bipartisan concerns of
this fundamentally important issue for the success of the
Opportunity Zones policy. What can you tell us today about the
forthcoming rules that will address key questions that may
unfreeze the market and see even more development to follow on
the so far successful implementation?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
And I thank your office for working with us to smooth the--
I guess the experience in the real world.
Secretary Mnuchin. Well, thank you. And again, I think this
is a very, very important economic development for communities
that really need the investment.
We did significant listening after the first round to try
to clarify issues. I can assure you this is at the top of my
list.
We are working very closely with OIRA to get this out as
quickly as we can so that taxpayers can understand this and we
can see money going into the communities right away.
Senator Scott. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Menendez?
Senator Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman,
first of all, I would like to invite you to New Jersey so you
could meet the nearly 1.8 million New Jerseyans who deducted
their State and local property tax. And I can assure you, just
like me as a property owner in New Jersey, they are not
millionaires. They are not multimillionaires. They are about as
middle-class as can be.
And as a State, we give more money to the Federal Treasury
than we get back, compared to other States that give less and
get more in return. So that classification in your opening
comments I would seriously dispute.
Now, Mr. Secretary, I watched with interest that you
acknowledged this morning before the Ways and Means Committee
that the SALT cap is having a significant impact on States like
New Jersey, and other productive States, and that these
economies are critical to the national economy. As I said, New
Jerseyans pay more than their fair share in taxes, and we punch
above our weight economically. So I am encouraged to hear from
you that it appears maybe you have come to understand the views
of some of us who are facing this challenge. But this
administration's support of the SALT cap and unprecedented
efforts to undermine State-level tax credit programs sabotages
the success of States like New Jersey, and it hurts our country
as a whole.
Mr. Secretary, is it not fair to say that States have had
programs that awarded tax credits and exchange for donations
before the President's tax bill?
Secretary Mnuchin. Well, Senator, as you pointed out, I did
make comments on that this morning. So I will repeat them
without getting into a debate whether it impacted the high-end
individuals or the middle----
Senator Menendez. I do not mean to interrupt, but there is
limited time. That is not my question. I know what you said at
the Ways and Means Committee, and I accept that you have come
to some sensitivity of it. But is it not true that States have
had programs before the Trump tax bill that awarded tax credits
in exchange for donations?
Secretary Mnuchin. There have been credits for--
particularly in educational areas.
Senator Menendez. Yes, and so there are actually over 30
States that had such programs, where they had credits in
exchange for donations. So why did the administration reverse
decades of precedent and case law by prohibiting taxpayers from
deducting donations made to those State funds?
Secretary Mnuchin. Senator, I would be happy to come up and
walk you through this carefully. But what I would say is, what
we tried to do was preserve the intent of these programs in the
context of our obligation to monitor the $10,000 SALT.
So the idea was not to allow States to create a
workaround----
Senator Menendez. But this existed, Mr. Secretary, before
the SALT is what I am saying. These States, by the way, mostly
red States--including of many members of this committee--their
States had these charitable deductions for purposes that would
help them with their taxes. And for years, they went on without
a consequence, and all of a sudden States like New Jersey come
along and do the exact same thing as the States had for years,
and then all of a sudden we get a different ruling.
Now I will say this much: at least you are affecting all of
the States by those rulings at the end of the day, not just New
Jersey. But in essence, it seems to me that what you try to do
is to crack down on blue States that created the same exact
circumstances that red States had, and for years tax preparers
in those red States would say this is the easiest way to deal
with avoiding hitting the alternative minimum tax.
So they had it for a different purpose. But the IRS for
years allowed this to go on. The IRS actually had rulings that
said it was okay, and then all of a sudden when States like New
Jersey try to deal with the challenge for their taxpayers, it
was ruled unacceptable.
So you know, those of us who believe that, and get
concerned that the IRS is being weaponized, see this is a
classic, perfect example of that set of circumstances. I hope
we can work together to find a way to create relief for
taxpayers like myself who live on my salary and who have a
property and who are being affected by the SALT deduction. But
far beyond me, we have hundreds of thousands of New Jerseyans
who are not millionaires who are being affected by this, and
being treated poorly at the end of the day.
The Chairman. Senator Whitehouse?
Senator Whitehouse. Thanks very much.
Mr. Secretary, before we go any further, I would like to
ask unanimous consent to put two articles in the record, one
regarding the commentary that has been heard in this hearing
about tax bill revenues. Similar statements just earned four
Pinocchios, and I would like to have that article added. And
second, there is a recent article evaluating the so-called $93
trillion that the Koch brothers came up with and evaluating the
credibility of that as well.
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.
[The articles appear in the appendix beginning on p. 53.]
Senator Whitehouse. Secretary Mnuchin, you have said in the
past, in July of 2018 in the House Financial Services
Committee, ``We have got to figure out this beneficial
ownership issue in the next 6 months. I do not want to be
coming back here next year and we do not have this solved.'' I
think you and I are in the same place on this beneficial
ownership issue, but it is a bear trying to get progress, and
here it is next year and I do not see much progress. Could you
tell me, just for openers, who is the point person at Treasury,
by name, leading the beneficial ownership issue?
Secretary Mnuchin. First, let me just acknowledge I did
make that statement, and I am not pleased that it has not been
fixed.
Senator Whitehouse. Nor am I, and I look forward to working
with you together to fix it.
Secretary Mnuchin. I have put our new Deputy, Justin
Muzinich, in charge of this issue. He is coordinating with our
Office of Tax Policy. He would be happy to come over and sit
down with you.
We have a bunch of different ideas. I think it is very
important that we figure out a solution to beneficial
ownership. It is important for our TFI* area. It is important
for tax reporting. It is important for international
compliance. It is not a simple answer.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Senator Whitehouse. Would you agree that it is also
important for our international credibility, that if we become
the Crooked Redoubt of kleptocrats everywhere, that is not a
great American brand to own.
Secretary Mnuchin. I would agree with you. I do not think
we will be without it. But I do agree with you, and I am not
happy to report that we have not solved this. It is a very
complicated issue with lots of different views.
But I am committed that Treasury will follow up with you
specifically, and we would very much like to get your input.
Senator Whitehouse. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Secretary Mnuchin. I hope I am not back here next time
without this solved.
Senator Whitehouse. I hope so too, because I am eager to
get it solved. I would also like to add to the record an
editorial piece that General David Petraeus and I wrote
describing the kleptocracy regime and America's support of the
secret channels for hiding money by foreign dictators and
crooks as a national security weakness for the country.
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.
[The article appears in the appendix on p. 57.]
Senator Whitehouse. And I want to thank General Petraeus
for writing that article with me. He is, obviously, somebody
who has an extraordinary record of defending America's national
security.
Mr. Secretary, there was really terrific bipartisan action
related to climate change here in Congress with respect to what
is called the 45Q tax program. It created a tax benefit for
investors in carbon capture and sequestration. On the floor the
other day, Republicans came to talk about climate change and
repeatedly mentioned the importance of this particular
legislation. Just recently Chairman Barrasso held a hearing in
which he repeatedly mentioned the importance of this
legislation.
I wrote to Treasury officials about this issue in early
February and would like to add a copy of that letter dated
February 6th to the record. I do not believe we have had a
response.
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.
[The letter appears in the appendix on p. 59.]
Senator Whitehouse. Thank you.
I do not believe we have had a response. I do not know why.
The failure of guidance on this has gummed up the progress that
we have tried to seek. There are industries waiting to go.
There are investors waiting to move. There are academic
institutions that have done scientific work that they want to
move forward with into production, and all of that is being
held up for want of 45Q guidance that I think is reasonably
tolerably easy to achieve.
Could you give us a time for when you think you can
actually get this done?
Secretary Mnuchin. So I understand that we followed up the
letter with a briefing to your office. I am not familiar,
personally, with all the details. But I will make sure that
next week I get briefed on this, and we will get back to you if
we have questions. So we will put it high on the list, and if
there are issues, we will follow up with you.
Senator Whitehouse. Let us just say there are not a whole
ton of issues on which Senator Cory Booker and I and Senators
John Barrasso and Jim Inhofe come together and agree on. This
is one. It ought not to get lost in the executive bureaucracy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Mnuchin. I assure you it will not get lost. Thank
you, Senator.
The Chairman. Senator Lankford?
Senator Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thanks for being here, and for the testimony
today.
Tell me how it is going with OIRA. There is a new
memorandum of understanding between IRS and OIRA trying to be
able to work out any of the regulatory issues. Have you bumped
into any barriers, slowdowns in timing, anything that has
caused an issue to OIRA and IRS in promulgating rules and regs?
Secretary Mnuchin. So I think we are pleased with the new
memo and the change of it. And I think we are working closely
with OIRA. Obviously, from our standpoint we always want to get
things out quicker. And from their standpoint, they have an
obligation to look through them. So there is always a natural--
we would rather go faster, but I think it is working.
Senator Lankford. No major hiccups to this point. That is
helpful.
There has been an ongoing dialogue about the tax gap, and
you and I have talked about that before. The tax gap is one of
those issues where we all talk about a number, but we also
realize the tax gap number is a decade old. So we really do not
know what the tax gap is anymore.
Any progress on trying to determine what is our tax gap,
and what is unpaid at this point?
Secretary Mnuchin. Well, I think there is progress, but I
would say more importantly, this is why I am determined that we
need to modernize the IRS technology--and we substantially
under-
invested in technology. We need to bring it into the modern
age.
And the best way to shrink the tax gap is through
technology, is through being able to use the vast amounts of
information that we have at the IRS, and automate it so that we
can use it for narrowing the tax gap.
Senator Lankford. So you and I talked about this last year
during FSGG conversations on appropriations, that for the past
10 years IRS has listed a problem with legacy hardware and
legacy software. There was additional investment that was put
to IRS last year, and there was the year before that, and the
year before that to be able to help in modernization.
Do you have a number yet, what it would take to be able to
move from ``we need additional investment'' to ``we are
there?''
Secretary Mnuchin. I think the total investment is
approximately $2 to $2.5 billion as to what we think is
necessary. And this will obviously be over a multiyear period.
Senator Lankford. Are we talking 5 years, 10 years? Are we
talking 3 years? What do you think that is?
Secretary Mnuchin. I think it is 6 years, and I think it is
like $2.2 to $2.6 is the range we have been using.
Senator Lankford. Okay.
So, switching from tax gap to the other side, the improper
payments side, EITC has been one of those things for a while.
GAO has placed it on the high-risk list to say there are a lot
of improper payments there.
Any progress in providing greater clarity to tax preparers
and other folks on how to be able to close down that improper
payment?
Secretary Mnuchin. There is, but again, this is something
that I would like to come in and brief you on----
Senator Lankford. Yes.
Secretary Mnuchin [continuing]. Because I think, as you
know, we have the right to hold the payments for a certain
period of time. But there are still issues with matching and
everything else and potential fraud in this. And we would be
happy to come up and give you a briefing. It is potentially a
significant amount of money.
Senator Lankford. Yes, it is. And it is one of those areas
that has been on GAO's list for a very long time to resolve,
and if there are ways that we can be helpful in that process, I
hope that we can be helpful in that process as well.
Secretary Mnuchin. Yes.
Senator Lankford. Opportunity Zones are, if not one of the
first three things that people say to me--there are a lot when
I get back in State--they are in that top list somewhere.
It has been interesting the amount of buzzing conversation
in different places around the States where they want to talk
about Opportunity Zones. I know that the regs are coming out on
that frequently. Will the frequency increase, or what do you
think is a regular release on regs on that? When do you think
is the next release? I know we just had one. When do you think
is the next one?
Secretary Mnuchin. I think the next release will come
within the next month, and it is quite material. I think it
will have a lot of issues. And then again, as we get feedback
and other issues, we will roll out additional regulation.
Senator Lankford. Terrific. There is a question that has
come up from a couple of folks in my State that there are
listed within the regs what are called sin businesses:
commercial golf courses--which I think a lot of people would be
shocked to know that the golf course, I guess, is on the sin
list--country club, massage parlor, hot tub facility, suntan
facility, racetrack, gambling facility, liquor store. Is there
an assumption within that that anything that violates Federal
law should also be on that list?
So for instance, the multiple States that have legalized,
decriminalized, or allowed medical distribution of marijuana,
would those businesses and grow locations or dispensaries--
because they violate Federal law--would they also not be
eligible for an Opportunity Zone credit the same as these
others?
Secretary Mnuchin. It is not something I believe we have
considered at the moment. But I would be happy to review it
internally----
Senator Lankford. There has been a question just in my
State. Just try to figure out, if it violates Federal law if it
still is eligible for a tax credit. And so trying to be able to
figure out that balance on it would be helpful to folks.
Can I flip to one more quick subject? The nonprofit parking
piece that the reg came out for, about 30 pages of it--is that
done or is there a new reg that is coming out? Any updates on
that one in the days ahead?
Secretary Mnuchin. The taxpayer should be able to rely upon
the guidance that has come out, although it will go through a
more formal process. But they should be able to rely upon that.
And we hope that we have solved it as best as we can.
Senator Lankford. Okay. Thank you.
The Chairman. Senator Hassan?
Senator Hassan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Wyden, for having this hearing.
Good afternoon, Mr. Secretary. Thank you for being here.
Before turning to my questions, I just wanted to comment on
Treasury's mission to stop terrorist financing.
Detecting and disrupting terrorist financing is a critical
tool in the counterterrorism arsenal. And in order to help
prevent ISIS, Al-Qaeda, or the next version of these groups,
whatever they may be, from threatening our homeland, we have to
provide robust funding for the antiterrorist financing programs
at the Treasury Department. To that end, I am very pleased that
Treasury's budget requests a significant increase for the
Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence, and I look
forward to supporting Treasury in this mission. So thank you
all for doing that.
Secretary Mnuchin. Thank you, and thank you for the
specific funding increases we have had in the last few years in
recognition of the importance of it.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you.
Now I want to move on to some pieces of the budget. I am
sure, Mr. Secretary, we can agree that supporting innovative
small businesses is key to growing the economy and creating
good-paying jobs. In my State, the New Hampshire Community Loan
Fund, a nonprofit community development financial institution
in Concord, has been increasing access to capital for Granite
Staters, especially small businesses in economically distressed
areas of our State, for more than 35 years.
In fact, they came by my office yesterday. But the
President's budget would eliminate the Treasury Department's
Community Development Financial Institution program, which
provides support to CDFI in New Hampshire.
Meanwhile, Mr. Secretary, the administration told the
American people that the new pass-through deduction in the 2017
tax law would give a boost to Main Street entrepreneurs. But in
fact, the Joint Committee on Taxation found that in 2018, the
top 1 percent received over $20 billion in tax cuts from this
new deduction.
Now, after billions in tax cuts that were supposed to help
small businesses have actually gone to the top 1 percent, the
administration wants to slash the vital CDFI program. Mr.
Secretary, can you tell me in dollar terms how much the
President's budget would cut from the Treasury Department's
CDFI program?
Secretary Mnuchin. It would take it down from 250 to
approximately 14----
Senator Hassan. That is the CDFI fund, not the program.
Secretary Mnuchin. Yes.
Senator Hassan. The program, I believe, is currently funded
at about $160 million.
Secretary Mnuchin. I do not have that chart with us, but we
would be happy to follow up with you.
Senator Hassan. It is a very important program within your
own department. So let me just tell you that it is funded at
about $160 million, and your budget completely eliminates it--
100-percent cut.
So with the $20 billion that the pass-through deduction
handed to the top 1 percent last year, with----
Secretary Mnuchin. I----
Senator Hassan. Go ahead. I am sorry. Did you want to say
something?
Secretary Mnuchin. No, I was just going to say we are happy
to follow up. But let me just acknowledge that I do think the
CDFI program does create valid benefits to the community. There
were difficult decisions we made in the budget, and we would be
happy----
Senator Hassan. And let us just talk about what that
reflects about the administration's priorities then, okay?
Because with the $20 billion that the pass-through deduction
handed to the top 1 percent last year, is it not true that the
CDFI program could be fully funded more than 100 times over?
Secretary Mnuchin. Well, I do not agree with you. And the
calculation is rather complicated on the $20 billion, because
what we did is, we lowered the corporate tax rate. The idea of
the pass-through discount was to create some level of parity
between pass-throughs and corporations.
Senator Hassan. I do understand. I----
Secretary Mnuchin. There is an assumption in that
calculation as to what goes to the taxpayers and what gets
passed on.
Senator Hassan. But let us just be very clear, though. That
is about half of the value of the total pass-through deduction.
And it went to the top 1 percent at a time when the
administration is turning around and talking here in this
hearing about tough choices to make. The tough choices are
going to be for small businesses in economically distressed
areas that cannot get necessary capital to invest and create
jobs just where we need them the most.
That reflects this administration's priorities, and I just
have to tell you I think that is backwards. I think we should
be focused on where we need to help people start small
businesses and create jobs in the most economically depressed
areas of our country. And certainly in my State, that
elimination of CDFI is going to have a real impact.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Casey?
Senator Casey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, good to be with you. I wanted to start with
something that was not noticed by very many people, I guess,
across the country when the tax bill was enacted at the end of
2017. The 2017 tax bill eliminated the deduction for union dues
and other expenses for workers like gasoline and tools that
they have to purchase. At that time--and I would include that
time as well as the present--did you support eliminating the
deduction for unreimbursed employee expenses?
Secretary Mnuchin. I did support the elimination of
unreimbursed employee expenses.
Senator Casey. And is there anything in the President's
budget that has just been announced, or any initiative that you
or anyone else in the administration has undertaken to
reinstate those provisions for union dues and employee
expenses?
Secretary Mnuchin. I am not aware of it, but I can check
with the team and get back to you.
Senator Casey. Okay, I might have the answer, or an answer.
I have a bill to make the deduction for union dues above the
line, and also to reinstate the deduction for expenses like
tools and gas. And I ask--you may not have seen this bill yet,
but I ask you to take a look at it and then correspond back
with us with an answer as to whether or not you or the
administration could support it.
Secretary Mnuchin. We would be happy to do that, and we
will have the Office of Tax Policy work with your staff so we
can understand the exact impact.
Senator Casey. Thank you.
And at the time of the tax bill, there were a lot of
debates about the projected impact of the tax bill on workers,
on workers' wages. At one point, the Council of Economic
Advisors for the White House said that wages would go up on
average $4,000. What is your sense of, (a) what has happened
since the enactment of the bill to workers' wages? Have they
gone up $4,000? Have they gone up at all? What is your sense of
where workers' wages are in dollars?
Secretary Mnuchin. We have had the largest growth of wages
last year that we have had. I think the idea was not
necessarily the $4,000 would all be in year one, but we
continue to think that wage growth will lead to that for the
calculation.
Senator Casey. So are you saying that real wages are up,
inflation-adjusted wages are up since the tax bill?
Secretary Mnuchin. Yes, indeed.
Senator Casey. And what is your source for that?
Secretary Mnuchin. Yes, we are happy to give you the
sources. I have it from our Office of Economic Policy. This is
all based on third-party data that I believe is put out with
the Commerce Department.
But we are happy to give you the exact data and the
sourcing of it.
Senator Casey. Okay; we look forward to seeing that it.
Also, going back to one of the 2018 hearings--to be exact,
February 14, 2018--I asked you the following. I said last May,
referring to 2017, you told the committee, quote--and I'm now
quoting you--``over 70 percent of the cost of corporate taxes
are actually born by the worker.'' And then my question was, if
companies are not keeping to that, instead are giving the
majority of the value of the tax cut to shareholders and
executives through dividends and buybacks, do you think we
should have a mechanism in place for making sure that
employees--that wage earners--see the gains from the tax code?
That was my question to you in 2018.
Your response at that time was, quote, ``I commented on
this earlier, the similar question. And again, we do stand by
what we believe. There are many economists that support that
over 70 percent.'' You went on to say, ``We do stand behind
that. We think we are going to see that. We think we are going
to see wage increases.''
Do you still stand behind those statements about 70
percent?
Secretary Mnuchin. I do, over a broad basis. Okay, I do
think that is the case. Now I know the comment that you are
going to say is, well there have been big stock buybacks.
Senator Casey. What do you mean by ``broad basis?''
Secretary Mnuchin. If we look over the economy, over a
large set of large companies and small companies, that is what
that statistic was based on.
Senator Casey. Are you saying that we have seen or we will
see 70 percent of the gains going to workers?
Secretary Mnuchin. What I am saying is that, over time, the
workers bear 70 percent of the cost of taxes. So, yes, I stand
behind, over the 10-year scoring period, that that is our view.
Senator Casey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Cortez Masto?
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, welcome. I want to jump to another subject.
I am concerned about an unpublished IRS decision that is
blocking the development of affordable housing for veterans in
my State. For years, the Low-Income Housing Tax Credits and
private activity bonds were effectively used together to build
affordable housing, including projects that serve veterans and
other special needs populations.
Recently, however, the IRS has informally interpreted how
the general public use criteria are applied to private activity
bonds.
[Pause.]
Secretary Mnuchin. We are working with the Finance staff,
and we are----
Senator Cortez Masto. I have not asked a question.
Secretary Mnuchin. I am sorry. I apologize.
Senator Cortez Masto. I was just waiting for you to get
your answer, or question, or take care of whatever you needed
to.
In the misinterpretation of the statue and congressional
intent, the IRS has decided that private activity bonds can no
longer be used for veteran housing projects. And as a result,
ongoing projects have been halted and the ability of veteran
housing facilities to renovate or expand will be significantly
impaired in my State.
So can you tell me, when did the IRS make the decision to
reinterpret the general public use criteria as applied to
private activity bonds? And what was the justification for the
change?
Secretary Mnuchin. I am concerned about the impact,
particularly on our veterans. We have been working with the
Finance staff. We will also work with your office. We are
trying to resolve this issue so that it can be used, and so
that veteran housing is not impacted. So we share your concern.
Senator Cortez Masto. So then, why change it? I guess I
would like more information. That was not enough. I do not
understand the justification for the change.
Secretary Mnuchin. I apologize, but I am not briefed on the
entire issue, given the specifics of this, but I assure you I
will follow up with you next week.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. I appreciate that. Thank
you.
Another subject as important for me--and I know you are
aware of this--is the high student loans that we have in this
country. There are more than 40 million Americans with student
loan debt. This outstanding debt of $1.5 trillion is stressful
for families. It is a drag on our economy.
And the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has a position
which is called the Private Education Student Loan Ombudsman.
That ombudsman is designated by the Treasury Department, is my
understanding. And I understand the previous gentleman who was
there left the Bureau because he had concerns that it had
abandoned students. It was no longer enforcing the law. I would
like to include his letter of resignation in the hearing
record.
[The letter appears in the appendix on p. 31.]
Senator Cortez Masto. I am curious: have you read that
letter, and do you agree with his concerns, or are you aware of
what is happening here?
Secretary Mnuchin. I have read the letter. I am aware of
the concerns. We do not necessarily agree with the concerns. I
have had my legal department review it internally, and we are
working to replace that position.
Again, our responsibility is to effectively designate the
person, and that person has the responsibility to carry it out.
But it is something that is an important position that will be
dealt with.
Senator Cortez Masto. And do you have a time frame of when
you are going to fill that position?
Secretary Mnuchin. Very soon.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
And is that individual going to be committed to ensuring
that students--protecting student loan borrowers from servicing
errors, like miscalculated payments?
Secretary Mnuchin. I would say that person, that will be
part of the responsibility. Again, that is an important issue
that that person will have to review. Ultimately, we need to
make sure that the servicers are properly enforcing their
responsibilities.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
The third subject I want to jump to is U.S. debt. Is it not
true that the U.S. national debt is more than $25 trillion
dollars?
Secretary Mnuchin. No; it is less than $25 trillion.
Senator Cortez Masto. So I am looking at the U.S. debt
world clock. That is not accurate?
Secretary Mnuchin. I do not believe that is the exact
number.
Senator Cortez Masto. All right. So what is our national
debt, then, if that is not the case?
Secretary Mnuchin. Well, we will get back to you on the
exact number.
Senator Cortez Masto. You do not know, sitting right here,
what our national debt is as a Treasury Secretary?
[No response.]
Senator Cortez Masto. Well, I can tell you it is over $20
trillion.
Secretary Mnuchin. It is more like $22 trillion than 25.
Just to be clear, I was trying to get the exact number for you.
I was aware of----
Senator Cortez Masto. All right, semantics. It is $22
trillion. Thank you.
And is it not true that the administration's tax bill
raised the debt by $1 trillion?
Secretary Mnuchin. No, that is not true.
Senator Cortez Masto. Then what did it raise----
Secretary Mnuchin. I would be happy to go through the math
for you. So the tax bill scored at $1.5 trillion on a static
basis. You take off 250. That is the difference between
baseline and policy as a result of expensing. That gets you
down to 1.25 trillion. As a result of last year's growth, we
have already accounted for about 400. So the current cost is
825, and with about 35 basis points of growth over the 9 years,
it will pay for itself.
So we do not believe that it will add to the----
Senator Cortez Masto. That is at 3-percent growth?
Secretary Mnuchin. No; what I am saying is, all you need is
an additional----
Senator Cortez Masto. You said ``basis points of growth
over 9 years.'' What basis points are you looking at?
Secretary Mnuchin. The breakpoint is about 2.55. We believe
that we will get 3 percent. At 3 percent, it pays down the
debt.
Senator Cortez Masto. So it is just under $1 trillion right
now.
Secretary Mnuchin. Again, no; it is $825 billion assuming
zero growth. Okay, if you assume----
Senator Cortez Masto. So when you say it is $825 billion
right now----
Secretary Mnuchin. Again, just to be clear, the way this
was scored was on a static basis at 1.5 trillion. Okay, all
along we said that it would be positive because we thought
there would be over 75 basis points of additional growth, and
we would raise an additional trillion dollars.
What I am saying to you is that the cost has been reduced
already as a result of 1 year of growth, and if we hit 2.55
percent growth--that is roughly the break-even for paying for
itself. So we firmly believe not only will this pay for itself,
but it will pay down debt.
Senator Cortez Masto. I notice I have run out of time. So
thank you very much.
The Chairman. Senator Roberts?
Senator Roberts. Thank you, Senator.
I want to talk a little bit about agriculture. And then I
have some very quick questions for you.
I want to know that tax reform included much-needed
incentives for farmers to grow their operations at a time when
we are struggling to stay afloat. I think you know that I am
not a very good fan of tariffs and tariff retaliation and the
rather desperate need for price recovery in farming.
But I want to also say that, because of tax reform, a
family farmer in Dodge City, KS can now immediately write off
larger capital purchases, things like breeding livestock, farm
equipment. Single-purpose structures up to $1 million are
eligible, and the benefit does not start to phase out until the
business reaches $2.5 million in capital purchases.
A dairy farm in Wichita can now invest in an additional
milking machine they need to grow their business. The Act also
created a 20-percent deduction for pass-through businesses. I
have a couple of questions for you on that, since we have heard
a lot of commentary from my friends across the aisle.
Ninety-three percent of the U.S. farms file their taxes as
pass-throughs. This deduction is a very big deal for
agriculture. Some will say this only applies to certain
businesses, and that the rules for those who qualify are too
complicated to the average small business. I just do not think
that is true.
Based on the Joint Committee on Taxation's 2019
projections, over 95 percent of individuals who will take the
pass-through deduction will fall below the income eligibility
thresholds. As a result, they do not have to worry about the
section 199A limitations. This is tax relief for farmers that
really provides some incentives to grow their business and hire
more workers.
Now, given where we are with the farm economy, it could not
have been done at a better time. Now we have heard a lot from
my friends here across the aisle with regards to their concern
that too much of the benefit on pass-throughs goes to owners
above the income threshold.
Mr. Secretary, an owner of an S corporation, a
manufacturing business for example, who is above the income
threshold would be subject to wage and investment limitations.
If that business pays no employee wages and has no special
investment in the business, that section 199A deduction would
be exactly zero. Is that not true?
Secretary Mnuchin. That is correct.
Senator Roberts. So this deduction is helping to encourage
the impressive increase in jobs and wage growth that we have
seen since tax reform, as well as the increase in capital
investment. And I think you would agree with that, would you
not, sir?
Secretary Mnuchin. I would agree. Thank you.
Senator Roberts. Lastly, the Democrats--pardon me; I do not
say ``Democrats.'' My friends across the aisle are terribly
concerned about the pass-through deduction, that it is just too
complicated. I have just mentioned that.
Is it not true, Mr. Secretary, that for pass-through
business owners below the income threshold--and according to
JCT, more than 95 percent of the business owners taking the
deduction are below the income threshold--the complexity really
amounts to taking your qualified business income and
multiplying it by 20 percent. Is that not correct?
Secretary Mnuchin. That is correct.
Senator Roberts. Now, the budget proposes legislation
enabling additional funding for new and continuing investments
to expand and strengthen tax enforcement. Now, I have been on
this committee for quite a while. That does not excite me too
much, given the past history of what we have had to investigate
and get into.
According to the budget, however, spending $15 billion will
generate $47 billion in new revenue. How?
Secretary Mnuchin. Well, this has to do with the tax gap.
It has to do with better technology and having enforcement. So
that is the idea.
Senator Roberts. It is my understanding that this
represents a much larger investment in--regarding the question
that Senator Lankford had just a while ago on computer
technology, is that not correct?
Secretary Mnuchin. That is true.
Senator Roberts. Well, if you are investing $15 billion and
you produce $47 billion in revenue, hopefully, that is a good
thing.
Where are we with China on trade?
Secretary Mnuchin. We are in active discussions with China.
I have had two conference calls recently with Ambassador
Lighthizer and our counterpart, Vice-Premier Liu He. We had a
discussion as recently as last night.
I think you know we are working on a very extensive
document that covers very important issues, structural changes,
forced technology, IP protection. It is a complicated issue. We
are working diligently to try to get this done as quickly as we
can.
Senator Roberts. I appreciate that. I know you are aware of
this, but all regions, all crops, farmers, ranchers, growers,
everybody involved in the food chain, are going through a
difficult time. I would just offer an opinion of mine, and
talking to the Ambassador from Canada and also Mexico, they
would sure think it would be a good idea if we are going to get
NAFTA-2 passed, that we could do something with those
continuing tariffs.
I know in talking to Mr. Lighthizer, sometimes he can be a
stubborn cuss. He will not mind that. I have known him for a
long time. But at least--how do you feel about that?
Secretary Mnuchin. I can assure you that the Ambassador and
I are working very hard on that issue. We had a bunch of people
with the President yesterday. That was brought up.
The idea is, one, we would like to pass the USMCA as
quickly as we can, and as part of that, we would like to reach
a resolution on the steel and aluminum tariffs with Canada and
Mexico. And I can assure you on the agriculture side, I spoke
to the Soybean Growers Association this week. I understand the
importance of agriculture and trade.
Senator Roberts. You can add in corn, wheat, sorghum.
Senator Daines, you want to add in beef, I know that.
Senator Daines. Beef, wheat, and barley, sir.
Senator Roberts. There we go. We can just keep going down
the line.
The Chairman. Senator Cassidy?
Senator Cassidy. Thank you, sir.
A couple of things, and I am sorry. I have been away, so
you may have answered this. But I do not know what your answer
was.
The issues on the guidance on the Opportunity Zones, as to
the pace at which those will come out, you spoke of them,
rightly, as something which is highly anticipated and has the
potential to have a great impact. But the information from the
IRS has been somewhat limited.
You know, for example, how do we liquidate an Opportunity
Zone without disrupting the tax benefit, as one example. Or how
local businesses can meet key tests to become qualified. So
anyway--and it is a time-limited incentive. So any insights as
to when these rules shall be released?
Secretary Mnuchin. I can assure you this is on the top of
our list. We are going through with OIRA right now the review
of various regulations. And we are trying to get things out as
quickly as we can. We realize how important this is to the
communities.
Senator Cassidy. Also, I think one of my colleagues
earlier, I am told, brought up trade-based money laundering. It
is something of intense interest to me in my office.
When we were in Mexico, they pointed out that the USMC does
have new provisions which would allow greater cooperation
between the United States and Mexico to track this.
I do not know what it will require to implement this, but
the cartels are moving $60 billion a year, conservatively, out
of our country. And obviously, this has been highlighted
recently, because the President is using money from the asset
forfeiture fund to help finance the southern border.
Are you familiar with these provisions, and do you have any
sense of how they will begin to be implemented?
Secretary Mnuchin. I am familiar with them, and we are
working closely with ourselves and other departments on how we
will implement them. We look forward to coming up and briefing
you once we make a little bit more progress.
Senator Cassidy. That will be wonderful. And what I do not
know now--and again, if you want to include this in your
briefing--and I have tried to understand. If somebody is moving
assets and our dollars one direction or the other, and there is
an effort to mis-invoice, or double invoice, or false invoice,
how is there a correlation between the dollars that are going
in one direction and the putative goods going in another? I
just have not been able to figure that out, as easy as that
seems.
Obviously money is flowing, but goods may not go. So how do
we know whether or not that is happening?
Secretary Mnuchin. As you have outlined, it is somewhat of
a complicated issue, and we look forward to going through it
with you.
Senator Cassidy. Sounds great. Also, I would like to point
out, just for my colleagues who seem to be bashing the Tax Cuts
and Jobs Act bill and suggesting that benefits have not been
realized by those who are lower-income, I also will put up this
and just point out here the dark blue line is wage growth, and
the wage growth right now is disproportionately among those who
are in the lower half of the income scale. And that is because
of this economy, and this economy is at least in part because
of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act bill.
So this is not pertaining to your testimony or questions to
you, but it does pertain to the public debate as to whether or
not there is a general benefit that comes from a booming
economy. There is a general benefit, and in this economy it is
disproportionately for those who are in the lower end of the
wage scale.
So hospitality and the service industries, for example, are
disproportionately benefiting with 5-percent growth in their
wages. So also just to make that point, again not apropos of
you, but just to echo something you said earlier.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield the balance of my time.
The Chairman. Senator Daines?
Senator Daines. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Secretary
Mnuchin. Thanks for coming up here today.
Since President Trump took the oath of office, Republicans
have delivered lower taxes, fewer regulations, and because of
these policies, our economy is soaring. In fact, on average
Montana families are keeping over $1,000 of their hard-earned
paychecks. And on top of that, many are receiving higher wages.
This is resulting in bigger paychecks for working families.
I would like to first talk about the pass-through
deduction. It is allowing Main Street companies in Montana and
around our country to succeed. As you know, these businesses
employ 66 million workers, which is about 55 percent of the
workforce. The purpose of the TCJA deduction is to help
preserve and to grow these jobs. And I am hearing from small
businesses in Montana it is doing just that.
My question is, would you agree that this deduction for
Main Street businesses is helping to encourage the impressive
increase in jobs and wage growth we are seeing since tax
reform, as well as the increase in capital investment?
Secretary Mnuchin. Yes, I would.
Senator Daines. And now the naysayers of the tax cut bill
contend that it produced nothing more than a sugar high. In the
President's budget, however, you anticipate annual economic
growth of around 3 percent over the next decade. What do you
think the other forecasters are missing about the
sustainability of our soaring economy?
Secretary Mnuchin. Well, I think you know last year when we
predicted 3 percent or higher, everybody else was still in the
low 2s. I think we just have a fundamentally different view of
growth, and in running it through the economy. So we think that
the impact of the tax cuts is just beginning and we will
continue to see more.
Now, let me just make one comment, which is, the U.S. is
growing. The rest of the world is slowing down substantially.
So we are growing, and whether it is Europe, or whether it is
China, they are having an opposite impact.
Senator Daines. Why do you think we are growing and other
places are not?
Secretary Mnuchin. Because we have instituted a combination
of tax cuts, regulatory relief, and redoing our trade agenda.
Senator Daines. In sharp contrast, Mr. Secretary, to the
policies that you and I would support, several of my friends
across the aisle have proposed a so-called Green New Deal,
which includes wiping out all the oil and coal industries that
are critical to Montana jobs, critical to our tax base,
critical to our way of life. And it includes canceling the
private health coverage of 180 million Americans, including
over 500,000 Montanans. To top it off, these proposals would be
financed by tens of trillions of dollars in tax increases.
Could you give a short overview of how these radical
proposals would disrupt and damage our economy?
Secretary Mnuchin. I do not think they disrupt or damage. I
think they destroy. So I do not know how they could possibly be
financed without having the economy just ground to an absolute
halt.
Senator Daines. I want to shift gears and talk a bit about
China. Senator Roberts mentioned it earlier. It was recently
reported the administration is actively seeking to exclude
allies from talks with China.
Do you agree that working with our allies to confront
China's trade abuses could increase pressure on China to make
the structural reforms, the necessary reforms that are needed
to level the playing field, particularly for Montana farmers
and ranchers, the outdoor industry, and other businesses?
Secretary Mnuchin. Well, let me just comment. At the G7, we
are working on WTO reform, which is really a lot of the China
issues, and a lot of the other problems with the WTO. I think
the President is very focused on our bilateral trade with
China, which is very unbalanced, and that is our number one
priority.
Although I can tell you I was in Europe last week and met
with both the finance ministers of France and the UK, and we
have been in communication with them and have their input.
Senator Daines. So one of the industries we are seeing that
has been hurt with retaliatory tariffs is the U.S. polycon
industry. They have been targeted by the Chinese. I would urge
you to prioritize removal of these tariffs to help level the
playing field.
We have a polysilicon manufacturer called REC Silicon in
Butte, a place that creates great jobs. And we need some help
here to get rid of these retaliatory tariffs. I just want to
make sure you are aware of that, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Mnuchin. Thank you.
Senator Daines. Thanks.
The Chairman. Senator Cantwell?
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I join my colleague from Montana in asking for your help
and support, obviously, on the trade issues and trying to open
up markets. And this is a holdover from the last
administration, but nonetheless, it is still a very important
issue to, in my opinion, focus more on, giving the resources to
USTR to fight these cases legally. I am more for lawyering up
than tariffing up.
So anyway, REC is a good example to that point, because it
is 5 or 6 years later, and we are still dealing with the basic
underlying substance.
And I apologize for asking a bunch of related questions,
but I wanted to get your views on them. The new deduction under
199A--you have had an extension, but how can we help our
farmers and fishermen get the information that they need so
that they can file their taxes?
Secretary Mnuchin. This is a very important issue for us,
and we want to make sure--there are obviously a lot of
technical issues, as you said, particularly for farmers. We
hope to get something out very quickly, and we have taken a lot
of input. And if there are specific issues you have, we will
reach out to your office, but we are very focused on this.
Senator Cantwell. Okay; soon meaning what? What would you
say soon is?
Secretary Mnuchin. Within the next month--weeks.
Senator Cantwell. So, okay; thank you.
I just want to get your viewpoints too. Do you think it is
fair that we have business expense deduction for legitimate
businesses, but on a cannabis business, we do not? They are not
allowed to have business expensing.
Secretary Mnuchin. Let me just comment that this is a very
complicated issue that impacts lots of things where there is a
conflict between Federal law and State law. And whether it is
me putting on my IRS hat where we have hundreds of thousands of
dollars of cash coming in, this issue needs to be resolved one
way or another, because there are conflicts, and so many
regulations and rules and everything else.
However it is resolved, you have just described one of
many, many, many complicated issues.
Senator Cantwell. And so you would like to see that
resolved?
Secretary Mnuchin. Again, I just encourage--there are lots
of issues that we cannot give guidance on, or cannot change
from Treasury without dealing with the conflict.
Senator Cantwell. To me it is an injustice that there is a
business that is not treated like other businesses when a State
decides that that is a true business. But we will get on to
other things.
The Low-Income Housing Tax Credit is something we are very
supportive of and want to see continued investment in. My
colleague from New Jersey brought up, and maybe my colleague,
Senator Scott brought up, we definitely are seeing hundreds of
thousands of people paying more taxes in the State of
Washington.
So the notion that corporations are paying less--we are
getting more money from a larger pool of people who are paying
more. I have constituents who are paying more, middle-class
families who are paying more because of those same SALT
deductions that are no longer available. And yet I do not know
that they would relate that growth that you are saying is
occurring and wage growth.
In 2015, we had one quarter with 5.1-percent wage growth,
and in 2016, we had one quarter with 3.1-percent wage growth.
So we have had some wage growth, but I do not know that
everybody is equating the tax bill results to wage growth. I do
not even know if you believe that there is consistency among
economists about what creates wage growth. Do you think there
is?
Secretary Mnuchin. I think different economists have
different views on lots of different things. And let me just
say, I am sympathetic where SALT is having an impact on certain
economies, and we are trying to monitor this carefully.
Senator Cantwell. All I am saying is I think the northwest
has a lot of wage growth. And I think that companies and
employees are doing great jobs at creating products and
services. And that is why I think that they are having some
success in also raising wages, because of the productivity that
is coming and the efficiencies that are coming out of some of
those business models.
So I would just caution us not to equate, just by looking
at the balance sheet of the Federal Government, that all of a
sudden we are achieving all these goals. Personally, I would
like us to see a Federal discussion about what causes wage
growth, at least get people on the same page, because I am not
sure we are all on the same page. And I think we are going to
continue to have this debate.
But from the concerns of people in my State--I hear from
people who work for these companies and who literally are
paying more in taxes. So they think they are creating the
economic opportunity, and now they are paying more in taxes.
And yes, we gave that company a big tax break, and they
might have bought back shares and increased the value of the
company, but it is not necessarily as clean-cut as I think the
administration might think it is.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you. Senator Portman?
Senator Portman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Secretary, I appreciate your being here, and
you're here during a time where we can brag about what we have
accomplished, which is a tax bill that is helping middle-class
families throughout Ohio. A median-income family in Ohio is
getting another 2,000 bucks a year, on average.
Wage growth is finally going up, not just in Ohio, but
across the country. This is something we have all been waiting
for for a long time. In Ohio, it has been about a decade and a
half. The wage growth last month was 3.4 percent, inflation-
adjusted by the way.
So some of the numbers we heard a minute ago were not
inflation-adjusted. And yes, I mean, here are the numbers: 1.7
percent average, real--meaning inflation-adjusted in this
administration, post the tax bill, versus .6 percent during the
Obama administration. That is reality.
And now we are finally seeing wages go up even higher, 3.4
percent last month, the highest in over 10 years. And if you
look at it over your long basis, it is also the highest since
the Great Recession.
So finally, we are getting the kind of wage growth that all
of us have been waiting for. And people working harder, longer
hours have not seen the ability to get ahead. Now they are
saying, yes, finally we are beginning to see the benefits of
good tax policy being spread more broadly.
So I am excited about it, particularly because, if you look
at it, it is the blue collar workers who are getting the
biggest benefit, right? The white collar wages are not going up
quite as fast. So this is exciting.
I have been all around Ohio, as you know, doing these town
hall meetings and talking to our small business community. I
had a roundtable discussion the week before last, and I heard
the same thing I have heard at the other two dozen of them that
I have done, which is every single business around the table is
doing something to invest in their people or in their plant and
equipment.
And to the point earlier about, you know, is this really
going to result in more investment, non-residential fixed
investment, equipment structures, and so on--7.2-percent annual
growth rate in 2018, the highest since 2011.
So this is the tail. This is the consequence of tax reform
over time. Would you agree with that, that seeing the increased
investment is going to be one of the major benefits of the tax
reform?
Secretary Mnuchin. Yes, I would agree with you.
Senator Portman. When you look at the 199A pass-through
issue, I heard earlier some of my colleagues talking about
folks who are above the threshold getting too much of a
benefit. I would make two points. Number one, that is about 4.9
percent of taxpayers. Number two, they only get a deduction
when they do one of two things, right: pay wages or make
investments. Is that not good?
Secretary Mnuchin. That is good.
Senator Portman. And if you look at the wage growth, and
you look at the investment growth, I mean part of it is because
you and we, working together, put together a pretty smart
package on 199A. It is not perfect. Nothing is in this
complicated tax code and complicated world we live in. But this
has enabled us to be able to see higher growth, don't you
think?
Secretary Mnuchin. It has, and I want to personally thank
you for the work that you have done, in particular, on this.
Senator Portman. You and I worked a lot on the
international side--again, very complicated. I will give you a
quote from a group that met in 2015, the International Tax
Working Group. It said that ``tax reforms on the international
side work best with a substantial corporate rate reduction and
broader tax reform for all businesses.'' That was Chuck Schumer
and Rob Portman. We were co-chairs of that task force. That is
exactly what we did.
And you have worked with us on some issues, including the
expense allocations issues under GILTI and other things--and to
try to be sure that we are getting these benefits broadly.
But let me ask you this question. Do you think, as some of
my colleagues have asked when they talk about raising the
corporate rate, if we took the corporate rate back up to, let
us say 28 percent or more, maybe even 35 percent, let us say
even 28 percent, do you think that would result in a new trend
of foreign acquisitions and inversions that we saw happening
before the tax bill?
Secretary Mnuchin. Either that or, again, an additional
slowdown in the economy.
Senator Portman. Yes. I mean, I look at the numbers.
Businesses were being acquired or inverting at a rapid rate,
three times as many businesses being bought by others rather
than the U.S. buying those businesses. And we managed to
reverse that and now have money actually flowing back in.
Two final questions quickly. One is with regard to IRS
reform legislation. You and I have talked about this before. I
know you are generally supportive.
The new Commissioner now being in place and having gotten
through the worst part of the tax season--and soon he will be
through it altogether--do you think it is time for us to push
IRS reform, as we talked about at the end of last year, to be
able to make the agency work even better for taxpayers?
Secretary Mnuchin. I do, and the Commissioner and I would
look forward to coming up and sitting down with you and going
through that.
Senator Portman. I think it would be time. And one of the
things that we talked about and I want to get your view on is
the IRS Oversight Board. It has not worked well.
The administration--and I would say the Obama
administration most recently, but even the Bush
administration--did not embrace it as I had hoped they would.
The idea is that it gives strategic direction to the IRS to
avoid some of the problems we are now seeing at the IRS in
terms of taxpayer service and lack of direction on IP and
investment in technology.
Do you support the idea of an Oversight Board going back to
its original intent?
Secretary Mnuchin. I would like to go through that with you
and kind of weigh the benefits and the issues. Again, there is
a difference between oversight and an advisory. But again, I
would love to come and talk to you, and we could discuss the
benefits and the issues.
Senator Portman. I think it is a matter of establishing a
strategic direction that is consistent for the agency. And I
would like to work with you, and I hope you can give us some
ideas of what kind of expertise you would be looking for on,
perhaps, a board that is more streamlined and more effective.
The other one is retirement security. My time is expired,
so I will just ask you for the record if you could just tell us
what your views are on trying to move forward with a broader
retirement package.
We have RESA that we got so close to passing. We also have
this issue of frozen defined benefit plans. The Retirement
Security Preservation Act deals with that. We have about
420,000 beneficiaries who stand to lose benefits this year
alone if we do not deal with that.
So we would love to hear your thoughts on that at the
appropriate time. If you want to give an answer now if the
chairman will allow you, otherwise I have to yield back my time
that I have already used too much of.
Secretary Mnuchin. I will just comment that retirement
savings is an important issue and we look forward to working
with you on it.
The Chairman. Everybody has asked you the questions that
you are going to get today. You may get questions in writing.
So every member should know that those questions for answer in
writing should be submitted to the Secretary by the close of
business March 28th.
Thank you very much, Secretary Mnuchin.
Secretary Mnuchin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[Whereupon, at 3:03 p.m., the hearing was concluded.]
A P P E N D I X
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
----------
Submitted by Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto,
a U.S. Senator From Nevada
August 27, 2018
The Honorable Mick Mulvaney
Acting Director
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
1700 G Street, NW
Washington, DC 20052
Acting Director Mulvaney:
It is with great regret that I tender my resignation as the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau's Student Loan Ombudsman. It has been the
honor of a lifetime to spend the past seven years working to protect
American consumers; first under Holly Petraeus as the Bureau defended
America's military families from predatory lenders, for-profit
colleges, and other unscrupulous businesses, and most recently leading
the Bureau's work on behalf of the 44 million Americans struggling with
student loan debt. However, after 10 months under your leadership, it
has become clear that consumers no longer have a strong, independent
Consumer Bureau on their side.
Each year, tens of millions of student loan borrowers struggle to stay
afloat. For many, the CFPB has served as a lifeline--cutting through
red tape, demanding systematic reforms when borrowers are harmed, and
serving as the primary financial regulator tasked with holding student
loan companies accountable when they break the law.
The hard work and commitment of the immensely talented Bureau staff has
had a tremendous impact on students and their families. Together, we
returned more than $750 million to harmed student loan borrowers in
communities across the country and halted predatory practices that
targeted millions of people in pursuit of the American Dream.
The challenges of student debt affect borrowers young and old, urban
and rural, in professions ranging from infantrymen to clergymen.
Tackling these challenges should know no ideology or political
persuasion. I had hoped to continue this critical work in partnership
with you and your staff by using our authority under law to stand up
for student loan borrowers trapped in a broken system. Unfortunately,
under your leadership, the Bureau has abandoned the very consumers it
is tasked by Congress with protecting. Instead, you have used the
Bureau to serve the wishes of the most powerful financial companies in
America.
As the Bureau official charged by Congress with overseeing the student
loan market,\1\ I have seen how the current actions being taken by
Bureau leadership are hurting families. In recent months, the Bureau
has made sweeping changes, including:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Section 1035 of the Dodd-Frank Act establishes a Student Loan
Ombudsman at the CFPB to ``provide timely assistance to borrowers,''
``compile and analyze'' borrower complaints, and ``make appropriate
recommendations to the Director [of the CFPB], the Secretary [of the
Treasury], the Secretary of Education, the Committee on Banking,
Housing, and Urban Affairs and the Committee on Health, Education,
Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee on Financial
Services and the Committee on Education and Labor of the House of
Representatives.'' See 12 U.S.C. Sec. 5535.

Undercutting enforcement of the law. It is clear that the
current leadership of the Bureau has abandoned its duty to fairly and
robustly enforce the law. The Bureau's new political leadership has
repeatedly undercut and undermined career CFPB staff working to secure
relief for consumers. These actions will affect millions of student
loan borrowers, including those harmed by the company that dominates
this market. In addition, when the Education Department unilaterally
shut the door to routine CFPB oversight of the largest student loan
companies, the Bureau's current leadership folded to political
pressure. By undermining the Bureau's own authority to oversee the
student loan market, the Bureau has failed borrowers who depend on
independent oversight to halt bad practices and bring accountability to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the student loan industry.

Undermining the Bureau's independence. The current leadership of
the Bureau has made its priorities clear--it will protect the misguided
goals of the Trump Administration to the detriment of student loan
borrowers. For nearly seven years, I was proud to be part of an agency
that served no party and no administration; the Consumer Bureau focused
solely on doing what was right for American consumers. Unfortunately,
that is no longer the case. Recently, senior leadership at the Bureau
blocked efforts to call attention to the ways in which the actions of
this administration will hurt families ripped off by predatory for-
profit schools. Similarly, senior leadership also blocked attempts to
alert the Department of Education to the far-reaching harm borrowers
will face due to the Department's unprecedented and illegal attempts to
preempt state consumer laws and shield student loan companies from
accountability for widespread abuses. At every turn, your political
appointees have silenced warnings by those of us tasked with standing
up for servicemembers and students.

Shielding bad actors from scrutiny. The current leadership of
the Bureau has turned its back on young people and their financial
futures. Where we once found efficient and innovative ways to
collaborate across government to protect consumers, the Bureau is now
content doing the bare minimum for them while simultaneously going
above and beyond to protect the interests of the biggest financial
companies in America. For example, late last year, when new evidence
came to light showing that the nation's largest banks were ripping off
students on campuses across the country by saddling them with legally
dubious account fees, Bureau leadership suppressed the publication of a
report prepared by Bureau staff. When pressed by Congress about this,
you chose to leave students vulnerable to predatory practices and deny
any responsibility to bring this information to light.
American families need an independent Consumer Bureau to look out for
them when lenders push products they know cannot be repaid, when banks
and debt collectors conspire to abuse the courts and force families out
of their homes, and when student loan companies are allowed to drive
millions of Americans to financial ruin with impunity.
In my time at the Bureau I have traveled across the country, meeting
with consumers in over three dozen states, and with military families
from over 100 military units. I have met with dozens of state law
enforcement officials and, more importantly, I have heard directly from
tens of thousands of individual student loan borrowers.
A common thread ties these experiences together--the American Dream
under siege, told through the heart wrenching stories of individuals
caught in a system rigged to favor the most powerful financial
interests. For seven years, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
fought to ensure these families received a fair shake as they strived
for the American Dream.
Sadly, the damage you have done to the Bureau betrays these families
and sacrifices the financial futures of millions of Americans in
communities across the country.
For these reasons, I resign effective September 1, 2018. Although I
will no longer be Student Loan Ombudsman, I remain committed to
fighting on behalf of borrowers who are trapped in a broken student
loan system.
Sincerely,
Seth Frotman
Assistant Director and Student Loan Ombudsman
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
cc:
Hon. Steven Mnuchin, Secretary, U.S. Department of the Treasury
Hon. Betsy DeVos, Secretary, U.S. Department of Education
S enator Mike Crapo, Chairman, Senate Committee on Banking, Housing,
and Urban Affairs
S enator Sherrod Brown, Ranking Member, Senate Committee on Banking,
Housing, and Urban Affairs
S enator Lamar Alexander, Chairman, Senate Committee on Health,
Education, Labor and Pensions
S enator Patty Murray, Ranking Member, Senate Committee on Health,
Education, Labor and Pensions
Representative Jeb Hensarling, Chairman, House Financial Services
Committee
R epresentative Maxine Waters, Ranking Member, House Financial
Services Committee
R epresentative Virginia Foxx, Chairman, House Committee on
Education and the Workforce
R epresentative Bobby Scott, Ranking Member, House Committee on
Education and the Workforce
______
Prepared Statement of Hon. Chuck Grassley,
a U.S. Senator From Iowa
Welcome to this afternoon's hearing. Treasury Secretary Mnuchin is
here to testify about the President's Fiscal Year 2020 budget proposal.
The President's budget includes various proposals to confront a
variety of policy issues, including runaway Federal spending, border
security and immigration enforcement, national defense, the opioid
epidemic, and health-care costs.
The budget envisions receipts averaging 17.3 percent of GDP over a
10-year budget window, slightly above the average of the past 50 years.
It also has outlays averaging 20.0 percent of GDP over 10 years, equal
to the average of the past 50 years.
The budget contains some relatively minor tax proposals and
proposes spending restraint to help achieve budget savings of around
$2.8 trillion over 10 years. Those savings are significant, even if
they come to only a fraction of what some recent proposals from the
other side would cost, such as Medicare-for-All or the Green New Deal.
Those socialist-leaning proposals would easily cost tens of trillions
of dollars over a decade, force Americans out of employer-provided
health insurance that they like, and radically restructure the American
economy. And they'd add tens of trillions to our deficits.
The President's budget represents a first step in our budget
process, where we learn of the President's priorities and proposals. I
can say that I agree that we must remain focused on important goals
like reducing health-care costs, continuing to rebuild the military,
fighting against opioid abuse, and addressing the security and
humanitarian crisis at our southern border.
I also know that this committee is ready to help accomplish some of
the goals in the President's budget, such as tackling issues
surrounding high drug prices and confusing drug pricing.
I will note that the budget is being put forward in the setting of
a robust economy, and an economy that has been strengthening following
enactment of tax reform. The economy and tax reform are benefiting
Americans across the board.
As you mention in your testimony, Secretary Mnuchin, the tax rate
cuts, doubling of the standard deduction, and expanded Child Tax Credit
give real benefits to hardworking American families. And tax reform is
fueling the economy.
During the Trump administration generally, and especially since tax
reform was enacted, economic growth has topped 3 percent, business
investment has been strong, job creation has been robust, real wage
growth has accelerated, and incomes have grown.
In 2018, we saw more job openings than the number of people who are
unemployed, and that signal of a robust labor market has persisted.
Unemployment has been remarkably low, overall and for Hispanic and for
African American workers. And in my State of Iowa, unemployment stands
at a record low 2.4 percent, the lowest rate in the country.
All of those strong economic numbers mean that hardworking
Americans and their families are clearly benefiting from tax reform.
With that, I turn to Ranking Member Wyden for his opening remarks.
______
Prepared Statement of Hon. Steven T. Mnuchin,
Secretary, Department of the Treasury
Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the
committee, it is good to be with you today.
I am pleased to report that President Trump's economic program of
tax cuts, regulatory relief, and improved trade deals is working for
the American people. During 2018, real GDP increased by 3.1 percent
measured from the fourth quarter of 2017 to the fourth quarter of 2018.
This is the highest Q4-to-Q4 growth rate since 2005.
The unemployment rate remains historically low at 3.8 percent, and
earnings rose by over 3 percent in 2018, the highest nominal increase
in a decade. More Americans are entering the workforce because of a
renewed sense of optimism.
The World Economic Forum's most recent competitiveness report
announced that the United States is the number one most competitive
economy in the world, receiving the top ranking for the first time in
10 years. Companies are investing hundreds of billions of dollars in
new and expanding business operations in the United States.
That is in large part because the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA) made
our tax rates competitive, moved us from a worldwide system towards a
territorial system of taxation, and allowed immediate expensing of
capital expenditures. For hardworking families, it also cut rates
across the board, doubled the standard deduction, and expanded the
Child Tax Credit.
I would also like to highlight Opportunity Zones, a key component
of the TCJA. Opportunity Zones will help ensure that more Americans
benefit from our economic expansion and robust job market. They provide
capital gains tax relief to encourage investments in businesses located
in distressed communities. This policy has generated a great deal of
enthusiasm. We are particularly proud of this incentive, because it
will ensure not only that capital is deployed in our country, but that
it is invested in a way that will achieve profound results--by
restoring the promise of prosperity to people and communities.
These measures are fueling growth. Along with our efforts to
provide regulatory relief, in our trade negotiations we are aiming to
break down barriers to markets around the world.
As you know, China has gained many advantages through unfair trade
practices. This administration is committed to rebalancing our trading
relationship in order to level the playing field for hardworking
Americans. We are negotiating with China on structural reforms to open
their economy to our companies and protect America's critical
technology and intellectual property.
The administration is also prioritizing the U.S.-Mexico-Canada
Agreement (USMCA). It is the most comprehensive trade agreement ever
negotiated and will modernize our trading relationships across North
America. The USMCA will create the highest standards ever to protect
intellectual property rights, support small and mid-size businesses,
open markets for agricultural products, and spur manufacturing. I
encourage all members of Congress to support its passage, because it
will have a positive impact for American workers, business owners,
farmers, and families.
In addition to enhancing overall growth prospects, I want to note
the positive impact that the administration's economic agenda will have
on our country's debt and deficits going forward. During the last
administration, analysts predicted that 2-
percent growth was the highest America could achieve, and that it was
the new normal. We have already shown that we can and will do better.
An extra 1 percent of GDP growth per year means trillions of dollars of
additional economic activity and more revenue to the government.
Turning to the budget, the policies and priorities in the
President's Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 budget will continue to foster
stronger economic growth, reduce spending, and create a more
sustainable fiscal outlook for our country by reducing the deficit as a
share of GDP. Of special interest to this committee, the Treasury
portion of the FY 2020 budget includes $290 million for the Business
Systems Modernization account, funding which is foundational for a new
6-year IRS IT modernization plan. Investment in the modernization of
IRS information technology systems and infrastructure will protect the
integrity of our tax system and improve customer service for taxpayers.
I am pleased to continue working with you on policies that will
help to create jobs and increase wages for the American people.
Thank you very much.
______
Questions Submitted for the Record to Hon. Steven T. Mnuchin
Questions Submitted by Hon. Chuck Grassley
Question. Over the course of the Obama administration, debt held by
the public more than doubled, increasing by more than $8 trillion.
Deficits totaled more than nearly $8 trillion in current dollars, with
4 straight years of deficits above $1 trillion, even in years after the
recession ended.
Spending as a share of gross domestic product (GDP) shot up to well
above the historic average. And taxes were increased by well over $1
trillion when Obamacare taxes and the resolution of the fiscal cliff
are taken into account.
If we look ahead, under current law, revenue relative to GDP will
get back to the long-run average, even before temporary tax reform
provisions phase out, according to the non-partisan Congressional
Budget Office (CBO).
But spending relative to GDP is scheduled to continue to rise well
above the long-term average, driven by unsustainable entitlement
spending.
I've felt, for a long time, that we have a spending problem. And,
as CBO has told us for a long time now, entitlement spending is driving
our deficits as growth in entitlement spending continues to outstrip
growth in the economy.
Secretary Mnuchin, with discretionary spending accounting for
around 30 percent of the budget, and mandatory spending accounting for
70 percent, do you think we can stabilize the budget without doing
something about unsustainable mandatory spending growth?
Answer. As Treasury discusses in the 2019 Financial Report for the
U.S. Government, current fiscal policy is unsustainable. With the aging
of the baby boom generation, non-interest spending as a percentage of
GDP is projected to rise from 18.7 percent in 2018 to 21.0 percent in
2029. This increase in spending is primarily due to growth in Medicare,
Medicaid, and Social Security spending. Policy changes that do not
hinder economic growth are essential to realizing a sustainable fiscal
path. For that reason, the President's budget proposes reductions in
non-defense discretionary spending and reforms to Medicaid and
Medicare. Treasury looks forward to working with Congress to identify
and implement meaningful spending modifications, which can include
changes in mandatory spending, that will put the Nation on a
sustainable fiscal path.
45q carbon capture and sequestration
Question. As part of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, Congress
enacted modifications to the section 45Q credit for carbon oxide
sequestration. To be a qualified facility under the amended provision,
construction must begin on the facility before January 1, 2024.
This bipartisan provision is an example of an incentive to reduce
the amount of carbon released into the atmosphere, directing it to
productive uses such as enhanced oil recovery. The provision represents
the sort of common-sense public-
private partnership that is better able to address issues with
pollution than draconian energy policies or vast mandates of power to
the government.
I appreciate all the work the Department of the Treasury is
devoting toward implementation of tax reform and the provisions within
the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018. I want to highlight the importance
of this provision to our sustainable energy future, encourage the
timely release of guidance necessary for stakeholders to use the
provision, and ask you to keep me informed as to your timeline to
prepare that guidance.
Answer. The Treasury Department and the Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) are actively working to solicit stakeholder input on the modified
section 45Q provisions and also provide guidance on the relevant
provisions. Treasury is aware that industry and investors need guidance
for many of these projects to get underway and Treasury is working to
provide the necessary clarity.
low-income housing tax credit
Question. As you noted during the hearing, the Treasury Department
has been in communication with Finance Committee staff regarding a
recent interpretation of the use of Private Activity Bonds (PABs) in
conjunction with the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit that would
apparently prevent the use of PABs for projects that serve veterans and
other populations with special needs.
Internal Revenue Code (IRC) section 42(g)(9) notes that ``A project
does not fail to meet the general public use requirement solely because
of occupancy restrictions or preferences that favor tenants--(A) with
special needs, (B) who are members of a specified group under a Federal
program or State program or policy that supports housing for such a
specified group, or (C) who are involved in artistic or literary
activities.''
Because the 4-percent Low-Income Housing Tax Credit is typically
used for rehabilitation projects financed with PABs, enforcing a public
use requirement on PABs effectively invalidates the IRC provision cited
above and could limit the ability of the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit
to be used for veterans housing.
Although legislation addressing this issue was introduced in the
House during the last Congress, I understand that the Treasury
Department currently has sufficient authority to address this matter.
Please provide the committee with an update on the steps you are taking
to address this issue.
Answer. On April 3, 2019, the Treasury Department and the IRS
released Rev. Proc. 2019-17, which provides favorable public
administrative guidance to address this issue regarding the general
public use requirements for qualified residential rental projects
financed with tax-exempt bonds under section 142(d) of the Internal
Revenue Code (Code). Rev. Proc. 2019-17 coordinates these requirements
with the provisions of Code section 42(g)(9) regarding the
permissibility of certain housing preferences for purposes of the low-
income housing credit. Specifically, this guidance provides that a
qualified residential rental project (as defined in Code section
142(d)) does not fail to meet the general public use requirement
applicable to exempt facilities solely because of occupancy
restrictions or preferences that favor tenants described in Code
section 42(g)(9) (for example, certain housing preferences for military
veterans). Rev. Proc. 2019-17 was published in 2019-17 Internal Revenue
Bulletin, dated April 22, 2019, and can be found at the following
website link: https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/rp-19-17.pdf.
______
Question Submitted by Hon. Pat Roberts
Question. Since China joined the World Trade Organization (WTO),
opening its financial sector to foreign competition and establishing a
level playing field have been important United States objectives. I
have read that China has demonstrated a willingness to open the
financial sector to 100 percent ownership for U.S. companies in 3
years, but did not offer a clear roadmap. What are we doing in the
ongoing negotiations to ensure that U.S. financial institutions will be
allowed access to the Chinese market without ownership or activity
restrictions?
Answer. The administration is working to ensure that U.S. financial
services suppliers, across a full range of sectors including banking,
insurance, securities, and asset management, have full and fair access
to the Chinese market, including China's removal of ownership and
activity restrictions.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. John Thune
Question. Mr. Secretary, as you know, with the European Union's
(EU) failure to reach a consensus on a uniform digital tax proposal, a
number of EU member states have decided to impose their own individual
digital taxes. As currently drafted, most (if not all) of these digital
tax proposals would have a disparate impact on American technology
companies. I believe this disparate impact speaks to the underlying--
true--intent of the taxes, which appear to be nothing more than a money
grab at the expense of U.S. innovators.
Have you reached a conclusion as to whether these discriminatory
proposals would give the United States actionable rights under any of
its existing trade agreements?
Answer. Unfortunately, we are seeing a disturbing trend of some
politicians, especially in Europe, politicizing the complex issue of
seeking genuine fairness in the rules for taxing cross border
transactions. This trend is seen most clearly in so-called Digital
Services Taxes (DSTs), such as that proposed by France. If implemented
unilaterally in various countries, DSTs are likely to:
a.
Hurt consumers in the countries that implement them;
b.
Complicate the environment for seeking global consensus for
new rules in the OECD; and
c.
Stifle innovation and global growth because of inconsistent
and redundant tax obligations around the world.
The United States believes all companies--regardless of nationality
or sector of the economy they operate in--should pay fair rates of
taxation. The United States recognizes that changes in business
practices in the increasingly digitalized, 21st-century global economy
are challenging the global consensus that has existed for many years on
the rules for taxing cross border transactions.
As a result, the United States is leading efforts in the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) seeking
agreement on new international tax rules. In the OECD, the United
States is working with more than 125 countries on a multilateral
solution, seeking to craft a global consensus for new rules that will
ensure all companies pay fair rates of taxation and will also provide
certainty to taxpayers, minimize administrative burdens, and avoid
double taxation.
The United States is fully committed to seeing the multilateral
OECD process succeed. We believe the ongoing work is on an increasingly
positive trajectory and look forward to the G20 endorsing a detailed
OECD work plan by June 2019. This work plan is specifically designed
and intended to deliver a global consensus on new rules by the end of
2020.
Question. The President's fiscal year 2020 budget seeks to improve
clarity in worker classification, and as you may know, I have
introduced legislation that would do just that. My bill, the New
Economy Works to Guarantee Independence and Growth (NEW GIG) Act,
addresses the classification of workers--independent contractors versus
employees--and creates a safe harbor for those who meet a set of
objective tests that would qualify them as an independent contractor,
both for income and employment tax purposes.
Given the importance of this issue to me, to the administration,
and to the on-demand economy, (a) do you agree that more needs to be
done to clarify who is an independent contractor in such network
platform companies, and (b) will you commit to working with me to add
much-needed certainty to our worker classification rules?
Answer. Workers, service recipients, and tax administrators would
benefit from reducing uncertainty about worker classification,
eliminating incentives to misclassify workers, and reducing
opportunities for noncompliance by workers classified as independent
contractors. Your bill shares many common elements with the proposal in
the administration's fiscal year (FY) 2020 budget. Treasury is
committed to working with you and others in Congress to add much-needed
certainty to existing worker classification rules.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Johnny Isakson
Question. Tax reform changed our international tax system to
address the ``stateless'' income issue, which is the same issue that
the European Union's proposed ``digital tax'' claims to target. Would
you agree that it is wrong and punitive for foreign countries to levy a
discriminatory new tax on U.S. firms, especially a tax targeted solely
at large U.S. technology companies?
Answer. Unfortunately, we are seeing a disturbing trend of some
politicians, especially in Europe, politicizing the complex issue of
seeking genuine fairness in the rules for taxing cross border
transactions. This trend is seen most clearly in so-called Digital
Services Taxes, such as that proposed by France. If implemented
unilaterally in various countries, DSTs are likely to:
a.
Hurt consumers in the countries that implement them;
b.
Complicate the environment for seeking global consensus for
new rules in the OECD; and
c.
Stifle innovation and global growth because of inconsistent
and redundant tax obligations around the world.
The United States believes all companies--regardless of nationality
or sector of the economy they operate in--should pay fair rates of
taxation. The United States recognizes that changes in business
practices in the increasingly digitalized, 21st-century global economy
are challenging the global consensus that has existed for many years on
the rules for taxing cross border transactions.
As a result, the United States is leading efforts in the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) seeking
agreement on new international tax rules. In the OECD, the United
States is working with more than 125 countries on a multilateral
solution, seeking to craft a global consensus for new rules that will
ensure all companies pay fair rates of taxation and will also provide
certainty to taxpayers, minimize administrative burdens, and avoid
double taxation.
The United States is fully committed to seeing the multilateral
OECD process succeed. We believe the ongoing work is on an increasingly
positive trajectory and look forward to the G20 endorsing a detailed
OECD work plan by June 2019. This work plan is specifically designed
and intended to deliver a global consensus on new rules by the end of
2020.
Question. What is the administration prepared to do to avoid these
actions by France and other European governments, which will both hurt
the international competitiveness of American companies and also
threaten the U.S. tax base?
Answer. Please refer to answer above.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Tim Scott
Question. I'd like to say that I very much support the President's
deregulatory agenda. Too little attention is paid to the cost
attributed to burdensome regulations and the negative affects these
regulations have on our economy. I was especially pleased that he
extended his deregulatory mission to tax regulations when he issued
Executive Order 13789 though I will say I was a little surprised when I
saw in Treasury only found a total of eight tax regulations as worthy
of further review. I understand that Treasury staff are now fully busy
with implementing tax reform, but this executive order was issued early
2017. Notably, Treasury still has yet to act on the distribution rules
of the Obama-era section 385 regulations. On October 4th of 2017,
Treasury issued its final report in response to EO 13789 in which it
said that it expected that Congress would obviate the need for the
distribution rules through tax reform and would reserve action until
completion of tax reform. On the day that the 385 regulations were
released, then Treasury Secretary Lew stated that the best way to deal
with the issues that the regulations grappled with ``would be to enact
comprehensive business tax reform.'' With that statement, I could not
agree more. The issues that the 385 regulations deal with, debt versus
equity, go to the heart of tax reform. Well, I'm happy to say that we
completed tax reform and I think the powerful measures we took do
obviate the need for those rules. Specifically, we lowered the rate to
2 percent, transitioned to a territorial system, provided for downward
attribution rules, limited interest deductions, and provided for a new
Base Erosion and Anti-Abuse Tax (BEAT). The remaining section 385
regulations should be low-hanging fruit ripe for revocation since their
sole purpose now are to increase cost and freeze out investment in the
United States washing away the economic benefits from tax reform. I'm
proud to say that over 140,000 South Carolinians are employed by
international companies and the foreign direct investment is driving a
manufacturing renaissance in my State as it is across the country.
Therefore, while I was pleased to see Treasury repeal the documentation
requirements of the regulations, it's unfortunate that the more
substantive and burdensome portions of the regulations remain. Can we
count on you to finish what you started as part the President's
deregulatory agenda and finally rescind the remaining portions of the
385 regulations?
Answer. Treasury has consistently worked during this administration
to reduce regulatory burdens on U.S. taxpayers--by reviewing existing
regulations and partnering with Congress to address burdens best
resolved through legislation. On April 21, 2017, the President issued
Executive Order (EO) 13789 (82 FR 19317), a directive designed to
reduce tax regulatory burdens. The order directed the Secretary of the
Treasury to identify significant tax regulations issued on or after
January 1, 2016, that impose an undue financial burden on U.S.
taxpayers, add undue complexity to the Federal tax laws, or exceed the
statutory authority of the IRS. In an interim Report to the President
dated June 22, 2017, Treasury identified eight such regulations,
including the final and temporary regulations issued under section 385
of the Internal Revenue Code (Code). (T.D. 9790; 81 FR 72858). The
section 385 final and temporary regulations address the classification
of related-party debt as debt or equity for U.S. Federal income tax
purposes, and generally consist of two parts: (i) the ``documentation
regulations''; and (ii) the ``distribution regulations.''
As your question acknowledges, in light of taxpayer concerns and
other contemplated further actions, on September 24, 2018, Treasury and
the IRS issued proposed regulations (83 FR 48265) that propose to
remove the final documentation regulations. With respect to the
distribution regulations, Treasury stated in its October 2017 report on
EO 13789 that legislative changes can most effectively address and that
proposing to revoke the existing distribution regulations before the
enactment of fundamental tax reform could make the problems worse.
Accordingly, Treasury focused its efforts on actively working with
Congress on fundamental tax reform to prevent base erosion and fix the
structural deficiencies in the current U.S. tax system. The Tax Cuts
and Jobs Act (TCJA), which was enacted shortly after Treasury released
its report, included many elements that addressed the underlying
conditions that had previously led to inversions and foreign takeovers.
Consistent with Treasury's prior statements on assessing whether
the TCJA obviates the need for the distribution regulations and makes
it possible for these regulations to be revoked, Treasury has been
studying the inter-relationships of the statutory and regulatory
changes from the TCJA with the section 385 distribution regulations.
Part of this analysis includes understanding how taxpayers have
modified their behavior in response to the changes. One such example
includes whether the application of the Global Intangible Low-Taxed
Income (GILTI) system to U.S. parented groups, but not to foreign-
parented groups, creates continuing motivation for inversions and
foreign takeovers, and whether the BEAT and other anti-earnings
stripping provisions fully mitigate those motivations. Treasury is
continuing to assess these factors before reaching a conclusion on
whether or not to revoke the section 385 distribution regulations.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Todd Young
Question. Mr. Secretary, lawmakers from both sides of the aisle--
not to mention supporters of the Opportunity Zones policy in the
private and philanthropic sector--are eager to make sure Opportunity
Zones work in our communities. Today in my home State, the Opportunity
Investment Consortium of Indiana is leading the way by discussing best
practices for successful implementation at the local level.
I believe it is imperative that the IRS collects data on
Opportunity Funds and their investments so we can better understand and
evaluate whether our policy goals are being met. I believe this can be
done in a manner that provides basic transparency without imposing
significant or arbitrary administrative burdens on investors.
Can you speak to how your department is approaching this issue?
Will you commit to implementing a reporting standard for
Opportunity Funds this year as part of the broader rules among process?
Answer. On April 17th, we released the text of a Notice and Request
for Information, which was then published in the Federal Register. This
request sought public comment on the data that would be most valuable
to collect and the least burdensome means of collecting those data. We
would welcome your concrete suggestions in that process.
In addition, the preamble to the second set of Opportunity Zone
regulations, which were published in the Federal Register, foreshadowed
potential changes to the Form 8996 filed by Qualified Opportunity Funds
(Funds). We expect that proposed revisions to the Form 8996 may require
additional information such as (1) the employer identification number
(EIN) of the Zone business owned by a Fund, and (2) the amount invested
by Funds and Zone businesses located in particular Census tracts
designated as qualified Opportunity Zones. Those changes would be
effective for the current tax year.
Question. Mr. Secretary, I appreciate the administration's focus on
the issue of China's economic aggression. For far too long, China has
stolen American intellectual property, forced technology transfer on
our job creators, and dumped goods, undercutting American jobs.
Resolving these illicit trade practices in the near term is a
shared priority of the administration and Congress. However, the
unilateral manner in which the administration initiated this trade
dialogue--through punitive tariffs--has detrimentally impacted scores
of Hoosier job creators. While the administration should be lauded for
bringing China to the table to seriously dialogue about their illicit
activities, the administration must not forget that there is a very
tangible impact that the tariffs are placing on American farmers and
manufacturers.
Can you reassure my Hoosier constituents that the administration is
acutely aware of the impact this trade dispute has on American workers
and families--and that we are working to swiftly conclude this dispute
in short order?
Answer. The administration is committed to working toward a more
fair and reciprocal trade relationship with China, which will benefit
American workers and families in Indiana and across the United States.
In the current negotiations with China, we are seeking to address a
wide range of unfair trade practices, including ones that support non-
market forces. China should have responded to the findings in the
section 301 investigation and the subsequent U.S. tariff actions by
undertaking the necessary economic and policy reforms needed to end its
trade-distortive practices. Instead, China retaliated with tariffs on
U.S. products. Currently, the administration's use of tariffs under
section 301 is providing the United States with an important source of
leverage to bring China to the table to negotiate an enforceable
agreement that will address China's unfair trade practices. The
administration does not have a predetermined timetable for how long it
will be necessary to leave these tariffs in place.
Our negotiations with China stalled in May 2019 following months of
hard work and candid and constructive discussions. By that time, the
parties had reached agreement on a number of important matters. In
wrapping up the final important issues, however, the Chinese moved away
from previously agreed-upon provisions. More recently, China has
indicated a willingness to resume our discussions. For an agreement to
be reached, China must commit to real structural changes and cease its
unfair trade practices, as well as end its retaliatory actions. Any
agreement must also be enforceable.
Question. Mr. Secretary, I occasionally hear the charge that tax
reform created new incentives for U.S.-based companies to invert to a
foreign country. While it's too early to tell from aggregate date--
anecdotally it appears that tax reform has changed the incentives that
drove companies to invert in the past, namely a high corporate tax
rate.
While it appears we've leveled the playing field for U.S.
companies, I'm still hearing from companies located in Indiana
concerned that regulations implementing the TCJA might run counter to
the intent of Congress, particularly as it relates to our international
regime.
Can you speak to how you are approaching regulations that still
need to be finalized and how they might impact decisions on where to
locate business units that are located in the U.S. today?
Are you confident we won't return to the pre tax reform days where
we were reading about inversions of U.S.-based multinationals on a
regular basis?
Answer. Compared to the old international system, the new system
discourages the shifting of U.S. profits overseas, significantly
reduces the disincentive to repatriate foreign profits to the United
States, and reduces the tax rate disparities that motivated U.S.
companies to invert. TCJA reduced the top U.S. statutory corporate tax
rate from 35 percent to 21 percent and created an international tax
system that more closely aligns the tax rate on domestic investment of
U.S. companies with the tax rate on foreign investment of U.S.
companies. Overall, as a result of the TCJA, the incentive to locate
investment in the United States has increased and the incentive to
invert has been greatly reduced. Treasury received comments from some
taxpayers that the statutory allocation of expenses to foreign source
income for purposes of computing the foreign tax credit limitation, and
the resulting limitation on foreign tax credits, can result in higher
than expected residual tax on global intangible low-taxed income.
Proposed regulations treat income and assets related to the section 250
deduction as exempt for expense allocation purposes, which has the
effect of reducing expense allocations to global intangible low taxed
income. As regulations are finalized, Treasury continues to review the
relevant statues, comments, and all other aspects of the issues.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
corporate tax cuts
Question. Mr. Secretary, you repeatedly claim that the 2017
Republican tax bill is going to pay for itself, and even reduce the
level of expected debt. The failure of this policy is obvious when one
looks at corporate tax receipts, as we are already seeing that the
Republican tax bill will not pay for itself. Corporate tax revenues
dropped a massive $90 billion between 2017 and 2018, an over-30 percent
drop.
Of course, determining whether the tax cuts increase revenue is not
based on whether nominal revenues increase year-over-year, inflation
generally leads to nominal revenue growth most years. One better way is
to see how revenues stack up against prior expectation. Under this
analysis, the massive corporate tax cuts will end up losing hundreds of
billions of dollars.
In 2017, before passage of the tax bill, CBO estimated corporate
tax revenues through 2027. They did so again this year (ultimately
projecting through 2029). Among years that were projected both before
the passage of the bill and after it, it becomes clear that the
corporate tax cuts will never pay for themselves. It will be 6 years
before annual corporate revenues reach prior expectations, and even
that is fleeting. Overall, corporate revenues through 2027 are
projected to be down over $500 billion.
CBO Corporate Revenue Projections
(in billions of dollars)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Total
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2017 CBO
projection
340
352
382
377
381
385
396
408
422
439
3,882
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2019 CBO
projection
205
245
274
292
319
358
399
428
427
409
3,356
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Revenue loss
135
107
108
85
62
27
-3
-20
-5
30
526
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Looking at this, how can you continue to claim that the corporate
tax cuts will pay for themselves? If you maintain that corporate
revenues are not going to be $500 billion below prior expectations,
please identify the year you project corporate revenues to reach the
number projected by CBO in its 2017 projection.
Answer. Neither the Secretary, nor Treasury staff, have maintained
that corporate tax cuts alone would cover the cost of the Tax Cuts and
Jobs Act (TCJA). Rather, it has been the consistent position of
Treasury that the TCJA would pay for itself through economic growth
over a 10-year period. The Secretary has consistently maintained that
the tax cuts through TCJA were front-loaded due to provisions such as
immediate expensing, and that calculations and predictions were done
over a 10-year period of time. It was never implied that the TCJA would
pay for itself during the early years of its implementation. Business
provisions in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA), including immediate
expensing, lower tax rates, and deemed repatriation, are currently
incentivizing economic activity and generating growth. The Department
of Treasury's Office of Tax Policy's Analysis of Growth and Revenue
Estimates released on December 11, 2017 correctly projected the 2.9-
percent economic growth in 2018, which exceeded the Congressional
Budget Office's 2.2-percent projection made just before President Trump
took office. This increased rate of growth is expected to continue.
According to this analysis, each 0.35 percent of incremental annual GDP
growth increases tax receipts by roughly $1 trillion over 10 years.
These results indicate that TCJA along with President Trump's other
economic policies will generate enough additional economic growth to
pay for the Joint Committee on Taxation's estimated $1.5 trillion
static cost of the tax bill.
repeal of energy tax incentives
Question. The National Climate Assessment, a report developed by
more than a dozen Federal Government agencies, including the
Departments of Defense, Transportation, Commerce, and Agriculture,
determined:
Climate change creates new risks and exacerbates existing
vulnerabilities in communities across the United States,
presenting growing challenges to human health and safety,
quality of life, and the rate of economic growth. . . . Without
substantial and sustained global mitigation and regional
adaptation efforts, climate change is expected to cause growing
losses to American infrastructure and property and impede the
rate of economic growth over this century.
The assessment stated not only that climate change is an
extraordinary threat to the health and well-being of American citizens,
but also that we need to be doing substantially more to deal with this
growing crisis.
Right now, what few tools we have to combat climate change include
Federal tax credits for renewable energy, including solar and wind.
Congress, on a bipartisan basis, provided longer-term extensions of
these incentives in 2015.
But in the budget proposal, the Trump administration has called for
repealing these incentives--even going so far as to tax utility rebates
customers get for buying more efficient appliances and reducing their
energy consumption.
Mr. Mnuchin, can you explain to me, in light of the National
Climate Assessment, in light of the overwhelming international
consensus on the need for action to combat climate change, why the
Trump administration wants to repeal these incentives that have been
extraordinarily successful in driving investment in clean energy and
creating jobs?
Answer. The tax incentive was instituted to encourage investment in
clean energy. Now that a market has developed, there is no longer a
need to continue the subsidy and have taxpayers subsidize this
industry.
infrastructure policy
Question. Mr. Mnuchin, 2 years ago, many members of the Senate
Finance Committee were excited about the prospect for bipartisan action
on infrastructure. It's been 2 years. Senate Democrats have put forward
a plan. House Democrats have put forward proposals.
The budget contains barely more than a page of platitudes, with few
specifics, and what little is there would actually reduce overall
Federal investment in infrastructure. It's extraordinarily backward to
think paying for a new infrastructure program by gutting existing
infrastructure grant programs will lead to more investment.
Mr. Mnuchin, where is the administration's infrastructure plan?
Would the Trump administration support increasing Federal revenues to
pay for investments in infrastructure? If so, what are some ideas?
Answer. The administration is poised to work with Congress on an
infrastructure plan. The President has stated that he would consider
additional revenues in such a plan. Details should be worked out in
negotiations with Congress.
conservation easement syndication
Question. Secretary Mnuchin, as you know I have been focused on the
issue of syndicated conservation easement tax shelter transactions
since 2016. I am a strong supporter of the conservation easement
program and am concerned that these abusive transactions may threaten
the integrity of the conservation easement program. In December of
2016, the IRS issued Notice 2017-10 which deemed certain syndicated
conservation easement transactions to be potentially abusive listed
transactions, and requires participants and material advisors of such
transactions to make additional disclosures to the IRS. The IRS has,
and continues to, provide the Finance Committee with analysis on these
disclosures. In addition, on March 27th, Senator Grassley and I
initiated a bipartisan investigation into syndicated conservation
easement transactions.
In February of last year, Senators Daines and Stabenow introduced
the Charitable Conservation Easement Program Integrity Act (S. 2436)
which seeks to end to abuse of this critical program. Earlier this year
they reintroduced an updated version of this legislation as S.170. In
response to a question regarding abusive syndicated conservation
easement transactions during last year's budget hearing you stated:
``Treasury is encouraged to hear of congressional interest in
addressing the issue. Treasury is in the process of reviewing H.R. 4459
and S. 2436. While it remains unclear if a legislative solution will
ultimately be needed, Treasury supports the efforts to lay the
groundwork in the case that it is.''
Has Treasury completed its review of this legislation? If so, does
the administration intend to endorse the policy?
Answer. The IRS continues to address the syndicated easement
contributions through review of the disclosures required by Notice
2017-10 and appropriate examinations. At this point no decision has
been made regarding specific legislative proposals; however, Treasury
supports the bipartisan investigation and hopes that it can provide
additional information which can be used to help develop comprehensive
solutions to ensure the integrity of the conservation easement program.
irs staffing
Question. Secretary Mnuchin, on March 26, 2019, the GAO released a
report entitled ``Internal Revenue Service: Strategic Human Capital
Management Is Needed to Address Serious Risks to IRS's Mission.'' The
report found that reductions in IRS enforcement staff have created a
skills gap and affected the IRS's enforcement capabilities. Between
2011 and 2017, enforcement staff declined 27 percent, leading to a 40
percent decline in individual audits. Without a robust enforcement
staff at the IRS, wealthy and well-connected individuals can cheat on
their taxes and escape the consequences.
During your 2017 confirmation hearing, you stated that you were
committed to addressing understaffing issues at the IRS. Yet as the GAO
report shows, staffing shortages and skills gaps are continuing to
prevent the IRS from carrying out its mission. Additionally, the
Treasury's fiscal year 2020 budget request suggests further reducing
the IRS staff by 1,639 employees. What have you done since your
confirmation to improve IRS staffing? Do you plan to implement the
GAO's recommendations, and if not, what is your planned response to the
GAO report?
Answer. Treasury has taken a series of actions to strengthen the
IRS workforce and address the long-term trends highlighted by the
Government Accountability Office (GAO). The Department has also used
existing flexibilities to improve hiring and has sought to restore
streamlined critical pay authority.
First, Treasury has made hiring in enforcement positions a
priority. The latest example of this commitment is our plan to hire
approximately 4,300 additional enforcement personnel at the IRS in FY
2019, including nearly 2,000 revenue officers and revenue agents.
Treasury is also improving IRS staffing by continuing to request
additional human capital resources and better employ existing hiring
authorities in mission critical areas. For example, the IRS is hiring
up to 1,000 positions to assist with tax reform implementation.
Virtually all of these positions were filled by December 2018.
The administration has also proposed additional resources for
enforcement in the FY 2020 budget. For example, the 2020 budget
includes $34 million to expand IRS compliance analytics. These targeted
investments in compliance analytics and technology will allow existing
enforcement personnel to be more productive and build on our existing
efforts. For example, the IRS recently deployed machine learning
techniques that revealed a new form of non-compliance among
partnerships that was not previously known. Similarly, new data
products for employment tax investigations identified 18 cases with an
average estimated tax loss 30-percent greater than traditional methods.
The budget also proposes a $362-million discretionary program integrity
cap adjustment in FY 2020 to fund new and continuing investments in
expanding and improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the IRS's
overall tax enforcement program. Additional adjustments are provided in
future years to fund new initiatives and inflation. These investments
will generate $47.1 billion in new revenue over 10 years and will cost
about $14.5 billion, for net revenue of $32.6 billion.
Treasury agrees with GAO's recommendations and will implement them
to the extent resources are available.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert Menendez
unbanked cannabis industry
Question. Over 300 million Americans in 47 States have access to
some form of State-legalized cannabis product. The National Cannabis
Industry Association estimates that the United States marijuana
industry could generate over $130 billion in Federal tax revenue and
add over one million jobs by 2025 if adult use is legalized in all 50
States. However, as you know, State-legal cannabis businesses mostly
deal only in cash and are overwhelmingly denied banking services,
making their employees and customers become soft targets for crime,
robbery, or assault.
Does the Department have any estimates on the percentage of legal
marijuana-related businesses that are unbanked?
Answer. The Department of the Treasury does not receive or maintain
information on the percentage of State-authorized marijuana-related
businesses that are unbanked. FinCEN, however, has been tracking
Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) filed in response to FinCEN's
Guidance on BSA Expectations Regarding Marijuana-Related Businesses
(FIN-2014-G001). These SARs provide FinCEN with the status of reported
banking relationships with marijuana-related businesses (MRBs). As of
December 31, 2018, Treasury is aware of 551 Depository Institutions
providing services to MRBs.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ FinCEN Marijuana Banking Updates, Frequently Requested FOIA-
Processed Records, https://www.fincen.gov/frequently-requested-foia-
processed-records.
Question. Since cannabis-related businesses are forced to pay their
Federal taxes in cash, do you know how much time and resources are
dedicated by the Department to process paper-filed tax returns as
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
compared to electronically filed tax returns?
Answer. The Department would not be able to provide such an
estimate for
cannabis-related businesses. Generally speaking, all other things being
equal, processing electronically filed returns requires fewer resources
than processing paper-filed returns.
Question. From a fiscal perspective, is it your opinion that the
U.S. would benefit if State-legal cannabis businesses could pay their
fair share of Federal taxes electronically?
Answer. The Department encourages taxpayers to pay their taxes
according to the processes established by the IRS. Whether cannabis-
related businesses should be able to pay their Federal taxes
electronically is a policy question best addressed by the U.S.
Congress.
Question. Are there any discussions of expanding the current FinCEN
guidance?
Answer. The SAR reporting structure set forth in the February 2014
guidance remains in place. FinCEN continues to work closely with law
enforcement and the financial sector to combat illicit finance and will
notify the financial sector and supervisory authorities of any changes
to FinCEN's SAR reporting expectations.
Question. It is well-documented that the Russians evade our
sanctions through simple corporate restructuring. Mr. Secretary, the
Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) has what's referred to as the
50 percent rule, which means that if an entity is owned 50 percent or
more by an sanctioned person, it is automatically treated as
sanctioned. The problem is that Russian oligarchs reportedly
restructure their companies so that their ownership on paper is lower
than 50 percent so they avoid sanctions, retain control of the company,
and continue to profit. Given this reality, I strongly believe that it
is in the interest of US national security to lower the standard from
50 percent to 20 percent or lower in the Russia context. You have the
power to do this through regulation. Will you do so or should the
Senate consider legislation?
Answer. Treasury is very focused on sanctions evasion, including
through the use of ownership restructurings. The 50 percent rule does
not hinder Treasury's ability to target sanctions evasion, including by
designating entities on the basis of control rather than ownership.
Rather, the 50 percent rule reflects longstanding industry practice and
enlists global compliance departments in the effort by instructing them
when to determine property is blocked. The 50 percent rule (set out on
OFAC's webpage https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/
Documents/licensing
_guidance.pdf) establishes that any property (e.g., an entity) in which
a blocked person holds a 50 percent or greater interest is itself
considered blocked, regardless of whether OFAC has added the entity to
OFAC's List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN
List). OFAC's regulations, guidance, and Frequently Asked Questions
make clear that ownership is only one of the bases upon which OFAC can
sanction an entity. For example, if a sanctioned oligarch restructured
a company to own less than a 50-percent ownership interest, OFAC
retains the authority to designate the company for being controlled by
the oligarch or for materially assisting, sponsoring, or providing
financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services
to the oligarch.
Using different ownership thresholds for different OFAC sanctions
programs could result in uncertainty and confusion in the global
compliance community, which, in turn, could undermine the effectiveness
of OFAC sanctions.
Question. Since the April 6th designations of Oleg Deripaska and
others, the Treasury Department has not designated any other Russian
oligarchs for sanctions. When can we expect additional sanctions on
Russian oligarchs who are connected to Putin? How many will you
sanction? Will you coordinate these actions with our allies?
Answer. This administration is aggressively pursuing the wide range
of Russian malign activity, having sanctioned 287 Russia-related
entities and individuals under various sanctions authorities. Of these,
the administration sanctioned 188 entities and individuals under
Ukraine- and/or Russia-related sanctions authorities created or
codified by title II of the Countering America's Adversaries Through
Sanctions Act (CAATSA), including sections 224 and 228. These actions
have included individuals and entities acting for or on behalf of
designated Russian oligarchs. For example, in December 2018, Treasury
designated Victor Boyarkin, a former GRU officer who reports directly
to Deripaska and has led business negotiations on Deripaska's behalf.
Continuing outreach and collaboration with allies is a key component of
the strategy to counter Russia's destabilizing behavior and sends a
strong signal of transatlantic unity to the Kremlin. Treasury worked
closely with allies in the EU and Canada to impose coordinated
sanctions on Russian individuals and entities in March in response to
Russia's continued aggression in Ukraine, specifically for Russia's
attack on Ukrainian naval vessels in the Kerch Strait. Furthermore,
senior Treasury officials have made several trips to European capitals
to urge national authorities to take enforcement actions against
Russian targets designated by Treasury. Although Treasury does not
telegraph sanctions or comment on prospective actions, Treasury is
committed to continue to increasing pressure on Kremlin-
connected oligarchs and preventing them from being able to wield their
influence directly or through proxy actors across the globe.
In addition to employing targeted financial sanctions on those
advancing the Kremlin's destabilizing behavior, Treasury has worked to
harden the anti-money laundering controls in countries with high levels
of exposure to illicit Russian financial activity and taken measures to
safeguard the U.S. financial system from being exploited by corrupt
actors. For example, in February 2018 FinCEN issued a notice of
proposed rule-making pursuant to section 311 of the USA PATRIOT Act
against ABLV Bank, a Latvian bank it found had facilitated significant
Russian-based illicit activity. FinCEN identified ABLV Bank as a
foreign financial institution of primary money laundering concern and
proposed a special measure that would prohibit U.S. financial
institutions from opening or maintaining a correspondent account in the
U.S. on behalf of the bank.
Question. I'm concerned that Treasury is not devoting sufficient
resources to implementing Russia sanctions. How many people do you have
working on Russia sanctions targeting at the Treasury Department? How
many meetings has the National Security Council held with Treasury this
year to discuss Russia sanctions targeting? How does the demand signal
from the White House for sanctions on Russia compare to those on Iran?
Answer. Countering Russia's malign activities is one of the highest
priorities for the administration and the U.S. Department of the
Treasury. Indeed, along with North Korea, Venezuela, and Iran,
Treasury's Russia sanctions program has been among this
administration's most active to date. Treasury will continue to
identify opportunities to use the full range of Russia-related
sanctions authorities to advance U.S. national security and foreign
policy priorities. Treasury will also continue to work with
international partners to maintain transatlantic unity in thwarting
Russian malign behavior. For example, over the past year senior
Treasury officials have made multiple trips to key jurisdictions--such
as Cyprus and Latvia--identified as priorities in combating Russia's
illicit financial networks. This is in addition to several other trips
to Europe to urge allied countries to aggressively enforce U.S. and EU
Russia sanctions programs and increase transatlantic cooperation to
counter Russia's malign influence. This financial diplomacy is a key
component in Treasury's strategy to implement Treasury sanctions
programs.
In the recent FY 19 appropriations passed by Congress, Terrorism
and Financial Intelligence (TFI) Departmental Offices received $159
million, which is approximately $17 million over enacted FY 2018
budget. On top of the budget increase from last year, this represents
an almost 30 percent increase from just 2 years ago. TFI does not
always permanently dedicate specific full-time employees to a single
sanctions program, because TFI administers approximately 30 programs
and often surge resources to meet immediate priorities. Because many of
Treasury's staff have specializations in multiple subjects, in certain
circumstances, staff cover more than one program. Additionally,
Russia's malign activity spans multiple sanctions programs. This
administration has sanctioned Russia-related targets under many other
sanctions programs, including the Cyber, North Korea, Syria, Venezuela,
Transnational Criminal Organizations, Russia Magnitsky, and Global
Magnitsky programs.
Beyond sanctions, Treasury leverages an array of measures to
advance Treasury objectives and counter-threats, including engagement
with the public and private sector, support for partners' actions,
working in multilateral fora, and using other authorities.
Question. Why has Treasury not continued the periodic ``sanctions
maintenance'' packages against Russia that the Obama administration
used to ensure that Russian evasion was checked?
Answer. Treasury has--and has done more. Treasury believes Russia's
malign activities call for a response that is stronger than mere
``maintenance.'' Treasury's Russia sanctions program is among the most
active. In a little over 2 years, this administration has sanctioned
287 Russia-related entities and individuals, including 271 subject to
Treasury actions. The administration carried out over 188 of these
actions under Ukraine- and/or Russia-related sanctions authorities
created or codified by CAATSA, including Sections 224 and 228.
Treasury's sanctions have imposed significant costs on Russia, and
Treasury will continue to use all of its authorities aggressively to
impose sanctions on Russia for its brazen and malign activity,
including targeting and disrupting activities related to sanctions
evasion.
base erosion and anti-abuse tax
Question. I understand that the Department of Treasury is currently
reviewing public comments related to its draft Base Erosion and Anti-
Abuse Tax regulations. Can you provide an update on the expected timing
of the final rule?
Answer. Treasury and IRS are carefully studying public comments
related to the proposed BEAT regulations. Final regulations are
expected to be released in early fall 2019.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto
irs determination that veterans or special needs housing ineligible for
private activity bonds
Question. Affordable housing providers have used Private Activity
Bonds (26 U.S.C. 142) to build homes for veterans, people with AIDS,
and other special needs populations.
How will the Treasury Department reverse the recent IRS
interpretation so that ``General Public Use'' will once again include
projects that provide housing to low-income veterans and other special
needs populations?
Who is leading this effort at the IRS and at Treasury?
What discussions have you had with officials at HUD and USDA? What
were there views and concerns, if any?
Answer. See answer to Chairman Grassley's question #3 (reproduced
below).
student loan ombudsman at cfpb
Question. On April 3, 2019, the Treasury Department and the IRS
released Rev. Proc. 2019-17, which provides favorable public
administrative guidance to address this issue regarding the general
public use requirements for qualified residential rental projects
financed with tax-exempt bonds under section 142(d) of the Internal
Revenue Code (Code). Rev. Proc. 2019-17 coordinates these requirements
with the provisions of Code section 42(g)(9) regarding the
permissibility of certain housing preferences for purposes of the low-
income housing credit. Specifically, this guidance provides that a
qualified residential rental project (as defined in Code section
142(d)) does not fail to meet the general public use requirement
applicable to exempt facilities solely because of occupancy
restrictions or preferences that favor tenants described in Code
section 42(g)(9) (for example, certain housing preferences for military
veterans). Rev. Proc. 2019-17 will appear in 2019-17 Internal Revenue
Bulletin, dated April 22, 2019, and can be found at the following
website link: https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/rp-19-17.pdf.
student loan ombudsman at cfpb
Question. Will you meet with the former CFPB Student Loan Ombudsman
Seth Frotman to hear his concerns and recommendations?
Answer. The Dodd Frank Act requires that the Secretary, in
consultation with the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection (CFPB)
Director, designate a Private Education Loan Ombudsman within the
Bureau. Treasury approves the selection of an Ombudsman after an
appropriate candidate emerges through the civil service process
employed by the CFPB. Treasury has no operational authority over the
Ombudsman.
Question. What criteria will you require in your proposed candidate
to ensure the Ombudsman has a history and commitment to protect
borrowers from service errors such as miscalculated payments or
preventing permitted lower payments?
Answer. On May 5, the CFPB posted the Private Education Loan
Ombudsman position on its website and on USAJOBS. The position
description is available from CFPB. As with any position, Treasury and
CFPB evaluated candidates against the knowledge, skills, and abilities
set forth in the position description. On August 16, 2019, Robert G.
Cameron was appointed to the position of Ombudsman.
tax evasion
Question. What is the IRS doing to reduce tax evasion?
Answer. The IRS is committed to reducing the tax gap and is taking
several actions to reduce evasion. These efforts revolve around the
hiring of an additional 4,300 personnel for exam and collection,
deploying new technologies to detect and deter evasion, tapping into
new data sources with analytics, issuing guidance, undertaking targeted
compliance campaigns, authorized information sharing with government
partners, supporting the Department of Justice Tax Division, and
highlighting priority enforcement actions for the public. The IRS is
also committed to promoting voluntary compliance through proactive
outreach and education as well as quality customer service.
Question. What additional resources does the IRS need to punish tax
evasion?
Answer. Enacting the President's budget will allow the IRS to
better address tax evasion. The budget includes funding increases for
enforcement personnel, increases for enabling technology, and new
authorities--including authority to regulate paid return preparers and
new information return reporting requirements--that will make it easier
for the IRS to detect, deter, and address evasion.
Question. What penalties are assessed on firms that market illegal
tax shelters?
Answer. The Internal Revenue Code penalties directed at the
marketing of abusive tax shelters, also known as abusive tax avoidance
transactions, are (1) section 6700, Promoting abusive tax shelters; (2)
section 6701, Penalties for aiding and abetting understatement of tax
liability; (3) section 6707, Failure to furnish information regarding
reportable transactions; and (4) section 6708, Failure to maintain list
of advisees with respect to reportable transactions.
In addition to these penalties, injunctions are available under
sections 7407 and 7408 via civil actions in district courts. Section
7408 is most directed against the promotion of abusive tax avoidance
transactions because it allows for an injunction when a person has
taken actions subject to penalty under sections 6700, 6701, 6707 or
6708. In addition, section 7407 provides for an injunction against
return preparers who have engaged in specified conduct, including
conduct subject to penalty under section 6694 and any fraudulent or
deceptive conduct which substantially interferes with the proper
administration of the Internal Revenue laws. Ultimately, the court may
enjoin the person from acting as a tax return preparer.
Question. What tax benefits are available for transactions with no
economic substance, for example, a U.S. citizen who sells his U.S. home
to a foreign company he controls and then pays them rent on his home?
Answer. In general, a transaction that lacks economic substance may
be recharacterized or disregarded by the IRS to deny the Federal income
tax benefits claimed by the taxpayers. Transactions engaged in by all
taxpayers, not just individuals but also entities like partnerships and
corporations, may be challenged by the IRS and recharacterized to the
extent they lack economic substance. The codified economic substance
provisions in section 7701(o) apply to transactions entered into after
March 30, 2010, and provide that in applying the economic substance
doctrine, a transaction will have economic substance only if (A) the
transaction changes in a meaningful way (apart from Federal income tax
effects) the taxpayer's economic position; and (B) the taxpayer has a
substantial purpose (apart from Federal income tax effects) for
entering into such transaction. See 26 U.S.C. 7701(o)(1). In addition,
under section 6662(b)(6), significant penalties apply to transactions
that are found to lack economic substance within the meaning of section
7701(o)(1), which are increased if the position is not disclosed to the
IRS on an income tax return. See 26 U.S.C. 6662(i).
In addition, U.S. individuals may utilize foreign entities
(corporations, trusts and foundations) and chains of entities (e.g., a
foreign trust owning a foreign corporation), and nominees to conceal
their beneficial ownership of property, such as financial assets,
entities, and real property, while retaining control and enjoyment of
the property. U.S. individual taxpayers may use foreign entities to
hold foreign accounts or assets for their benefit in order to keep such
accounts or assets hidden from interested persons, such as creditors,
law enforcement, and tax authorities like the IRS.
Question. What steps has Treasury taken to cut off access to U.S.
financial markets for tax and financial professionals that facilitated
offshore tax abuses?
Answer. The Office of Professional Responsibility (OPR) supports
the Treasury Department's strategy to enhance enforcement of the tax
law by ensuring that tax professionals (including attorneys, certified
public accountants, enrolled agents, enrolled actuaries, enrolled
retirement plan agents, appraisers, and unenrolled/
unlicensed return preparers) adhere to tax practice standards and
follow the law. The OPR is the governing body responsible for
interpreting and applying the regulations governing practice before the
IRS, which are set out in title 31, Code of Federal Regulations,
subtitle A, Part 10, and which are released as Treasury Department
Circular No. 230. The regulations prescribe the duties, obligations,
and restrictions relating to such practice and prescribe the
disciplinary sanctions for violating the regulations. The OPR has
exclusive responsibility for practitioner conduct and discipline,
including instituting disciplinary proceedings and pursuing sanctions.
The OPR has the authority to prescribe, among others, the following
disciplinary sanctions for violation of the applicable standards: (i)
disbarment from practice before the IRS for a minimum period of 5
years; (ii) suspension from practice before the IRS; and (iii) censure
in practice before the IRS.
An IRS employee who believes a practitioner has violated any
provision in Circular 230 is required to make a written report to the
OPR. A mandatory referral must be made to the OPR when the following
penalties or sanctions are asserted against a practitioner: (i)
understatement of taxpayer's liability by tax return preparer due to
willful or reckless conduct (section 6694(b)); (ii) aiding and abetting
understatement of a tax liability (section 6701); (iii) promotion of
abusive tax shelters (section 6700); (iv) actions to enjoin tax return
preparers for engaging in unlawful conduct (section 7407); and (v)
actions to enjoin specified conduct related to tax shelters and
reportable transactions (section 7408).
Question. Are foreign financial firms sending staff of private
banks into the USA to recruit and service U.S. clients participating in
offshore tax evasion schemes? How big of a problem is this?
Answer. Based on prior IRS enforcement and Department of Justice-
Tax Division (DOJ-Tax) prosecutions, it is clear that foreign firms
were sending staff into the United States to recruit and service U.S.
taxpayer clients, particularly in the time period extending from
approximately 2000 to 2010.
As a result of IRS-Criminal Investigation enforcement work within
the international banking arena, DOJ-Tax announced the Swiss Bank
Program (SBP) in August 2013, to provide a path for Swiss banks to
resolve potential criminal liabilities in the United States. As a
result of the SBP, DOJ-Tax has finalized Non-Prosecution Agreements
(NPA) with 81 Swiss financial institutions, some of which provided
information indicating bank personnel traveled into the U.S. for client
meetings.
Question. Are there international financial firms opening accounts
in the name of shell entities, concealing money transfers, ignoring
disclosure obligations, thwarting subpoena requests and extradition
requests to punish tax evaders in the U.S.? If so, how many and what is
Treasury doing about this?
Answer. The IRS frequently observes cases in which shell entities
formed in the U.S. and in foreign countries are used to conceal
beneficial ownership for the purpose of avoiding U.S. tax reporting
requirements. Recent investigations have revealed an increase in
foreign financial firms and ``professional enablers'' assisting U.S.
persons in the concealment of offshore assets and transactions.
Question. Please give me examples of where the U.S. Treasury is
working with foreign allies to prosecute financial corruption in other
nations. Corruption is in the end a problem of criminal law. How can
Treasury help make criminal law regarding financial corruption from
heads of state work in a multi-jurisdictional environment?
Answer. Treasury, through IRS-Criminal Investigation (IRS-CI), is
involved in several international collaborations with foreign partners
to combat financial corruption.
For example, IRS-CI was instrumental in the investigation of
misappropriation of funds from the 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB),
where $4.5 billion was allegedly diverted out of the Malayan sovereign
wealth fund by its officials, their relatives, and other associates.
The funds were reportedly laundered through a series of shell companies
in the U.S. and abroad. IRS-CI worked with international law
enforcement partners to successfully trace the flow of funds through
multiple jurisdictions and through a web of shell companies.
Question. In 2017, and 2018 if available, what percent of the
profits of U.S. corporations were in tax-haven countries? These are
countries where the firm has few staff or employees, no physical
presence, or any real economic presence.
Answer. There is not a universally agreed upon list of a tax-haven
countries, but many scholars consider countries with very low tax rates
to be tax havens. While data for 2018 and 2017 are not available yet,
the IRS's Statistics of Income division has published information on
profits and income tax of large U.S. multinational corporations for tax
year 2016 by jurisdiction. In particular, tax data in Table 3:
Country-by-Country report (https://www.irs.gov/statistics/soi-tax-
stats-country-by-country-report) shows the effective tax rate of a
multinational enterprise group by tax jurisdiction.
Question. Should corporate income tax be imposed where the value is
created?
Answer. Income subject to tax within a multinational enterprise is
determined in part based on the prices charged between related parties.
The U.S. continues to be a strong advocate for the ``arm's length
standard'' used in determining those prices. Recognizing that there is
growing international dissatisfaction with these existing profit
allocation rules, and in consideration of a view these rules may not be
fit-for-purpose in a modern economy, the U.S. is willing to consider
alternatives that would provide more certainty and stability to the
international tax system.
our nation's housing finance system
Question. How would Treasury experts structure the government's
role in our housing finance system to increase access to homes
affordable to families earning less than $40,000 a year? What would
your housing finance experts recommend as an approach to increase the
supply of rental homes, manufactured homes and home ownership to
families who cannot afford to pay more than a $900 a month for housing?
In Nevada, much of the only available housing available in rural
areas is manufactured homes. What recommendations will you make to
ensure manufactured home buyers have access to affordable financing
that sustains their homeownership choice?
How will your proposed plan ensure that home buyers in rural areas
benefit from national pricing rather than pay higher fees and interest
rates due to fewer financial firms serving their counties?
How will your plan increase the percentage of African American,
Latino, Asian Pacific American and Native American home buyers who are
able to sustain homeownership?
Please identify which housing and consumer groups your staff has
met with to discuss changes to our housing finance system?
Answer. On March 27th, President Trump signed a Presidential
Memorandum directing Treasury and the Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) to each develop a housing reform plan. Treasury's
housing reform plan must make recommendations for administrative and
legislative reforms to achieve the following housing reform goals: (a)
ending the conservatorships of the Government-Sponsored Enterprises
(GSEs) upon the completion of specified reforms; (b) facilitating
competition in the housing finance market; (c) establishing regulation
of the GSEs that safeguards their safety and soundness and minimizes
the risks they pose to the financial stability of the United States;
and (d) providing that the Federal Government is properly compensated
for any explicit or implicit support it provides to the GSEs or the
secondary housing finance market.
Treasury is in the process of preparing its housing reform plan,
and as part of that process it continues to engage with stakeholders
and other interested parties to identify issues and challenges facing
the housing finance market. As required by the Presidential Memorandum,
Treasury's housing reform plan will propose reforms that, among other
specific objectives, define the GSEs' role in promoting affordable
housing without duplicating support provided by the Federal Housing
administration or other Federal programs.
Treasury looks forward to working with the Federal Housing Finance
Agency, HUD, Congress, and other stakeholders to address the need for
comprehensive housing finance reform as laid out in the Presidential
Memorandum.
killing myra
Question. I'm disappointed that the Treasury Department killed the
myRA program. Half of workers do not have access to a retirement
account at work. The national savings rate is going down.
How does the Treasury Department plan to help more people save for
retirement?
Answer. With respect to its retirement agenda, Treasury is
prioritizing issuing guidance in response to EO 13847, Strengthening
Retirement Security in America. The EO states it is the policy of the
Federal Government to expand access to workplace retirement plans for
American workers and notes that regulatory burdens and complexity can
be costly and discourage employers, especially small businesses, from
offering workplace retirement plans to their employees. The EO also
states that outdated distribution mandates may reduce the effectiveness
of plans, requiring retirees to take larger than necessary withdrawals
and possibly leaving them with insufficient retirement saving in later
years. To address these issues, the EO directed Treasury to consider
issuing guidance, and Treasury is considering issuing guidance: (a)
regarding the circumstances in which a multiple employer plan may
satisfy the tax qualification requirements of the Code, including if
one or more of the participating employers fails to take action to
satisfy those requirements, given that (i) these plans provide an
efficient way to reduce administrative costs of establishing and
maintaining retirement plans and (ii) providing clear guidance on these
issues should make the plans more attractive, especially among small
employers; and (b) to update the life expectancy tables in regulations
on required minimum distribution from retirement plans and individual
retirement arrangements to reflect current mortality data.
public monthly housing scorecard
Question. For 90 months, HUD and Treasury released a Monthly
Housing Scorecard providing information on the health of the Nation's
housing markets. It was insightful, expansive and public.
When will Treasury and HUD resume jointly producing the Monthly
Housing Scorecard?
Answer. Treasury will consider your request.
financial services for cannabis
Question. As you may be aware, the State of Nevada legalized
recreational use of cannabis in 2016. While the cannabis industry in
the State, and across much of our Nation, is thriving, I am troubled by
the public safety concerns presented by a lack of financial services
for cannabis and cannabis affiliated businesses.
Does the Department have estimates on the number of legal
marijuana-related businesses that are unbanked? If so, please provide
the number.
Answer. The Department of the Treasury does not receive or maintain
information on the percentage of State-authorized marijuana-related
businesses that are unbanked. FinCEN, however, has been tracking
Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) filed in response to FinCEN's
Guidance on Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) Expectations Regarding Marijuana-
Related Businesses (FIN-2014-G001). These SARs provide FinCEN with the
status of reported banking relationships with marijuana-related
businesses (MRBs). As of December 31, 2018, Treasury is aware of 551
Depository Institutions providing services to MRBs.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ FinCEN Marijuana Banking Updates, Frequently Requested FOIA-
Processed Records, https://www.fincen.gov/frequently-requested-foia-
processed-records.
Question. Does the Department have estimates on how many
individuals who work for legal cannabis-related businesses are
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
unbanked? If so, please provide the number.
Answer. The Department has not prepared an estimate of how many
individuals work for State authorized MRBs, nor how many are unbanked.
Question. Does the Department support additional regulatory clarity
to allow financial institutions to facilitate services for legal
cannabis-related businesses?
Answer. Marijuana remains a controlled substance under U.S. law
(the Controlled Substances Act), making it illegal under Federal law to
manufacture, distribute, or dispense marijuana. Many States have passed
or are considering laws which conflict with Federal law. To the extent
a legislative solution is being sought, it must address these
conflicts. The Department of the Treasury will continue to operate
consistent with Federal law. The Department has not expressed an
opinion on whether financial institutions should bank marijuana-related
businesses or any other services in which banks engage. Treasury has
consistently stated that financial institutions are expected to follow
the law and reasonably manage their anti-money laundering risks.
Treasury's approach remains consistent with the guidance it issued in
2014, setting forth BSA obligations for financial institutions that
provide services to marijuana-related businesses. Private institutions
make their own risk decisions regarding their banking relationships,
which in this case could include marijuana's status as a controlled
substance under U.S. law.
Question. Please provide any actions the Department could take to
facilitate financial services for cannabis-related industries.
Answer. Marijuana remains a controlled substance under U.S. law
(the Controlled Substances Act), making it illegal under Federal law to
manufacture, distribute, or dispense marijuana. Many States have passed
or are considering laws which conflict with Federal law. To the extent
a legislative solution is being sought, it must address these
conflicts. The Department of the Treasury will continue to operate
consistent with Federal law.
missing tax dollars related to cannabis
Question. An audit by the State of Nevada found that the State
missed at least $500,000 in missed tax revenue.
Does the Department know how much Federal tax revenue was collected
from cannabis-related businesses in 2018? If so, please provide the
number.
Does the Department have an estimate of missed Federal tax revenue
by cannabis and cannabis-affiliated businesses? If so, please provide
the estimate.
Answer. The Department has no information on, nor any estimates of,
Federal tax revenue collected or not collected specifically from
cannabis-related businesses in 2018 or any other year. The Department
does not track this information.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert P. Casey, Jr.
Question. Secretary Mnuchin, were you aware, prior to enactment of
the TCJA, that 66 percent of the benefit of the legislation's pass-
through deduction would go to the wealthiest 5 percent of eligible
taxpayers?
Answer. The pass-through deduction provided a much needed tax
relief for the country's small businesses. Additionally, the majority
of the beneficiaries of the pass-through deduction are in the bottom
four quintiles of the income distribution. As a result of the tax cut,
small business optimism soared and strong economic growth followed. The
solid economic growth the U.S. has experienced since the enactment of
the TCJA has led to higher compensation and more employment
opportunities for American workers, providing financial benefits for
middle- and lower-
income families beyond what is captured in conventional tax
distribution analysis.
Question. Were you aware, prior to the enactment of the TCJA, that
over 50 million households making under $100,000 a year would see a tax
increase or a tax cut of less than $9 a month?
Answer. When working closely with colleagues in Congress in
designing tax reform, many ways to put money in workers' pockets were
considered. In addition to providing tax cuts for the majority of
families, the TCJA was projected, and has worked, to incentivize
economic activity and thereby boost GDP. Most importantly, the
resulting wage and job growth since the passage of the TCJA has
increased the take-home pay and improved the well-being of the
country's middle- and lower-
income families.
Question. Were you aware, prior to its enactment, that the TCJA
would make the U.S. tax system less progressive?
Answer. As stated in the responses above, prior to its enactment,
it was expected the TJCA would boost U.S. economy and increase take-
home pay for working families. This growth effect is generally not
captured in the tax distribution analysis.
According to the Joint Committee on Taxation (JCT),\3\ the TCJA
will provide a total tax cut of $259 billion in 2019, benefiting, on
average, families across all income levels. While the majority of
families will see their tax liability decline, 3.8 percent of families
are projected to have a tax increase of more than $500. Of all income
categories, the top-income families--those with economic income of $1
million or more--will have the highest percentage (13.8) with tax
increases of more than $500. Moreover, the share of Federal taxes paid
by these highest earners will increase from 19.3 percent to 19.8
percent in 2019 due to the TCJA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.jct.gov/publications.html?func=startdown&id=5173.
Question. Were you aware, prior to the enactment of the TCJA, that
the tax legislation will allow corporations to exempt more income from
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
US tax when they build a new factory overseas?
Answer. Section 951A (GILTI) exempts from taxation a routine return
attributable to certain offshore tangible assets determined based on a
formula (generally, 10 percent of an asset's tax basis). This tax basis
measurement was chosen because it is administrable and avoids disputes.
It is also subject to many exceptions and limitations and is thus not
susceptible to easy generalizations about the tax effect of building
new factories overseas versus in the United States. In certain cases,
overseas investments in new plants and equipment will materially
increase a taxpayer's overall and U.S. tax burdens.
Question. Do you continue to have a financial relationship with
Eddie Lampert--through ESL Investments, Inc., Seritage, or any other
entity? That is, are you invested in any of his firms?
Answer. No.
Question. Prior to the enactment of the TCJA, did you ever discuss
with Mr. Lampert the net operating loss carryforward provision that was
made law through the 2017 tax bill?
Answer. I do not believe that I ever discussed that issue with Mr.
Lampert.
Question. Do you have a personal financial interest in the net
operating loss carryforward provision that was enacted into law through
the 2017 tax bill?
Answer. I do not believe that I have any such personal financial
interest.
______
Submitted by Hon. Sheldon Whitehouse,
a U.S. Senator From Rhode Island
From The Washington Post
Larry Kudlow's Claim That ``We Have Virtually Paid For'' Trump's Tax
Cut
By Salvador Rizzo
Judy Woodruff, PBS: ``You are hanging a lot of this on these tax cuts,
but we now have a number of experts who are watching those tax receipt
numbers that come in regularly, and they are saying that they do not
add up to what is anything like the kind of growth that the
administration had projected off these tax cuts.''
National Economic Council Director Larry Kudlow: ``Well, actually,
overall revenues are up about 10 percent. So that's a pretty good
number. And let me say, one of the people that are skeptical of us, the
Congressional Budget Office, nonetheless, their estimates before taxes
and most recently after the taxes, they have argued, they have said,
there's roughly $7 trillion of higher nominal GDP, and from that comes
about 1.2 trillion in extra revenues, so that the tax cuts are about 80
percent paid for overall.''
--Exchange on PBS's ``NewsHour,'' March 11, 2019
``Even the CBO, with which we generally disagree--I'm not breaking news
here on my part--but they just published their new numbers. You know,
from the point of pre-tax-cut to now, we have had about $7 trillion
unexpected increase, $7 trillion over 10 years in terms of GDP. And
that kind of calculates to roughly 1.2, 1.3 trillion in additional
revenue. That's the CBO numbers. These are all 10-year estimates. I
apologize for that, but that's the convention. So, what am I saying
here? The tax cut was about 1.5 trillion scored. We have virtually paid
for it--I guess 80 percent paid for it--and that's by the CBO's own
numbers.''
--Kudlow, in an interview on CNBC's ``Squawk on the Street,'' March 8,
2019
President Trump's chief economic adviser says new numbers from the
Congressional Budget Office show that 80 percent of the
administration's tax cuts will be paid for in a decade. Even when
accounting for lost revenue, the tax cuts will ``virtually'' pay for
themselves because of increased economic activity, Kudlow suggests.
He's not the first Republican to claim tax cuts pay for themselves. But
he is the first to twist what the CBO's nonpartisan number-crunchers
said in a Feb. 28 analysis.
CBO Director Keith Hall factored in several big developments in this
analysis. One was the estimated effect of the tax cuts Trump signed in
December 2017. Another was ``changes to federal spending resulting from
legislation enacted early in 2018.'' The biggest change came from
``revised historical data and changes in the economic outlook . . .
before accounting for the effects of the tax act.''
The CBO breaks down the effect of the tax cuts by themselves--but
Kudlow isn't using that specific, smaller number. He's citing the much
larger estimate that folds in all the changes.
The Facts
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act lowered rates for individuals and businesses.
The CBO in 2018 estimated that in the 10 years between 2018 and 2027,
the bill would reduce revenue by $1.65 trillion and boost the deficit
by almost $1.5 trillion, before accounting for the cost of additional
deficit borrowing. The CBO also estimated that the tax cuts would spur
net economic growth at the same time that they drove up the federal
debt.
On Feb. 28, Hall gave an updated economic forecast. Kudlow accurately
noted that CBO analysts revised upward by $7 trillion their estimate
for nominal GDP for the 10-year period from 2017 to 2027.
But Kudlow went on to say that the added tax revenue from that $7
trillion--roughly $1.2 trillion to $1.3 trillion, he said--would cover
80 percent of the cost of Trump's tax cuts.
On CNBC, he attributed this to ``the CBO's own numbers.'' On PBS,
anchor Judy Woodruff mentioned experts who have challenged the
administration's economic projections. Kudlow, offering the CBO
analysis as a defense, said ``there's roughly $7 trillion of higher
nominal GDP, and from that comes about 1.2 trillion in extra revenues,
so that the tax cuts are about 80 percent paid for overall.''
That's a bunch of spin.
Hall broke down the added $7.17 trillion in nominal GDP into several
different buckets:
Close to 38 percent, or $2.7 trillion, ``consists of the
effects of revised historical data and changes in the economic
outlook after January 2017 and before accounting for the
effects of the tax act.'' (Emphasis ours. Hall is saying
specifically that these changes were not tied to the tax cuts.)
Nearly 32 percent, or $2.33 trillion, ``is the effect of the
2017 tax act on CBO's projection of GDP.'' This is where Hall
isolates the estimated economic gains from Trump's tax cuts.
Around 18 percent, or $1.29 trillion, stems from ``other policy
changes . . . especially the changes to federal spending
resulting from legislation enacted early in 2018.'' No tax-cut
talk here.
The remaining 12 percent, or $846 billion, represents
``revisions to the economic outlook and changes to data.'' This
is not tied to the tax cuts, either.
When Kudlow mentions the added $7 trillion in GDP covering 80 percent
of the tax cuts' cost, and cites the CBO analysis, he misses the point
and ends up in deceptive territory. The question is really whether the
tax cuts generate more revenue than they remove from the equation. If
you have economic growth from other sources and you're using it to
cover the cost of the tax cut, you're forgoing other uses for that
money.
The CBO is estimating that $2.33 trillion, or one-third of the extra $7
trillion, will come from economic activity sparked by Trump's tax cuts.
The budget analysts don't make the claim that this economic activity
would cover 80 percent of the cost of the tax cuts. Hall wrote that
``macroeconomic feedback from the tax act offset about 30 percent of
CBO's estimate of the act's increase in budget deficits through 2028--
or 20 percent after debt-service costs are accounted for.'' (The tax
cut increases the deficit, which means the government would be
borrowing more money to cover some expenses over the 10-year period.)
So, you take the increased economic activity (deficit-reducer), the
interest on the borrowed funds (deficit-raiser) and the lost revenue
(deficit-raiser). Then you do the math. Looking solely at the tax cut,
the CBO says the increased economic activity offsets 20 percent of the
growth in the deficit over 10 years. Overall, the tax cut would
increase the projected deficit by more than $1.8 trillion through 2028,
the CBO said. (Note that this is a slightly different 10-year budget
window than the original estimate.)
``Kudlow seems to be counting the entire difference in GDP between two
CBO projections as being caused by the TCJA,'' said Kyle Pomerleau,
chief economist and vice president of economic analysis at the Tax
Foundation. ``While it is completely possible CBO is off in its
projection and the tax cut is contributing to more (or less) than
estimated, Kudlow is still misstating what CBO is projecting here.''
``There were a bunch of reasons that CBO revised their forecast up--
revised economic data, policy changes--in addition to the Tax Cuts and
Jobs Act, and the TCJA itself,'' said Benjamin R. Page, senior fellow
at the Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center.
Kudlow was making this claim that the tax cuts were ``virtually paid
for'' even before the CBO revised its GDP forecast in February. It
hasn't aged well. (Here's an August 2018 article from FactCheck.org.)
The White House did not respond to our requests for comment.
The Pinocchio Test
Kudlow's comments are misleading because he's twisting what the CBO
analysis says. He's doing it repeatedly and in front of TV cameras. He
has made these claims before and after the updated forecast from the
nonpartisan budget office.
The CBO's analysis says increased economic activity from Trump's tax
cuts would offset 20 percent of the growth they're adding to the
deficit over 10 years. That's a big net negative. It's a far cry from
saying economic growth would cover 80 percent of their cost. And it's
the kind of spin worth Four Pinocchios, especially when Kudlow
misstates the sober analysis of the CBO for political purposes.
______
From Politico
The Bogus Number at the Center of the GOP's Green New Deal Attacks
By Zack Colman
Republicans' estimates that the climate plan would cost $93 trillion
are based on a think tank study that doesn't endorse that total.
Republicans claim the ``Green New Deal'' would cost $93 trillion--a
number that would dwarf the combined economic output of every nation on
Earth.
The figure is bogus.
But that isn't stopping the eye-popping total from turning up on the
Senate floor, the Conservative Political Action Conference and even
``Saturday Night Live'' as progressive Democrats' sweeping-yet-vague
vision statement amps up the political conversation around climate
change.
The number originated with a report by a conservative think tank,
American Action Forum, that made huge assumptions about how Democrats
would implement their plan. But the $93 trillion figure does not appear
anywhere in the think tank's report--and AAF President Douglas Holtz-
Eakin confessed he has no idea how much the Green New Deal would cost.
``Is it billions or trillions?'' asked Holtz-Eakin, a former director
of the Congressional Budget Office. ``Any precision past that is
illusory.''
The Green New Deal isn't even a plan yet--at the moment it's a non-
binding resolution that calls for major action to stop greenhouse gas
pollution while reducing income inequality and creating ``millions of
good, high-wage jobs.'' But top Republicans have embraced the $93
trillion price tag, using it to argue that the climate plan would
bankrupt the United States.
Democrats say Republicans are using the number to dodge responsibility
for decades of denying climate science, while the White House continues
to disregard the evidence linking human activity to rising temperatures
and extreme weather.
To come up with the $93 million total, Republicans added together the
cost estimates that the AAF report's authors had placed on various
aspects of a Green New Deal platform. Most of those were based on
assumptions about universal health care and jobs programs rather than
the costs of transitioning to carbon-free electricity and
transportation.
``There's a race for think tankers, analysts and academia to be the
first to come up with a number, and you can see why--look at how many
people latched on to that $93 trillion number,'' said Nick Loris, an
economist at the conservative Heritage Foundation. ``A lot of times you
just see the number and you don't get a lot of the backstory behind the
number.''
Holtz-Eakin told Politico that he was interested only in ``ballparks,''
adding that the study is best viewed as ``a sincere but a heroic
estimate of a not very well-specified proposal.'' When asked whether he
had a problem with the way Republicans had characterized his study and
the $93 trillion figure, Holtz-Eakin said: ``We did try to play it
straight here. We never added it up.''
Green New Deal supporters acknowledge that their preferred polices
won't be free, but they say Republicans are acting in bad faith by
painting the resolution with a specific brush so early and refusing to
acknowledge that unchecked climate change poses its own economic risks.
For instance, a United Nations report last fall estimated a global cost
of as much as $69 trillion from even a modest rise in global
temperatures.
``We all knew this vacuum was here, but you can't put a price on it
until you have a piece of legislation that you can score,'' said Greg
Carlock, Green New Deal research director with the progressive think
tank Data for Progress. He said the AAF study ``was an attempt to fill
that vacuum, but it does it in a mean-spirited way.''
Yet the figure is already a fixture of GOP talking points about the
Green New Deal--echoing attacks the party has made on environmental
regulations for decades.
``That's always been the crux of the Republican argument against making
all these changes,'' said Rory Cooper, a Republican strategist and
managing director at Purple Strategies, a bipartisan consulting firm.
``It's significant lifestyle changes in exchange for an undefined
benefit.''
The GOP's eagerness to wield the price estimate underscores the
prominence that climate change has achieved in Washington for the first
time in nearly a decade.
When they set out to put a price tag on the Green New Deal last month,
Holtz-Eakin and his associates had no real policy or plan to evaluate,
so they made one up to perform back-of-the-envelope calculations. AAF's
analysis extrapolated from the various ideas laid out in the non-
binding resolution from Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-NY)
and Senator Ed Markey (D-MA)--such as switching the electric grid off
fossil fuels and providing jobs and health care for all Americans.
Democrats dismiss the AAF study as a fabrication. And on Wednesday, as
Republican senators railed on the floor about the $93 trillion estimate
and the dangers of socialism, several Democrats interrupted them to
demand that the GOP acknowledge the reality of climate change.
``That is a completely made up number by the Koch brothers,'' Markey,
who co-
sponsored the 2009 cap-and-trade bill, said on the Senate floor.
Markey interrupted a speech by Sen. Thom Tillis (R-NC), who is expected
to be among Democrats' top targets in next year's elections.
``I don't care if it is $93 trillion, $43 trillion or $10 trillion--it
is unsustainable,'' Tillis shot back. ``We can sit here and question
the sources, but at the end of the day, we all know that this was
theater.''
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell kept pushing the talking point,
noting that $93 trillion is ``more than the combined annual GDP of
every nation on Earth''--as well as more than enough to ``buy every
American a Ferrari.''
The figure has been a fixture of GOP messaging since AAF released its
report on Feb. 25.
Senator David Perdue (R-GA) wielded the $93 trillion figure at the
recent Conservative Political Action Conference. Senate Environment and
Public Works Chairman John Barrasso (R-WY) cited the price estimate in
a USA Today op-ed. Senator John Cornyn (R-TX) displayed it on a poster
on the Senate floor. It worked its way into an online skit from
``Saturday Night Live'' that parodied Democratic Senator Dianne
Feinstein's interaction with a group of young climate activists.
The number is so large it is nearly incomprehensible, but it dwarfs
other massive endeavors like building the interstate highway system,
which cost an equivalent of $241 billion in today's dollars, for
example. And the AAF study does not distinguish between government and
private-sector spending, nor does it attempt to quantify the benefits
of reducing pollution or other policies. For example, Stanford
University civil and environmental engineering professor Mark Jacobson
estimated that eliminating the electricity sector's carbon emissions
would avoid $265 billion in annual U.S. damages beginning in 2050.
``A central challenge to climate policy-making is there are costs right
away and the benefits emerge over time,'' said Michael Greenstone, an
economist and director of the Energy Policy Institute at the University
of Chicago. ``But just because the benefits happen over time doesn't
mean it's not real.''
In fact, $80.6 trillion of the costs in AAF's study come from a jobs
guarantee and universal health care. The Green New Deal resolution
calls for ``guaranteeing a job'' and providing high-quality health care
to everyone, but it is primarily focused on outlining a set of goals to
get the U.S. economy to net-zero carbon emissions by mid-century. While
liberal activists say economic justice must be a part of any eventual
policy based on the resolution, most see the Green New Deal itself as a
vehicle for an energy transition and industrial economic policy, rather
than something more sweeping, like ``Medicare for All.''
``Given that the [Green New Deal] is at this point simply a set of
long-term goals, without any specification of how those goals would be
achieved, any estimate of cost is itself likely to be exceptionally
speculative,'' Robert Stavins, an environmental economist at Harvard
University, wrote in an email.
Many studies that warn of dire economic effects of climate change
overstate the potential harm, according to a Pew Charitable Trusts
review of environmental policies.
Nevertheless, having a specific figure to cite can define the contours
of policy conversation, said Margo Thorning, a senior economic policy
adviser with the American Council for Capital Formation. Thorning was a
frequent Capitol Hill witness when Congress debated cap-and-trade
legislation in the early years of the Obama administration. She was
coveted partly because her organization published an influential study
that used Energy Information Administration statistics to show that the
policy would have curbed economic growth by $3.1 trillion between 2012
and 2030.
Similarly, a National Association of Manufacturers-backed study on the
potential effects of tightening standards for ground-level ozone said
the measure would cost $1.1 trillion and surrender $1.7 trillion in
economic growth between 2017 and 2040.
``I think it helped shape the debate because if people realized we were
going to be losing 2 to 3 percent of GDP or more and other countries
weren't, we were going to be losing a lot,'' Thorning said of her
organization's study on cap and trade.
Climate hawks say Republicans dismissing the Green New Deal as
unaffordable are ignoring the costs of doing nothing, like property
damage from extreme weather and public health effects from continued
fossil fuel pollution. The AAF study makes no attempt to address
potential benefits of avoiding those consequences.
``Not talking about the cost of inaction is incredibly misleading,''
said Rhiana Gunn-Wright, policy director with New Consensus, one of the
groups working on the Green New Deal. ``It's about how, when and where
you want to spend your money, because you're going to spend it.''
The United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change said in
October that the global cost of temperatures rising 1\1/2\ degrees
Celsius--the target the Green New Deal aims to avoid--would be $54
trillion in 2100. That would rise to $69 trillion in a 2-degree
scenario. Those targets also served as the basis of the 2015 Paris
climate agreement, which Trump has announced plans to abandon.
Global temperatures are on track to rise by at least 4 degrees by the
end of the century, according to projections from the Trump
administration. That would lead to even greater economic devastation--
for example, damaging $3.6 trillion of coastal property by 2100 without
measures to adapt to climate change, according to the National Climate
Assessment published last November.
Some GOP strategists see a long-term risk in a dismissive approach to
climate policy.
``With the Green New Deal, Republicans are excited to talk about
climate change for the first time because we can point out how silly
Democrats are being,'' said Alex Conant, a GOP strategist and partner
at Firehouse Strategies. ``It's likely not a long-term position.
Ultimately Republicans, if we want to be taken seriously on climate
change, we will have to offer conservative solutions to it.''
At least one Republican has kept her criticism of the Green New Deal
more muted: Alaska Senator Lisa Murkowski, whose home state is warming
more quickly than the rest of the country. Chairing an Energy and
Natural Resources Committee hearing on climate Tuesday, Murkowski
pointed to dwindling fisheries and melting permafrost, which her
constituents are already dealing with. She has never publicly cited the
American Action Forum study.
``This has got to be a priority for all of us,'' she said of
confronting climate change. ``It is directly impacting our way of
life.''
______
From The Washington Post
Putin and Other Authoritarians' Corruption Is a Weapon--and a Weakness
By David Petraeus and Sheldon Whitehouse
March 8, 2019
David Petraeus is a retired U.S. Army general and the former director
of the Central Intelligence Agency. Sheldon Whitehouse, a Democrat, is
a U.S. senator from Rhode Island.
Thirty years after the end of the Cold War, the world is once again
polarized between two competing visions for how to organize society. On
one side are countries such as the United States, which are founded on
respect for the inviolable rights of the individual and governed by
rule of law. On the other side are countries where state power is
concentrated in the hands of a single person or clique, accountable
only to itself and oiled by corruption.
Alarmingly, while Washington has grown ambivalent in recent years about
the extent to which America should encourage the spread of democracy
and human rights abroad, authoritarian regimes have become increasingly
aggressive and creative in attempting to export their own values
against the United States and its allies. Russian President Vladimir
Putin and other authoritarian rulers have worked assiduously to
weaponize corruption as an instrument of foreign policy, using money in
opaque and illicit ways to gain influence over other countries, subvert
the rule of law and otherwise remake foreign governments in their own
kleptocratic image.
In this respect, the fight against corruption is more than a legal and
moral issue; it has become a strategic one--and a battleground in a
great power competition.
Yet corruption is not only one of the most potent weapons wielded by
America's authoritarian rivals, it is also, in many cases, what
sustains these regimes in power and is their Achilles' heel.
For figures such as Putin, the existence of America's rule-of-law world
is intrinsically threatening. Having enriched themselves on a
staggering scale--exploiting positions of public trust for personal
gain--they live in fear that the full extent of their thievery could be
publicly exposed, and that the U.S. example might inspire their people
to demand better.
Corrupt regimes also know that, even as they strive to undermine the
rule of law around the world, they are simultaneously dependent on it
to a remarkable degree. In contrast to the Cold War, when the Soviet
bloc was sealed off from the global economy and sustained by its faith
in communist ideology, today's autocrats and their cronies cynically
seek to spend and shelter their spoils in democratic nations, where
they want to shop, buy real estate, get health care and send their
children to school.
Ironically, one of the reasons 21st-century kleptocrats are so fixated
on transferring their wealth to the United States and similar countries
is because of the protections afforded by the rule of law. Having
accumulated their fortunes illegally, they are cognizant that someone
more connected to power could come along and rob them too, as long as
their loot is stuck at home.
Fortunately, the United States has begun to take steps to harden its
rule-of-law defenses and push back against foreign adversaries. The
passage of the Global Magnitsky Act in 2016, for instance, provided a
powerful new tool for targeting corruption worldwide that is being
increasingly utilized. But there is more to do.
In particular, the United States should make it more difficult for
kleptocrats, and their agents, to secretly move money through the rule-
of-law world, whether by opening bank accounts, transferring funds or
hiding assets behind shell corporations. Failure to close loopholes in
these areas is an invitation to foreign interference in America's
democracy and a threat to national sovereignty.
Congress should tighten campaign-finance laws to improve transparency
given that U.S. elections are clearly being targeted for manipulation
by great-power competitors.
At the same time, the United States must become more aggressive and
focused on identifying and rooting out corruption overseas. Just as the
Treasury Department has developed sophisticated financial-intelligence
capabilities in response to the threat of terrorism and weapons of mass
destruction, it is time to expand this effort to track, disrupt and
expose the corrupt activities of authoritarian competitors and those
aligned with them.
Hardening the nation's rule-of-law defenses is not, of course, a
substitute for traditional forms of U.S. power, including military
strength and economic dynamism. But it can provide an additional set of
tools to bolster national security.
In the intensifying worldwide struggle between the rule of law and
corruption, the United States cannot afford neutrality. Complacency
about graft and kleptocracy beyond U.S. borders risks complicity in
it--with grave consequences both for the nation's reputation abroad and
Americans' well-being at home.
______
United States Senate
washington, dc 20510
February 6, 2019
Honorable David Kautter
Assistant Secretary (Tax Policy)
Department of the Treasury
1500 Pennsylvania Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20220
William M. Paul
Acting Chief Counsel
Internal Revenue Service
1111 Constitution Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20024
Dear Messrs. Kautter and Paul:
Last year, a broad bipartisan coalition successfully included the
Furthering Carbon Capture, Utilization, Technology, Underground
Storage, and Reduced Emissions Act (FUTURE Act) in the Bipartisan
Budget Act of 2018. The FUTURE Act enhanced the existing carbon
sequestration credit under section 45Q of the Internal Revenue Code,
expanding the credit to a wide range of carbon capture technologies.
It has been a year since the bill's passage, and we write today to
request that Treasury commit staff and resources to finalize a revised
guidance promptly. Recent reports have cited that several project
developers are interested in using the expanded credit, but require
updated guidance from Treasury. These projects have long lead times,
and therefore developers need certainty in order to commence
construction by the January 1, 2024 deadline.
We also request a staff briefing on the status of the revised guidance
at your earliest opportunity. Thank you for your work, and we look
forward to hearing from you soon.
Sincerely,
Sheldon Whitehouse
John Barrasso
United States Senator
United States Senator
Shelly Moore Capito
United States Senator
______
Prepared Statement of Hon. Ron Wyden,
a U.S. Senator From Oregon
The Finance Committee is back for Round Two on the budget, and
we're joined by Secretary Mnuchin. Since the Treasury budget is largely
about taxes, and taxes pay for the bulk of Federal programs, I want to
start with a hard look at the overall picture.
This isn't a budget as much as it's an economic smash and grab
perpetrated on the American people.
Get rid of the Washington lingo, and it's obvious. Cuts to
Medicare. Cuts to Medicaid. Cuts to Social Security. Cuts to education.
Cuts to housing. Cuts to cancer research. Cuts to job training. Cuts to
anti-hunger programs. Cuts to anti-poverty programs. I could go on.
Then you have the impact of the Trump tax law. Hundreds of billions
of dollars in tax handouts to corporations and billionaires. An overall
price tag that will reach $2 trillion in a single decade. Secretary
Mnuchin famously declared that the tax law would pay for itself and
more. He was off by multiple trillions of dollars.
The law kicked off a stock buyback bonanza. It's been a nonstop
joyride for corporate executives, who get a lot of their compensation
in the form of corporate stock. So that makes two special breaks that
are unavailable to cops and nurses. They can defer their taxes on their
stock holdings, and they got a lower tax rate on their salaries and
bonuses.
In addition, new data released by Syracuse University shows the
effect of years of Republican austerity imposed on the IRS. With audits
of corporations and high-earners steadily dropping year after year,
enforcement of our tax laws is in the worst shape that it's been in
decades. Not in modern memory has there been a better time to be a
wealthy tax cheat in America.
So under Donald Trump, corporations and the wealthy don't have to
pay a fair share, and there's a good chance they can get away with
paying virtually nothing at all. It should come as no surprise that
deficits crossed the trillion-dollar mark under unified Republican
control of government.
Unveiling the budget at a press briefing on Monday, Acting OMB
Director Russell Vought drummed up fears over what he called the
``unsustainable national debt.''
He warned that, ``annual deficits are continuing to rise'' without
any recognition of what's driven that increase. Echoing so many
Republican budget cutters before him, he declared that ``Washington has
a spending problem.''
Then it was off to the races, outlining exactly how the Trump
administration wants to dismantle the system that created a vibrant
middle class in America.
For too long, the full burden of Republican budget cuts has fallen
on the middle class and working people trying to get there. Not on
powerful special interests. Not on billionaires.
What the Trump administration put forward is not across-the-board
belt tightening. It's not a fair, even-handed reduction in spending.
Middle-class families lose, but the budget would send more taxpayer
dollars to Defense contractors. It gives them even more than what the
Pentagon asked for.
The bottom line is, just about every warning that came from this
side of the committee about the Republican tax bill and its aftermath
is proving to be true. The $4,000 raises American workers were
promised--nowhere to be found. The tax handouts are not paying for
themselves. New Fed data projects that the economy is growing this
quarter at a rate of 0.2 percent.
The nonpartisan experts at CBO forecast that as the corporate tax-
cut sugar high wears off, economic growth will slow to 1.7 percent in
the years ahead. And as the public has seen this week, the deficits
driven upward by the tax law are now the justification for draconian
budget cuts.
This cycle has lasted for decades. It's past time for it to end.
______
Communication
----------
Center for Fiscal Equity
14448 Parkvale Road, Suite 6
Rockville, MD 20853
[emailprotected]
Statement of Michael G. Bindner
Chairman Grassley and Ranking Member Wyden, thank you for the
opportunity to submit these comments for the record to the Committee on
Finance on the FY 2020 Budget.
The federal budget process is broken. The solution must include
incentives to keep the process moving. Automatic appropriations would
occur at Joint Budget Resolution marks, and if no resolution is passed,
revised Budget Control Act spending caps would end this difficulty and
spur action by both parties. Because BCA levels are too low, the marks
in the Act could be increased by the legislation amending the process
itself. These marks should be realistic rather than punitive. Part of
any reform must include new caps be set through 2025, when parts of the
TCJA expire as well.
As long as the current tax cuts are in force, the money not collected
in taxes should be made up with bond sales, else all sorts of mischief
occur in the area of asset accumulation and inflation. Such
accumulations are not economic growth, they are the manufacture of
speculative investment bubbles that always lead back to recessions and
depressions. There is no such thing as a business cycle, only rich
people who are undertaxed who invest in garbage and then sell it to the
public, like any Ponzi scheme.
We remind the Committee that in the future we face a crisis in net
interest on the debt, both from increased rates and growing principle.
This growth will only feasible until either China or the European Union
develop tradable debt instruments backed by income taxation, which is
the secret to the ability of the United States to be the world's bond
issuer. At some point, however, we need incentives to pay down the
debt.
The national debt is possible because of progressive income taxation.
The liability for repayment, therefore, is a function of that tax. For
every dollar you pay in taxes, you owe $13 in debt. People who pay
nothing owe nothing. People who pay tens of thousands of dollars a year
owe hundreds of thousands. The answer is not making the poor pay more
or giving them less benefits, either only slows the economy. Rich
people must pay more and do it faster. My child is becoming a social
worker, although she was going to be an artist. Don't look to her to
pay off the debt. Your children and grandchildren and those of your
donors are the ones on the hook unless their parents step up and pay
more. How's that for incentive to raise taxes?
We have added a Carbon Value-Added Tax to the first bullet of our
comprehensive four part approach to tax reform. A 25% Asset Value-Added
Tax will be added to the second bullet so that capital gains taxes can
be repealed, making automatic filing possible based on submissions to
the IRS from federal NBRT income and tax credit data provided by state
revenue agencies (see bullet four). Aside from these changes, our
proposals are identical to what we have stated previously, and can be
found in Attachment One.
Thank you for the opportunity to address the committee. We are, of
course, available for direct testimony or to answer questions by
members and staff.
Attachment One: Center for Fiscal Equity Detailed Proposals
Our four part tax reform plan provides context.

A Value-Added Tax (VAT) to fund domestic military spending and
domestic discretionary spending with a rate between 10% and 13%, which
makes sure very American pays something. This would include a Carbon
Value-Added Tax.

Personal income surtaxes on joint and widowed filers with net
annual incomes of $100,000 and single filers earning $50,000 per year
to fund net interest payments, debt retirement and overseas and
strategic military spending and other international spending, with
graduated rates between 5% and 25%. Capital Gains Taxes will be
replaced by a 25% VAT on Asset Sales, making automatic filing possible.

Employee contributions to Old-Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI)
with a lower income cap, which allows for lower payment levels to
wealthier retirees, without making bend points more progressive.

A VAT-like Net Business Receipts Tax (NBRT), which is
essentially a subtraction VAT with additional tax expenditures for
family support, health care and the private delivery of governmental
services, to fund entitlement spending and replace income tax filing
for most people (including people who file without paying), the
corporate income tax, business tax filing through individual income
taxes and the employer contribution to OASI, all payroll taxes for
hospital insurance, disability insurance, unemployment insurance and
survivors under age 60. Collection would be accomplished by the states,
who would forward data to the IRS.
Recent legislation has solved some of our international tax issues. It
would still be simpler to adopt a VAT on the international level and it
would allow an expansion of family support through an expanded child
tax credit. American competitiveness is enhanced by enacting a VAT, as
exporters can shed some of the burden of taxation that is now carried
as a hidden export tax in the cost of their products. The NBRT will
also be zero rated at the border to the extent that it is not offset by
deductions and credits for health care, family support and the private
delivery of governmental services.
Some oppose VATs because they see it as a money machine, however this
depends on whether they are visible or not. A receipt visible VAT is as
susceptible to public pressure to reduce spending as the FairTax is
designed to be, however unlike the FairTax, it is harder to game.
Avoiding lawful taxes by gaming the system should not be considered a
conservative principle, unless conservatism is in defense of entrenched
corporate interests who have the money to game the tax code.
Our VAT rate estimates are designed to fully fund non-entitlement
domestic spending not otherwise offset with dedicated revenues. This
makes the burden of funding government very explicit to all taxpayers.
Nothing else will reduce the demand for such spending, save perceived
demands from bondholders to do so--a demand that does not seem evident
given their continued purchase of U.S. Treasury Notes.
Value-Added Taxes can be seen as regressive because wealthier people
consume less, however when used in concert with a high-income personal
income tax and with some form of tax benefit to families, as we suggest
as part of the NBRT, this is not the case.
The shift from an income tax based system to a primarily consumption
based system will dramatically decrease participation in the personal
income tax system to only the top 20% of households in terms of income.
Currently, only roughly half of households pay income taxes, which is
by design, as the decision has been made to favor tax policy to
redistribute income over the use of direct subsidies, which have the
stink of welfare. This is entirely appropriate as a way to make work
pay for families, as living wage requirements without such a tax
subsidy could not be sustained by small employers.
The income surtax is earmarked for overseas military, naval sea and
international spending because this spending is most often deficit
financed in times of war. Earmarking repayment of trust funds for
Social Security and Medicare, acknowledges the fact that the buildup of
these trust funds was accomplished in order to fund the spending boom
of the 1980s without reversing the tax cuts which largely benefited
high income households.
Earmarking debt repayment and net interest in this way also makes
explicit the fact that the ability to borrow is tied to the ability to
tax income, primarily personal income. The personal or household
liability for repayment of that debt is therefore a function of each
household's personal income tax liability. Even under current tax law,
most households that actually pay income taxes barely cover the
services they receive from the government in terms of national defense
and general government services. It is only the higher income
households which are truly liable for repayment of the national debt,
both governmental and public.
If the debt is to ever be paid back rather than simply monetized, both
domestically and internationally (a situation that is less sustainable
with time), the only way to do so without decreasing economic growth is
to tax higher income earners more explicitly and at higher rates than
under current policy, or even current law.
The decrease in economic class mobility experienced in recent decades,
due to the collapse of the union movement and the rapid growth in the
cost of higher education, means that the burden of this repayment does
not fall on everyone in the next generation, but most likely on those
who are living in high income households now.
Let us emphasize the point that when the donors who take their cues
from Americans for Tax Reform bundle their contributions in support of
the No Tax Pledge, they are effectively burdening their own children
with future debt, rather than the entire populace. Unless that fact is
explicitly acknowledged, gridlock over raising adequate revenue will
continue.
CBO projections on the size of the debt and the role of Net Interest
are troubling, however, in that they show that most discretionary and
entitlement spending is projected to remain flat while net interest is
due to explode. It is helpful to explore the reasons for this. This
explosion essentially fuels the growth of the Dollar as the world's
currency. Essentially, this means that we pay our expenses with
taxation (even without adopting the Center for Fiscal Equity Plan)
while we roll over our debt without repaying it. This seems like a
wonderful way for American consumers to continue to live like imperial
Rome, however it cannot last.
There are two possible ends to this gravy train. The first is the
internationalization of the Dollar, the Federal Reserve and our entire
political system into a world currency or government and its concurrent
loss of national sovereignty or the eventual creation of rival
currencies, like a tradable Yuan or a consolidated European Debt and
Income Tax to back its currency. In the prior case, all nations which
use the Dollar will contribute to an expanded income tax to repay or
finance the interest on the global debt. In the second case, the
American taxpayer will be required to pay the debt back--and because
raising taxes on all but the wealthy will hurt the economy, it will be
the wealthy and their children who will bear the burden of much higher
tax levies.
To avert either crisis, there are two possibilities. The first is the
elimination of deductions, including the Charitable Deduction itemized
on personal income taxes--especially for the wealthy. If the charitable
sector, from the caring community to the arts, industrial and education
sectors, convince wealthier taxpayers to fight for this deduction, then
the only alternative is higher rates than would otherwise occur,
possibly including a much more graduated tax system.
Unlike other proposals, a graduated rate for the income surtax is
suggested, as at the lower levels the burden of a higher tax rate would
be more pronounced. More rates make the burden of higher rates easier
to bear, while providing progressivity to the system rather than simply
offsetting the reduced tax burden due to lower consumption and the
capping of the payroll tax for Old-Age and Survivors Insurance.
One of the most oft-cited reforms for dealing with the long-term
deficit in Social Security is increasing the income cap to cover more
income while increasing bend points in the calculation of benefits, the
taxability of Social Security benefits or even means testing all
benefits, in order to actually increase revenue rather than simply
making the program more generous to higher income earners. Lowering the
income cap on employee contributions, while eliminating it from
employer contributions and crediting the employer contribution equally
removes the need for any kind of bend points at all, while the
increased floor for filing the income surtax effectively removes this
income from taxation. Means testing all payments is not advisable given
the movement of retirement income to defined contribution programs,
which may collapse with the stock market--making some basic benefit
essential to everyone.
Moving the majority of Old-Age and Survivors Tax collection to a
consumption tax, such as the NBRT, effectively expands the tax base to
collect both wage and non-wage income while removing the cap from that
income. This allows for a lower tax rate than would otherwise be
possible while also increasing the basic benefit so that Medicare Part
B and Part D premiums may also be increased without decreasing the
income to beneficiaries.
If personal accounts are added to the system, a higher rate could be
collected; however, recent economic history shows that such investments
are better made in insured employer voting stock rather than in
unaccountable index funds, which give the Wall Street Quants too much
power over the economy while further insulating ownership from
management.
Too much separation gives CEOs a free hand to divert income from
shareholders to their own compensation through cronyism in compensation
committees, as well as giving them an incentive to cut labor costs more
than the economy can sustain for purposes of consumption in order to
realize even greater bonuses. Employee ownership ends the incentive to
enact job-killing tax cuts on dividends and capital gains, which leads
to an unsustainable demand for credit and money supply growth and
eventually to economic collapse similar to the one most recently
experienced.
The NBRT base is similar to a Value-Added Tax (VAT), but not identical.
Unlike a VAT, an NBRT would not be visible on receipts and should not
be zero rated at the border--nor should it be applied to imports. While
both collect from consumers, the unit of analysis for the NBRT should
be the business rather than the transaction. As such, its application
should be universal--covering both public companies who currently file
business income taxes and private companies who currently file their
business expenses on individual returns.
In the long term, the explosion of the debt comes from the aging of
society and the funding of their health care costs. Some thought should
be given to ways to reverse a demographic imbalance that produces too
few children while life expectancy of the elderly increases.
Unassisted labor markets work against population growth. Given a choice
between hiring parents with children and recent college graduates, the
smart decision will always be to hire the new graduates, as they will
demand less money--especially in the technology area where recent
training is often valued over experience.
Separating out pay for families allows society to reverse that trend,
with a significant driver to that separation being a more generous tax
credit for children. Such a credit could be ``paid for'' by ending the
Mortgage Interest Deduction (MID) without hurting the housing sector,
as housing is the biggest area of cost growth when children are added.
While lobbyists for lenders and realtors would prefer gridlock on
reducing the MID, if forced to choose between transferring this
deduction to families and using it for deficit reduction (as both
Bowles-Simpson and Rivlin-Domenici suggest), we suspect that they would
chose the former over the latter if forced to make a choice. The
religious community could also see such a development as a ``pro-life''
vote, especially among religious liberals.
Enactment of such a credit meets both our nation's short term needs for
consumer liquidity and our long term need for population growth. Adding
this issue to the pro-life agenda, at least in some quarters, makes
this proposal a win for everyone.
The expansion of the Child Tax Credit is what makes tax reform
worthwhile. Adding it to the employer levy rather than retaining it
under personal income taxes saves families the cost of going to a tax
preparer to fully take advantage of the credit and allows the credit to
be distributed throughout the year with payroll. The only tax
reconciliation required would be for the employer to send each
beneficiary a statement of how much tax was paid, which would be shared
with the government. The government would then transmit this
information to each recipient family with the instruction to notify the
IRS if their employer short-changes them. This also helps prevent
payments to non-existent payees.
Assistance at this level, especially if matched by state governments,
may very well trigger another baby boom, especially since adding
children will add the additional income now added by buying a bigger
house. Such a baby boom is the only real long term solution to the
demographic problems facing Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid,
which are more demographic than fiscal. Fixing that problem in the
right way definitely adds value to tax reform.
The NBRT should fund services to families, including education at all
levels, mental health care, disability benefits, Temporary Aid to Needy
Families, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance, Medicare and Medicaid. If
society acts compassionately to prisoners and shifts from punishment to
treatment for mentally ill and addicted offenders, funding for these
services would be from the NBRT rather than the VAT.
The NBRT could also be used to shift governmental spending from public
agencies to private providers without any involvement by the
government--especially if the several states adopted an identical tax
structure. Either employers as donors or workers as recipients could
designate that revenues that would otherwise be collected for public
schools would instead fund the public or private school of their
choice. Private mental health providers could be preferred on the same
basis over public mental health institutions. This is a feature that is
impossible with the FairTax or a VAT alone.
To extract cost savings under the NBRT, allow companies to offer
services privately to both employees and retirees in exchange for a
substantial tax benefit, provided that services are at least as
generous as the current programs. Employers who fund catastrophic care
would get an even higher benefit, with the proviso that any care so
provided be superior to the care available through Medicaid. Making
employers responsible for most costs and for all cost savings allows
them to use some market power to get lower rates, but not so much that
the free market is destroyed. Increasing Part E and Part D premiums
also makes it more likely that an employer-based system will be
supported by retirees.
Enacting the NBRT is probably the most promising way to decrease health
care costs from their current upward spiral--as employers who would be
financially responsible for this care through taxes would have a real
incentive to limit spending in a way that individual taxpayers simply
do not have the means or incentive to exercise. While not all employers
would participate, those who do would dramatically alter the market. In
addition, a kind of beneficiary exchange could be established so that
participating employers might trade credits for the funding of former
employees who retired elsewhere, so that no one must pay unduly for the
medical costs of workers who spent the majority of their careers in the
service of other employers.
Conceivably, NBRT offsets could exceed revenue. In this case, employers
would receive a VAT credit.
In testimony before the Senate Budget Committee, Lawrence B. Lindsey
explored the possibility of including high income taxation as a
component of a Net Business Receipts Tax. The tax form could have a
line on it to report income to highly paid employees and investors and
pay surtaxes on that income.
The Center considered and rejected a similar option in a plan submitted
to President Bush's Tax Reform Task Force, largely because you could
not guarantee that the right people pay taxes. If only large dividend
payments are reported, then diversified investment income might be
under-taxed, as would employment income from individuals with high
investment income. Under collection could, of course, be overcome by
forcing high income individuals to disclose their income to their
employers and investment sources--however this may make some inheritors
unemployable if the employer is in charge of paying a higher tax rate.
For the sake of privacy, it is preferable to leave filing
responsibilities with high income individuals.
Dr. Lindsey also stated that the NBRT could be border adjustable. We
agree that this is the case only to the extent that it is not a vehicle
for the offsets described above, such as the Child Tax Credit, employer
sponsored health care for workers and retirees, state-level offsets for
directly providing social services and personal retirement accounts.
Any taxation in excess of these offsets could be made border adjustable
and doing so allows the expansion of this tax to imports to the same
extent as they are taxed under the VAT. Ideally, however, the NBRT will
not be collected if all employers use all possible offsets and
transition completely to employee ownership and employer provision of
social, health and educational services.
