- SBA PROGRAMS SPURRING INNOVATION
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
SBA PROGRAMS SPURRING INNOVATION
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON INNOVATION AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
__________
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Small Business Committee Document Number 116-045
Available via the GPO Website: www.govinfo.gov
___________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
37-646
WASHINGTON : 2019
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Chairwoman
ABBY FINKENAUER, Iowa
JARED GOLDEN, Maine
ANDY KIM, New Jersey
JASON CROW, Colorado
SHARICE DAVIDS, Kansas
JUDY CHU, California
MARC VEASEY, Texas
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANTONIO DELGADO, New York
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Ranking Member
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa, Vice Ranking Member
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio
KEVIN HERN, Oklahoma
JIM HAGEDORN, Minnesota
PETE STAUBER, Minnesota
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
ROSS SPANO, Florida
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania
Adam Minehardt, Majority Staff Director
Melissa Jung, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Hon. Jason Crow..................................................
1
Hon. Troy Balderson..............................................
3
WITNESSES
Ms. Alison Brown, President and CEO, Navsys Corporation, Colorado
Springs, CO, testifying on behalf of the Small Business
Technology Council (SBTC)......................................
5
Mr. Rohit Shukla, CEO, Larta Institute, Los Angeles, CA..........
7
Mr. Javier Saade, Managing Partner & Venture Partner, Impact
Master Holdings & Fenway Summer Ventures, Jackson, WY..........
8
Mr. Ron Shroder, CEO and President, Frontier Technology, Inc.,
Beavercreek, OH................................................
10
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Ms. Alison Brown, President and CEO, Navsys Corporation,
Colorado Springs, CO, testifying on behalf of the Small
Business Technology Committee (SBTC).......................
25
Mr. Rohit Shukla, CEO, Larta Institute, Los Angeles, CA......
31
Mr. Javier Saade, Managing Partner & Venture Partner, Impact
Master Holdings & Fenway Summer Ventures, Jackson, WY......
38
Mr. Ron Shroder, CEO and President, Frontier Technology,
Inc., Beavercreek, OH......................................
53
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
None.
SBA PROGRAMS SPURRING INNOVATION
----------
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 19, 2019
House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Innovation and Workforce
Development,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:41 a.m., in
Room 2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jason Crow
[chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Crow, Veasey, Houlahan,
Finkenauer, Kim, Balderson, and Burchett.
Also Present: Representative Chabot.
Chairman CROW. Good morning. The Committee will come to
order. Thank you all for joining us this morning, and a special
thanks to all the witnesses for coming in. I want to get this
hearing kicked off at the appointed time, and we will have
probably some other members come and go as we proceed here. So
we appreciate your time.
One of the keys to long-term growth in our economy is to
create an environment that encourages innovation. We know that
when given the opportunity, it is small firms that have proven
they can lead the way innovating and creating new jobs in
America. Many innovations in businesses that we benefit from
today found their starts in basements and garages around the
country.
From 2000 to 2017, small businesses created 8.4 million new
jobs, or nearly 2/3 of all the new jobs created in the U.S. In
my own district in Colorado, 93 percent of employer businesses
are small, and many of those are professional, scientific, and
technical services.
One of the ways we have spurred innovation is through
targeted and smart Federal investments in research and
development. Since the 1980s, the SBA has led the SBIR-STTR
program, also known as America's Seed Fund, to invest in
research and development of cutting-edge technology. The SBIR-
STTR program is funded through a Federal set-aside of
extramural research and development funding spanning 11 Federal
agencies. Each agency offers direct grants to science and tech
entrepreneurs to help bring their technology to the market
under the direction of the SBA's policy directive.
Over the last 3 decades, the SBIR program has boasted
significant return on investment and has generated billions in
tax revenue. A study of the Navy and Air Force programs show
that the $6.25 billion in SBIR funding generated $8.8 billion
in new tax revenue and $92.1 billion in overall economic
impact.
Despite the success of the program, these program set-
asides have only been incrementally increased to 3.2 percent as
part of the 2011 reauthorization over the last 6 years. Since
then, our global competitors like China have aggressively
invested in research and development.
When SBIR-STTR was first implemented in 1982, the U.S. was
at a crossroads, much like we are today, and in danger of
losing its leadership in innovation due to globalization. More
than 30 years later, due to stagnant investments in research
and development, the U.S. is once again at risk of falling
behind. Due to short-term cost cutting and failure to
accelerate the infusion of Federal funds, other countries are
swiftly catching up to the U.S. For example, China has
drastically diminished the U.S. lead in innovation as they have
aggressively invested in research and development, while the
U.S. investment as a percentage of GDP has actually dropped.
The SBIR-STTR program plays a critical role in maintaining
the U.S. dominance in innovation. U.S. technology has
maintained a lead because of significant success in information
and communications technology. The computer, microchip, and
Internet were all achieved through partnerships between
government, academia, and entrepreneurs.
The first computers were funded by the military and
commercialized through the University of Pennsylvania and
Harvard. Similarly, Google founders, Larry Page and Sergey Brin
used Federal funding to research and then develop a prototype
of today's Google search. Most significantly, Qualcomm
developed the microchip that changed the global face of
wireless communications using grants from these programs. The
company now holds more than 13,000 patents, has over 35,000
employees worldwide, and is valued at nearly $100 billion.
Like the SBIR-STTR program, the SBA's Growth Accelerator
Competition Fund is changing how innovation is funded in
America. Over the last 5 years, the competition has funded over
223 projects in 45 states. The competition also has had
significant success reaching diverse applicants, awarding 44
percent of the awards to women, 41 percent to underserved
communities, and 16 percent to rural communities.
However, the SBA and participating agencies can do more to
foster innovation and help the U.S. maintain its global
leadership. In the past few months, I have spoken with
researchers and small business owners who have shared their
experiences with SBIR-STTR. They point to what their industry
calls the ``Valley of Death,'' where innovative ideas that do
not get timely or appropriately funded cannot move forward. In
order to remain competitive in innovation with the rest of the
world, there is a significant need to reduce process burdens
and streamline the application process.
We will use today's hearing to not only discuss the
benefits of the program, but also consider where they can be
improved. We will also highlight ideas like the Air Force's
Pitch Day model, which awarded a business in my district with
an SBIR Phase I award, to small business innovation vouchers
for commercialization and technical assistance programs.
I hope that today's discussion will shed light on the many
benefits of these programs, and I look forward to working with
my colleagues to improve the SBA's ability to accelerate
innovation and maintain U.S. competitiveness.
I thank each of the witnesses for joining us today, and I
look forward to your testimony.
I would now like to yield to the Ranking Member, Mr.
Balderson, for his opening statement.
Mr. BALDERSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good morning to
all of you on the panel. And thank you very much for taking the
time out of your busy day to come forward to us today. I know
it is challenging sometimes.
Innovation is the engine that drives our country's success.
Our economy's foundation is built on technology breakthroughs
that find state-of-the-art solutions to difficult problems,
then capitalizing on those products specifically through
entrepreneurship.
This coalition is particularly important for our small
businesses. Small firms tend to be nimbler, more responsive to
market changes, and more rapidly than bigger counterparts and
driving innovation to make the U.S. a leader in the world
economy.
In this modern era of globalization, it is essential for
both America's competitiveness and national security that small
businesses are easily able to develop and commercialize their
innovative products. This is why programs like the Small
Business Innovation Research and the Small Business Technology
Transfer programs are so important.
Small technology-based firms tend to be highly incentive,
constantly pioneering new advances. The Federal Government
should encourage this innovation. Buying these newly developed
technologies with other Federal R&D efforts was seen as a
natural extension both to boost small business participation in
Federal activities and to solve agency institutional problems,
be they at the Department of Defense, National Institute of
Health, or the Department of Energy.
All too often, good ideas never materialize. This could be
due to lack of funding, lack of public understanding, or
perceived lack of marketplace for revolutionary technology.
The SBIR and the STTR programs bridge the gap between this
and practical building our economy and improving the function
of the Federal Government in the process.
Similar to the strategy that brought about the SBIR and
STTR programs, the SBA's Growth Accelerated Fund competition
was designed to support small business job creation by giving
early stage entrepreneurs opportunities to immerse themselves
in intense learning. Accelerators can provide founders of early
stage companies with education, mentorship, financing, cohort-
based training, and technical assistance.
In the SBA program, accelerators, incubators, coworking
startup companies, and other entrepreneur models compete for
grants of $50,000 each. In 2019, the competition focused on
accelerators that work with high-tech entrepreneurs who are
potential SBIR or STTR program applicants. The applicants must
focus most of their efforts in support of entrepreneurs in the
following groups: opportunity zones, socially and economically
disadvantaged, women-owned businesses, or entrepreneurs located
in states and territories that are traditionally
underrepresented in the programs. Taken together, these
programs aim to increase the number of small businesses in the
high-tech segment of our economy, as well as raise their
presence in Federal research and development efforts. That is a
win-win for both the private and public sectors by creating
jobs, growing companies, and providing solutions to complex
problems.
Again, I thank all of you for being with us this morning. I
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CROW. Thank you, Mr. Balderson. The gentleman
yields back.
And if Committee members have an opening statement
prepared, we would ask that they be submitted for the record.
I would like to just take a minute now to explain the
timing rules. Each witness gets 5 minutes to testify and the
members get 5 minutes for questioning. There is a lighting
system to assist you. The green light will be on when you
begin, and then the yellow light comes on when you have 1
minute remaining. The red light comes on when you are out of
time, and we ask that you stay within that timeframe to the
best of your ability.
Our first witness, Dr. Alison Brown, hails from Colorado
Springs in my home state of Colorado. Dr. Brown is the
president and CEO of NAVSYS Corporation, a GPS technology
company and SBIR awardee. She has over 15 years of experience
in GPS receiver design and holds eight GPS-related patents. She
is currently a member of the U.S. Air Force Scientific Advisory
Board and served as a space representative for the Institute of
Navigation Council in 1993. Dr. Brown is a member of the
Editorial Board for GPS World and received the SBIR Tibbetts
Award for her excellence in the program. She received her B.A.
and M.A. in Engineering from Cambridge University, England, and
earned an S.M. in Aeronautics and Astronomics from MIT--that
kind of makes my brain hurt, Dr. Brown--where she was awarded
the DuPont Scholarship and studied as a Draper Fellow. She also
has a Ph.D. in Mechanics and Aerospace from UCLA.
Welcome, Dr. Brown.
Our second witness is Mr. Rohit Shukla, the CEO of Larta
Institute, an internationally recognized technology
accelerator. In founding and growing Larta Institute, he has
developed a reputation and expertise in the commercialization
of innovations emerging from government-funded initiatives,
research institutes, universities, and larger companies in the
private sector. Mr. Shukla has a Master's degree in Social and
Political Sciences from Cambridge University, England, and a
Master's degree in Communications, Arts and Sciences from
Loyola Marymount University of Los Angeles.
Welcome, Mr. Shukla.
Our third witness is Mr. Javier Saade. Mr. Saade is a
managing partner and venture partner at Impact Master Holdings
and Fenway Summer Ventures. He was one of the highest ranking
Latino appointees in President Obama's Administration where he
served as associate administrator of the Small Business
Administration. In that role, Mr. Saade oversaw the Small
Business Investment Company, Small Business Innovation
Research, and Small Business Technology Transfer System, both
the programs we are going to be talking about today, and growth
accelerator fund programs which collectively and since
inception have invested over $120 billion in 320,000 small
companies. Mr. Saade holds an MBA from Harvard Business School,
an M.S. in Operations and Technology from Illinois Institute of
Technology, and a B.S. in Industrial Management and
Manufacturing Engineering from Purdue University.
Welcome, Mr. Saade.
I would now like to yield to our Ranking Member, Mr.
Balderson, to introduce our final witness.
Mr. BALDERSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Our final witness today is Mr. Ron Shroder, chief executive
officer and president of Frontier Technology, Inc. (FTI), in
Beavercreek, Ohio. Mr. Shroder has nearly 40 years of
diversified, technical, and management experience in the
Department of Defense, commercial, and other Federal markets.
During his tenure, FTI was awarded the SBA Tibbetts Award for
the very best in Federal innovation research. He has been a
member of the Governor's Ohio Aerospace and Aviation Technology
Committee. Thank you for serving on that Committee. Great
Committee. And is the former national president for the Defense
Planning and Analysis Society.
Thank you for being with us today, Mr. Shroder. Always good
to have a great Ohioan here.
Chairman CROW. Thank you very much, Mr. Balderson.
Welcome, Mr. Shroder.
Dr. Brown, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENTS OF ALISON BROWN, PRESIDENT AND CEO, NAVSYS
CORPORATION; ROHIT SHUKLA, CEO, LARTA INSTITUTE; JAVIER SAADE,
MANAGING PARTNER & VENTURE PARTNER, IMPACT MASTER HOLDINGS &
FENWAY SUMMER VENTURES; RON SHRODER, CEO AND PRESIDENT,
FRONTIER TECHNOLOGY, INC.
STATEMENT OF ALISON BROWN
Ms. BROWN. Thank you very much, Chairman Crow, Mr.
Balderson, and members of the Committee. I am very honored to
be here today talking to you about the Small Business
Innovative Research program and what a huge advantage that has
been to my company and others in the state of Colorado.
My name is Alison Brown. NAVSYS Corporation is a small
business located in Monument, Colorado, and we have been
development innovative positioning, navigation and timing
solutions for the government and private sector since 1986.
Much of our success has been from the technology that we
developed with funding through the SBIR program. As an example,
we developed an early device for use on Air Force radiosondes
with an SBIR contract and that transitioned into the very first
deployed emergency 911 system in Colorado. And the phone that
we developed using that technology is actually now on display
at the Smithsonian Aerospace Museum.
Throughout my company's history, we have only been able to
bring innovations to the warfighter and field these solutions
rapidly because of the SBIR program. However, we, like many
other small businesses, have faced challenges, in particular in
SBIR transitions, both in protecting our intellectual property
and also in obtaining Phase III contacts with the Department of
Defense. Today, most of the protections enacted by Congress
already to improve the SBIR process have not yet been
implemented in the defense Federal acquisition regulations.
Today, we have updates to the SBIR policy directive that
include this legislation that have been released by the Small
Business Administration, but the SBA is not staffed to enforce
their own policy, and small business continue to face
challenges due to the lack of defense acquisition regulations
which implement this SBIR legislative language.
Government industry panels established under the National
Defense Authorization Act of 2016, the Section 809 and 813
panels, both recognize the importance of SBIR in defense
acquisitions. The Section 809 panel on acquisition reform
recognized and recommended that the SBIR program both be made
permanent and also that the SBIR allocation should be doubled,
increased from 3.2 percent currently to 7 percent.
I personally served on the Section 813 panel, which was
chartered to look at improvements to technical data rights, and
that resulted in recommending that SBIR data rights should be
afforded similar protection within defense acquisition
regulations as commercially developed items. The argument for
this was that the intent of SBIR data rights is to reward small
businesses for their innovation and invention and they need
that protection.
The SBIR program remains today one of the few successful
paths for small businesses to bring innovations into the hands
of the warfighter. Recently, Dr. Will Roper, who is the
assistant secretary of Air Force for Acquisition, Technology
and Logistics initiated a new SBIR Pitch Day model as a faster,
smarter approach to compete for ideas that can solve near-term
problems for the Air Force. NAVSYS has won two Pitch Day SBIR
awards to date.
In the first Pitch Day, contracting officials reviewed 417
submissions. They invited 59 businesses to pitch their
proposals in person in New York last March. I was there. It
took only 15 minutes for me to make my pitch to a panel of Air
Force program executives, and literally 10 minutes later I had
received the Phase I contract award. We expect to receive our
phase two contract later this month, which is less than 8
months after submission of our first proposal.
The SBIR program provides the mechanism to bring innovative
companies into the DOD ecosystem. Dr. Roper said the next
challenge is to organize to do this type of activity at scale.
So I would ask that you consider first mandating that DOD
promptly updates the DFARs to align with the SBIR policy
directive; to adopt the recommendations from the Section 809
and 813 panels; and to increase funding to facilitate rapid
transition of SBIR-developed technology under programs such as
the Air Force Pitch Days.
And just to close, in General Stephen Wilson's own words,
``Allow small businesses to deliver speed of capability to the
battlefield.''
Chairman CROW. Thank you, Dr. Brown.
Mr. Shukla, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF ROHIT SHUKLA
Mr. SHUKLA. Chairman Crow, Ranking Member Balderson,
members of the Committee, thank you so much for inviting me to
speak before you today. It is a privilege to bear witness to
the greatness of the SBIR-STTR program, and I just want to add
here that we also were a recipient of the SBIR Tibbetts Award.
I just want to make sure that everybody recognizes that. Thank
you.
For over 17 years, Larta has been providing
commercialization services to SBIR and STTR grantees at several
agencies, civilian agencies--NIH, NIST, USDA, NOAA, and DOE
being the most recent one--covering our mission as an
organization to focus on solutions that feed, fuel, and heal
the world. We have worked closely with some 4,000 SBIR-STTR
grantees since 2004. One size does not fit all, and I will come
back to that in a second, in a minute here.
Companies in the SBIR program, the ones that we have
certainly been involved with over the last 17 years, are at
different stages of maturity, development, different mindsets,
objectives, assets, and histories. So we have developed a
network-centric model of assistance to serve this diversity,
one that customizes the experience of commercialization to meet
the grantees' needs and objectives realities of the
marketplace. One that uses the wisdom, experience, and networks
of a host of demand experts, functional professionals, and
industry buyers and investors, to focus grantees on their best
and highest prospects in a highly dynamic and competitive
marketplace. To be clear, we are what you might consider a
virtual accelerator.
This approach has been very successful. Our portfolio
companies have raised over $2 billion. There have been 50
acquisitions, 10 IPOs, and as important, the vast majority of
companies that we have served are still around and doing
reasonably well, beating the odds on survival of small
businesses which you all know about.
Providing these innovators with the tools to navigate a
competitive marketplace and then having them be a part of our
evolving and powerful network has drawn attention to the
success of what is now known as ecosystem services approach. We
perfected this over a long period of time.
The emergence of TABA, which you are well aware of, which I
take a little credit since the germ of the idea emerged from a
proposal which I spearheaded when serving on NACIE, the
National Advisory Council of Innovation Entrepreneurship 3
years ago, has been a vote of confidence in the idea, and in
many ways caused some concern for us and grantees and agencies
alike.
I should mention the work done here by John Williams of the
SBA and Negat Raoul of the SBA in spearheading the notion of
commercialization and the funding that goes with it. I believe
it is positive that we have recognized the importance of
commercialization and have provided funding to enable
commercialization to be more than just a footnote in the SBIR-
STTR grantees' world.
However, as I said, one size does not fit all. It would be
a mistake to make this an individual handout program and it
would be a great step forward to recognize in an ecosystem
services concept reducing risk, increasing viability,
visibility, and credibility by deploying the curated experience
and wisdom of a marketplace is an approach that fits the
profile of our times.
What does this mean? For you, for your consideration, it
means enabling a hybrid approach. Let agencies solicit and have
accountable to them and the SBIR-STTR companies GSA vetted
contractors like ourselves providing ecosystem services. And
also allow companies to choose their own vendor if they
demonstrate that they know what they know and can afford the
risk.
Most research-based companies, however, in our experience,
do not necessarily know at the beginning in particular what
they do not know. And this is not surprising, and it is not a
reflection of any condescension on my part. We have tracked,
surveyed, and brought into our network thousands of companies,
and it is clear from our work that this is a true reflection of
the reality of research-based businesses, in addition to the
government itself as a user and buyer of services of the kind
that Dr. Brown mentioned here, created by SBIR companies. It is
itself, I do not think, not especially well tuned to the
prospect of emerging such products paid for by the U.S.
taxpayer except arguably in the Department of Defense. And I
say arguably because you heard from Dr. Brown.
In summary, one size does not fit all. Commercialization is
an ever-expanding journey, not a destination. You should
recognize the importance of ecosystem or HUB services and
providers who have been successful in curating and providing
these services as vital to the future of the SBIR program. This
is informed choice and the government should consider how it
might prime the pump on Phase III.
Thank you very much.
Chairman CROW. Thank you.
Mr. Saade, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF JAVIER SAADE
Mr. SAADE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman Crow, Ranking Member
Balderson, members of the Committee. Thank you for having me
here today.
As you mentioned, I previously served as associate
administrator of the SBA which runs, among others, the programs
that are being discussed here today. Some of the companies out
of the hundreds of thousands that received some of these grants
and investments include Apple, Qualcomm, Tesla, and Genentech.
But my focus here today is on the SBIR and the Growth
Accelerator Fund competition.
It was launched under my watch in 2014. The program's
genesis is rooted in Obama's first term when the economy was in
a freefall. One of the things the administration was focused on
was a more inclusive and accessible economy, and it should
continue to be a big part of the economic agenda. The economy
turned around and the economic indicators are strong but the
prosperity generated has been uneven. It is now more uneven
than before the 2008 crisis. Tens of millions of people have
been left behind. Most of them are from underrepresented
groups, hard to upscale workers, and rural communities.
This dynamic is magnified in our innovation economy.
Venture capital's persistent geographic, gender, and racial
homogeneity, evolving business formation pathways, and the lack
of diversity in private and public companies' C suites and
boards affect this dynamic and affect the productive capacity
and growth potential of our economy.
The government's role investing in the building blocks of
innovation, empowering innovators, and clearing a path for
anyone with talent cannot be overstated. Our innovation
ecosystem as you have all mentioned is one of our country's
crown jewels, but other countries are catching up fast. China
is probably the best example.
And the digital divide in the U.S. continues to get wider.
More pathways enhance the ability to scale participation in the
economy, but they continue to be sporadically reachable.
The Growth Accelerator Fund Competition is one of these
pathways. The fact that diversity in any form continues to be
part of the conversations is good and bad. Good, because we are
talking about it. Bad, because we are talking about it.
The competition had two goals, which it accomplished. One,
leveling the playing field in geographic areas with less access
to traditional sources of capital. And two, supporting
ecosystems and companies owned by, managed by, or that support
underserved groups like veterans, people with disabilities, and
minorities.
The competition is now in its fifth year, and with
relatively little money as mentioned before, it has supported
more than 200 entrepreneurial ecosystems in 45 states, D.C.,
and Puerto Rico. They, in turn, support thousands of startups
and entrepreneurs in places like Anchorage, Little Rock,
Shreveport, Harrisburg, Detroit, and San Juan.
You mentioned a few of the statistics and the program has
been very successful in reaching underserved groups. Twenty-one
percent of the winners had startups that were owned by or led
by American Indians, Alaskan Natives or Native Hawaiians.
Eighteen percent led by individuals with disabilities. Seventy
percent by those with limited access to capital. Eighty percent
who are racial minorities, 42 percent led by veterans, and 90
percent had startups owned or led by women.
The program can certainly be improved but the data points
to the Accelerator Competition being a successful component of
the American entrepreneurial ecosystem.
At a high level, some things that Congress and the Agency
should think about: One, is establish more permanent support
and policy from a funding and policy perspective. Two, enhance
the pathways for the thousands of startups that graduate to
access the SBIR and STTR programs. Three, improve coordination
with your districts and all the others around the country.
States and cities are very important. Four, enforce tighter
administration of the program with more robust reporting and
metrics. Five, examine interagency overlap with other
entrepreneurial support programs. Six, improve and continue
underrepresented group and geographic gap outreach. Seven, and
think about having different levels of award sizes.
I am happy to answer any questions about this or the other
programs. Thank you for listening.
Chairman CROW. Thank you, Mr. Saade.
And Mr. Shroder, despite the fact that like my friend and
colleague Mr. Balderson, I am sure you are a Buckeyes fan, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF RON SHRODER
Mr. SHRODER. Thank you, Chairman Crow, Representative
Balderson. It is an honor to speak to the Committee on such an
important aspect as innovative research, especially with FTI's
long history in the program.
As most of you know, the program started in 1977, under the
National Science Foundation. It did not take long for the SBA
to figure out how important a program it was, and it culminated
with President Reagan signing it into law in 1982. Since that
time there have been tremendous numbers of economic studies
that have occurred on the program. When you look at those, what
you can clearly see is, well, the money was extremely well
spent, something that we can all be proud of.
In this particular case, there are aspects like the
National Cancer Institute study that talks about the return
from taxes is a 3-to-1 ratio. There are more than one hundred
thousand jobs in just that study alone that are very high-
paying, good jobs. The revenue generated by companies is 10
times that.
My background with the Defense Department is a little bit
more associated with some of those other studies as well. And
as you know, there are programs out there, like just the Joint
Strike Fighter Program has published reports that said that
SBIR technologies have saved half a billion dollars on just one
program within the Defense Department. It is something that we
can all be proud of, while DOD also published the fact that
there is a 12-to-1, a 19-to-1, and a 23-to-1 return ratio. I
sit here and smile when I think of what Congress has done
because effectively, you have become the Shark Tank of the
government long before the program was popular. You took the
risk to invest in the technologies, and as small businesses, we
thank you for that very, very much.
The key is to understand what the technology and the
program does. And realistically, a lot of people in the
community will focus on the funding, the Phase Is and Phase
IIs. But let me tell you as a small business what that does for
you is it allows you to have a few people to work on a concept
and a prototype in hopes that ultimately you can commercialize
it. The real program success is in the Phase IIIs. That is
where the jobs are. That is when customers can acquire as much
as they want with any kind of funding that they want. It is
jobs, jobs, and more jobs. And that is where our companies, our
employees, the families of those employees all benefit, that is
where the growth comes from, and that is what we very much
appreciate.
And realistically, while the program has been in place for
37 years, it is this Committee and what it has done to evolve
the program over the years that is so critical. Because the
subtle changes of allowing a company to grow beyond the 500
limit when you are going into the Phase III and producing more
jobs, was critical to the program's success. But it was not
just that. The recent addition of the 3 percent administration
fee to allow the government people that we interact with to
come to us and actually work on it is equally critical.
You can look at a variety of those aspects, the most recent
policy guidance from the SBA talking about use the Phase III
program to the maximum extent possible is critical for
companies like FTI, because when we go to the government and
talk about ``here is the technology, you agree that it might be
valuable and you can use it,'' they need to see from you and
from the SBA and from the DOD that it is allowed, that they do
not have to be scared, that they can take it and run.
So again, from our perspective, we thank you for subtle
changes throughout the decades. It is very, very critical to
us. Which then leads us to, so what is next? And I think there
will continue to be subtle changes as this program goes on.
Those of us that are in the battle of it can give you some
suggestions. I think they have got to come from your heart. I
will tell you, after 37 years, I still do not understand why
the program is not permanent. It is something that generated
what is in every phone that we have today. It is across the
examples you gave. I really do think it is time to make the
program permanent. And I realize that some will hesitate
because they will worry about the ability to monitor it. I
think there are ways you can build into the law that you can
consistently check on it. If you do look at considering it to
be a permanent program, I think what you put into that law is
critical as well, things like rapid innovation funding which is
the key starter to get those new customers over that risk
aspect since you have only built a prototype; the 3 percent
administration fee to allow the government to actually help you
run the program; all of those things are critical to the
success of any permanent program that you look at, as well as
even who is in the program. You know, American-based technology
companies that can take these things and run, these are
critical.
So mostly, I thank you very much for the opportunity today,
for the changes that you have done over the years, and for the
courage to look at the program in the future.
I will be happy to answer any questions as we go forward.
Thank you.
Chairman CROW. Thank you, Mr. Shroder.
We appreciate the testimony that all of you shared today.
And I would like to now submit this letter from the Clean
Energy Business Network for the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
I will begin by recognizing myself for 5 minutes.
This is a question for all of the witnesses. In my opening
statement I talked about this concept of the ``Valley of
Death,'' many businesses in my community, my district have
talked about. So I would like to hear briefly from each of you
whether that is an idea, a concept, or a term that you have
heard of. Where that exists in the pipeline of the development
of your businesses, and what we can do to help close that to
make sure that we are setting folks up for success long term.
Maybe we can start with Dr. Brown.
Ms. BROWN. Thank you very much.
Chairman Crow, the ``Valley of Death'' is real. And it is
not just into Phase III. I mean, we go into valleys every time
between Phase I and Phase II. I mean, that is what is so
revolutionary about what the Air Force is doing with their
Pitch Days is they are rapidly moving us through the process.
We already have Phase III commitments now from Air Force
partners that want to see our technology move forward. And what
is different there is we are being given access. Before the
SBIR program, we were working for the research institutes. Now,
they traditionally do not move technology fast through the
process. They are there for the long-term vision. But what we
need to really move the innovation ecosystem into the hands of
the warfighters is technologies that can move fast; that can
get in front of the decision-makers, can show them. We are not
asking for a handout. We just want the opportunity to be able
to be able to walk in, show them what we can deliver. And that
is what the SBIR program has done.
Other programs that are being started to get innovation
into the hands of the warfighter we do not see as having nearly
the opportunity to be as successful as the SBIR. Congress,
basically, you know, they asked for rapid prototypes to be
enacted. They gave the DOD acquisition authority to do other
transaction authorities. If you go look at those programs, the
vast majority of them are giving awards to the large
businesses, not to the small innovators, not to the
nontraditional contractors, but to the same companies, in fact,
the foundation of our Department of Defense, I mean, they are a
national asset as well. But----
Chairman CROW. It sounds like speed is a really essential
element here, that the process is taking long and one of the
unique aspects of the Pitch Day is that it expedites it fairly
significantly.
So would you say that there is an opportunity to scale this
and roll it out to other services and that would be helpful?
Ms. BROWN. Absolutely. And I would also say it is the speed
and the access. Getting us in front of the decision-makers so
they can make the decision of what we can do to help them.
Chairman CROW. Thank you.
Mr. Shukla?
Mr. SHUKLA. Yes, sir. Of course we have heard of the
``Valley of Death,'' but I also think there is a consideration
given to the chasm of relevance. Making yourself relevant to a
set of buyers and potential users is what should be encouraged.
I do believe that credibility, reduction of risk, visibility,
viability are all issues for small businesses in the research
phases of their programs, including Phase I and Phase II.
One of the things we have done is to reduce that risk,
increase the visibility and viability of these companies,
increase their credibility by putting ourselves on the line,
essentially, in front of buyers and investors and so on and so
forth. It is a proxy of what Dr. Brown talked about in the
Defense Department, getting them before people who might be
interested in taking these on.
There is a range of different things that can be done and
should be done. It is a highly-dynamic kind of process trying
to engage a marketplace where there is a tremendous amount of
competition. I will say, and Javier might back me up on this,
the landscape of funding has also changed dramatically. It is
no longer just about venture capital, and it is no longer just
about corporate capital either, corporate investment capital.
Foundations are now investing in companies. Family offices have
become really active. These are all channels that you have to
keep juggling with and working with and we do that on behalf of
these small businesses because their success is our success.
Chairman CROW. I am going to give the others an opportunity
as well. Thank you.
Mr. Saade?
Mr. SAADE. I do not have much to add. I will say that it is
the 21st century and the way in which business formation
happens, capital formation happens, how people access
technologies has changed. And with that is concentration of
said capital. And the path of least resistance typically is to
write big checks. But the ``Valley of Death'' affects the
smaller entities which need smaller checks. So there is all
kinds of issues there, and yes.
Chairman CROW. Thank you.
My time has expired.
The Ranking Member, Mr. Balderson, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. BALDERSON. Thank you, Chairman Crow.
Mr. Shroder, while the SBIR has proven beneficial to early
stage growth, the process itself can make it hard to develop
products because of delays. Can you offer any recommendations
as to how to alleviate some of the pinch points that people
face?
Mr. SHRODER. I really think it is a corporate culture that
has to be evolved. I think you have to look at it as if you are
on Shark Tank. And when you are on Shark Tank, I think we are
honored to have your funding. And while this topic of the SBIR
might be a particular focus, we as a company have to make sure
that we are spending the money in a way that you would be
proud, and that being proud does not include just looking at
the technology today but spending those resources to productize
the technology in a way that goes beyond the two or four or six
people that you are talking to originally.
And so it is challenging as research engineers, et cetera,
to literally take the scope of what might have originally been
defined in a topic of an SBIR Phase I or whatever and think
that to commercialize it we are going to have to expand that
scope. And when we expand that scope, it is going to broaden us
to other customers, and those customers will be able to use
that product maybe in a slightly different manner than what it
was originally envisioned to be. But I give you the equivalent
of if we were Microsoft and we were all using Microsoft Word at
some point in time, what is going to happen is if you want a
better spellchecker, how would you like to be the only
organization that pays for that change? That does not work.
What you have to do is diversify that increase in capability
across a broader audience, and you need to have that focus when
you start the Phase I and Phase II SBIR.
Mr. BALDERSON. Okay. Thank you very much for that answer.
Dr. Brown, according to the Census Bureau, female-owned
firms account for 36 percent of all American businesses, and
that number is steadily rising, which is a good thing. Can you
offer any advice to female entrepreneurs who may be interested
in applying to the SBIR program?
Ms. BROWN. One advice I would like to give them is
basically a real world story about a friend of mine who is also
a woman-owned small business. It is an unfortunate fact of life
that women in the defense industry face discrimination. And
there have been cases where women have been permitted to be
part of the 8(a) program. The 8(a) program has significantly
more access to opportunities for businesses than the Women-
Owned Small Business program, significantly.
So my friend had faced significant discrimination. She went
through quite frankly a humiliating experience which I have
elected never to do myself, and she put forward her experiences
to the 8(a) and applied to become a member of that program.
Other women have been successful in going through that process.
She was denied, not because she had not experienced
discrimination; she was denied by the SBA because she had
persevered and succeeded in spite of that.
Now, no other member of the 8(a) program is required to go,
first of all, through that humiliating experience. And
secondly, would be judged ineligible for that program just
because the fact that they had actually succeeded.
So I would ask that you consider giving women-owned small
businesses the same blanket protection that other minorities.
We are not a minority but we are definitely a minority in small
businesses in government contracting. Please give us the same
protection as other 8(a) programs and do not require us to go
through this humiliating process even though we have suffered,
in many cases, more than other minorities.
Mr. BALDERSON. Thank you very much. And we will help you in
any way we can. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, we are pretty close to being out of time, so
I will yield back my remaining time.
Chairman CROW. Thank you. Thank you, the gentleman yields
back.
And now I would like to recognize the gentlelady from
Pennsylvania, Ms. Houlahan, for 5 minutes.
Ms. HOULAHAN. Wow. I wish I had been here to hear what you
were just talking about. I am grateful to you all for your
testimony and for coming here.
We actually have a lot in common. I was a program manager
in the Air Force. I am also a MIT person. My mom is a GPS
person. And I am an entrepreneur and small business owner
myself. And so a lot of what you guys talk about really
resonates with me. And so some of my questions have to do with
training of workforce development. And so one of the things I
have heard of consistently that we do not have, for small
businesses, a really good pipeline of STEM-trained workforce. I
think that people who are from larger and more established
businesses do not have quite the same pipeline problem. And so
I have had the chance to try and travel within my community--I
am from the Philadelphia area--to find programs that are trying
to elevate people into that pathway. Specifically, one of them
was in the University City Science Center in Philadelphia. And
I was wondering how we as a Federal Government can help you all
in this particular issue, if you could talk about that.
Ms. BROWN. Thank you so much for bringing that up. STEM is
actually a passion of mine. I volunteer extensively both with
the local universities, mentoring girls as young as 12. I mean,
it is being shown that we have to basically get young people
excited about technology and moving into our industries at that
age, and girls in particular are very disadvantaged in being
able to have role models and so forth to move forward.
I would like to circle back on the SBIR program, just give
you some real world stories.
When I first moved to Colorado, you know, my main office is
actually in Monument, which is not far from your district. And
at the time that was a very sleepy little town. It has grown a
lot since then but it was very sleepy. I got involved with the
local high school, and one of my early employees was actually a
high school student, Randy Silva. We sponsored him. He went
through University of Colorado. We actually gave him
scholarships and so forth. He came back and worked for us and
was an absolute star.
I am happy to say we have continued that model. I have a
high school student from Salida High School now. We started a
field office there. This is a very small, rural mountain town.
We quite frankly are very disadvantaged in our local high
school in terms of access, broadband access in particular. So
this student is just amazing. We have him working on new
technologies related to position, navigation technology, deep
learning, and we are soon going to start developing some new
game technology. He is just lapping it up. And other students
there have similar abilities, and when they are given access to
the broadband, they are given access to mentors, they are given
access to the online courses. He is doing online university
course right now. That is revolutionary. And I would like to
thank you for the SBIR program because it has enabled companies
like mine to bring on and encourage these youth.
Ms. HOULAHAN. Gentlemen? Anyone else?
Mr. SHUKLA. Thank you, Ma'am. I just wanted to say there
are lots of imaginative approaches to workforce development in
particular going on around the country. I think you will hear
from industry generally across the board in innovation and
technology that there is a real concern with the preparedness
of the workforce and the availability of talent. And clearly,
one of the responses has been to import talent using obviously
the conventional method of doing so over the years which of
course has come under considerable stress as you know more
recently.
I will say the one thing you can do as a government is to
actually focus on integrating the different efforts in
workforce development across the agencies. So labor has a whole
bunch of stuff. EDA at the Department of Commerce has a whole
range of programs. I think if you start to look at them and see
what the common elements of training and block grants, for
example, for education and training to the states and to local
programs at the community colleges, you will find that you will
reduce duplication, reduce the silos between programs, focus on
the particular objective of being able to get a well-trained
workforce for different kinds of new jobs, and not just
technical jobs but jobs that can actually work on critical
thinking across the board. You do not see that very often. You
do not see that kind of coordination. In fact, it has been
going on now for 25-30 years that I have seen starting in the
Clinton Administration and moving all the way down.
Ms. HOULAHAN. No, I appreciate that. And I am a freshman
here and in my first 8 months what I have seen is definite
silos, you know, whether it is programs that help women
entrepreneurs or programs that help veteran entrepreneurs. I am
both. You know, and so when I ask questions about the
intersectionality of those, there is kind of crickets. And so I
think that is a really good point.
I have only 7 seconds left so I yield back the balance of
my time. Thank you.
Chairman CROW. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
Now I will recognize the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr.
Burchett, for 5 minutes.
Mr. BURCHETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, for
holding this important hearing.
As all of you know and exemplify, small business owners
have to be innovative and willing to take some risks. That is
what defines American entrepreneurs and defines all of you all.
I was happy to help introduce the Small Business Innovation
Research and Small Business Technology Transfer Improvement
Act, and I will require each of you to restate that name to me
as you leave today.
That is a joke, by the way. Just making sure you all are
listening over there.
And along with my colleagues, including Mr. Baird and
Chairman Crow, I feel this legislation will help provide some
competitive funding opportunities that encourage small
businesses to take risks and pursue innovative research for
technology commercialization and frankly do what you all do
best.
This is a question for Mr. Shroder. Can you talk a little
bit about--and if any of the others want to add in after him
that would be great--about how the SBIR program allows
companies to take risks on technologies they believe in but
might not have the financial wherewithal to work on it?
Mr. SHRODER. You know, I go back to the Shark Tank aspect.
We are fortunate to have resource dollars associated with it
that we can take the risk of hiring those STEM people into
engineering and scientific aspects and not be afraid of failing
on a technological approach. We look at failure on a technology
basis as just an opportunity to learn what does not work so
that we can move to the next aspect. When you are doing that on
Department of Defense funding aspect that is very challenging.
You do not want to use their money in a way that is
questionable or that they would be disappointed by. But when
you are doing that with an SBIR program and SBIR dollars, as
long as you learn from that and adapt your technology to deal
with those under that aspect you are really given an
opportunity to succeed. And once you get past those, I will
call them the valleys, the challenges, the technological
breakpoints and you adapt, I think you then have a much
stronger technology that hopefully you can ripple throughout
the rest of the organization.
So for us, the SBIR program is unlike any other aspect that
we dealt with. It gives you the opportunity to take the risk.
Fail until you succeed.
Ms. BROWN. I work in both an advisory capacity for the
Department of Defense, you know, through my Air Force Science
Advisory Board work as well as a small business. So one of the
things that I see that is so important in technology today and
bringing it forward in innovation is the willingness to fail
fast and learn from your failures. And if you do not take
risks, you do not get the great advances. So for example,
Iridium. Wonderful system. You know, the first global, low
earth orbiting communication system. It has been dramatic in
changing lives all over the world. It was developed here in
America. And it was developed with a lot of sponsorship from
the Department of Defense. But one of the biggest items--it
would never have been built as a DOD system, and the reason is
because they took the risk to fly all of their satellites with
non-space-qualified parts. Space qualification adds a decade
into the legacy of technology introduction into military
satellites. We are still working with technology, you know,
that was developed 10 years ago and was hardened and tested
that is considered safe to use in satellites. Iridium took a
total different approach. The ``gray beards'', as it were, in
the defense industry thought it was not going to work. It did
work. If they had not been able to take that risk, afford to
basically try it, work around it, develop solutions, we would
not have that system today and we would not be looking at this
huge explosion in broadband satellite Internet that is all
going to be based on commercial technology that is coming from
the other companies following them.
Mr. BURCHETT. To piggy-back on that, is there any
opportunities to advance on others' failures? I am a gearhead
and I like the history of Ferrari. And Mr. Ferrari actually
never built a car. He just built a wonderful 12-cylinder engine
and had other people build his bodies. But he watched his other
racecars would end up crashing and then he would find out what
they did and then innovate on it, and so he did not have those
same catastrophes.
Mr. SHRODER. I certainly think there is a lot of that. We
talk about in our case, you know, maybe he talked to people and
figured out his bodies and the cars were not the best, but we
oftentimes use the concept that we have two ears and one mouth.
Sometimes we have to use them in that proportion. The key is
listening to what the customers need and then adapting. And
when you start off, to be fair, when you think you understand,
let's take a Phase I SBIR topic, it is a one-page description.
For you to imply that you truly understand what they think is
the problem is at best a little speculative. So the most
important thing you can do in a Phase I or Phase II program is
just to sit down and listen and describe to them what you think
you have heard them say, let them get a chance to reiterate it,
go talk to others that are similar to them so that you end up
finding out more and more about what the real problem is, which
is way more valuable than the actual topics and the
descriptions that come out of the system.
Mr. SHUKLA. So if I might just add one little thing. I know
they are talking about the Department of Defense in particular,
military procurement. In the civilian agency world, in the SBIR
world, risk is baked into the process itself as they both
alluded to and Javier alluded to as well. One thing we do is to
ensure that we maintain continuing intelligence about the
marketplace. That we can share with additional folks coming
into the program, cohorts that we are training. That is
extremely important because it is experiential learning that we
are able to impart to grantees that they otherwise would not on
their own be able to access.
Mr. BURCHETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have gone over. I
appreciate your indulgence, brother.
Chairman CROW. Thank you.
I would like to now recognize the gentlelady from Iowa, Ms.
Finkenauer.
Ms. FINKENAUER. Thank you, Chairman Crow.
The topic of today's hearing means a heck of a lot to me.
You know, I came to Congress to help Iowa small businesses fuel
innovation and create jobs. But more importantly, the
underlying part of that is I grew up in a state where I started
seeing a lot of my friends that I graduated high school with
move away. And we have got to figure out ways to create more
opportunity in rural areas, bring people back home, and also
make sure that they can stay and find opportunity.
And so one of the first things I tackled was making sure
that the Small Business Innovation Research program and the
Small Business Technology Transfer program were more accessible
because I found that that was a great vehicle to be able to do
it.
I was actually sworn in with Chairman Crow on January 3rd,
and by January 14th, I was really proud to get to pass my first
piece of legislation, the Small Business Stimulating Innovation
through Procurement Act of 2019 along with my colleague that I
met right across the hallway from me in Cannon, Congressman
Curtis. It was a bipartisan bill, one that I knew was
incredibly important, again, for our state and for our
communities all across the country. You know, the Small
Business Innovation Research program and the Small Business
Technology Transfer program have truly put innovative small
firms on the map. These programs have given our small
businesses the opportunity to participate in Federal research
and development and commercialize their work. This is a win
obviously for small businesses and for economic innovation and
growth, again, all across our country.
However, more small businesses could be benefitting from
these programs. My bill, actually, requires government
personnel to conduct outreach to small firms on the Small
Business Innovation Research program and the Small Business
Technology Transfer program, specifically, H.R. 246. Obviously,
the bill that I have been talking about, they were able to
pass, Stimulating Innovation through Procurement Act of 2019.
It would add a duty to the role of the procurement center at
the SBA to actually assist small firms with these programs.
I am proud of this work. It was one, again, that just made
sense and something that we needed to get done, again, to help
the next generation, and we have done our work here in the
House to get this thing done and passed. But I will keep
pushing every day for it to become law.
Mr. Shukla, if this bill is signed into law, how would H.R.
246 help stimulate small business innovation in places like
Iowa? What would that mean for rural areas?
Mr. SHUKLA. Thank you very much, Ms. Finkenauer.
I will say, since I have also worked in Iowa, by the way.
Ms. FINKENAUER. Oh, my goodness.
Mr. SHUKLA. Involving food and ag, and life sciences, in
particular, two anchors of the state's economy, and in rural
Iowa, I will say that you are absolutely on the right track.
The one thing I would ask though is for you folks to empower
the SBA with funding and staffing. They are really
understaffed.
Ms. FINKENAUER. Yes. Absolutely.
Mr. SHUKLA. And to connect in the conventional funding
apparatus of SBA which is lending, in particular, with the
innovation, which is really, really, really underfunded in
terms of staffing.
If you want to be able to increase the output of innovation
in rural areas, you have got to be able to expand the scope of
what they currently do. They do some great things with the road
tour, the roadshow and the road tour to underserved areas and
to rural areas, but I think it should be expanded beyond that
for outreach and training and procurement and a whole range of
things that need to be brought together.
Ms. FINKENAUER. So if this bill were to get signed into law
and these procurement officers were made to then work with some
of our small businesses to get those government contracts, what
would that mean specifically?
Mr. SHUKLA. Well, it would certainly mean that you could
have, like you do right now with the SBIR program, in any case
to set aside for small businesses, is you establish a core
group that you can actually reach out to in rural areas. USDA
does a program on rural development but it is frankly
underserved in my opinion. So I think you could do some things
in rural parts of the U.S., the broadband initiative is one of
them, that could be linked directly to the SBIR program itself
for topic areas and so on.
Ms. FINKENAUER. Great. Thank you so much. And thanks for
explaining that to folks on the Committee and to Washington.
And I just also want to take the opportunity to thank you
all for coming to testify here today. It does mean a lot, and
we have got some good work to do and I am excited to get to do
it.
And thank you, again, Chairman Crow. And with that, I yield
back.
Chairman CROW. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
I just have one follow-up question. The district that I
represent is one of the most diverse districts in the country.
I have over 150 languages spoken in one of my cities. Almost
one out of every five residents was born outside of the country
and they are very unique challenges to our immigrants and
refugee communities in starting and growing businesses and
accessing these programs.
I would love your thoughts on, just very briefly, on what
your experience has been on those challenges and what we could
be doing better to make sure that we are reducing barriers and
opening those up for those communities.
Mr. Saade, do you want to start?
Mr. SAADE. I will give it a try.
Look, the pathways to economic prosperity have widened, but
the people that control the purse strings, and I am not talking
about necessarily where we sit today, but in the private
sector, have concentrated. So it is not only immigrant
communities but anyone, if you look at the general macros and
the demographics of the population, something like 30 percent
of the population is white males. And I do not have anything
against white males, but the reality is that the country is not
white male. And if you believe that talent is equally
distributed, yet opportunity is not, then a good place to focus
is not just necessarily on the raw ingredients of what takes a
technology to a company to the capital markets and to
eventually millions of pensioners holding the stock of a
publicly traded company but just giving the people access to
the door because, I mean, at the end of the day, without these
programs, 70 percent of the technologies in the Apple phone
would not exist. A drug that saved my dad, Rituxan, and Biogen
its maker, would not exist without SBIR. So just the fact that
they exist is an amazing thing.
But the country is changing. The world is changing. Many
countries are out there with knives in their mouth trying to
take us off the pedestal across many aspects, including
economic diplomacy and entrepreneurial diplomacy. So yes, I
agree with you that a focus on less served groups, and that
includes immigrants, is smart business. On top of the fact
that, one last thing, if you look at the biggest companies in
the United States by market cap, 40 percent of them were
started by first generation immigrants. So all the money that
Wall Street loves and all the stocks we love to buy, it is
literally the lifeblood of, and I do not want this to be an
immigration pitch, but immigrants are hugely important to the
innovation economy.
Chairman CROW. Thank you, Mr. Saade.
Thank you to all the witnesses for sharing your time.
Representative Kim, one of our colleagues, is on his way
right now and had a question he wanted to ask. So I would open
it up to Mr. Shukla and Ms. Brown and Mr. Shroder, if you have
any comments on my last question.
Mr. SHUKLA. Yes, sir.
You know, in 1986, Margaret Thatcher turned to Gorbachev
and said, Mr. General Secretary, the ice's most difficult point
is breaking up. The fact of the matter is things are in flux,
and they are in flux. And what Javier was talking about in
terms of immigrants leading economic development in certain
areas is true. And access is also becoming a big issue.
Now, I am very optimistic that we are actually finding ways
of being able to deal with this issue. Obviously, there are
some real concerns on a national level and a Federal level. But
at the state level, states like California, for example, are
very diverse as you know. I come from one of the most diverse
cities on the planet. And it also has extreme inequality. But
there are lots of things that are being done to address
different aspects of it. And I am very optimistic. That is what
I would like to tell you.
Ms. BROWN. Thank you for asking the question. As you have
heard, of course, I am an immigrant. I was sworn-in in-front of
the Capital, the steps of Colorado as a result of Ronald
Reagan's Immigrants Day. It is a day that I always remember.
One of the thing that I think would be most appropriate to
try and help your diverse constituents is better and equal
access to capital. Immigrants have great ideas, but when you go
into a bank and you are looking for a loan and you are trying
to get approval, you just have to look at the numbers to see
that women and immigrants are disadvantaged in that domain.
The SBA has some fantastic programs. They have had
programs, too, that really try to improve rural access to
capital, which is even more disadvantaged. So I would
encourage, look at the numbers. If the numbers are not showing
that we are spreading access to capital equally, look at how do
you fix that. Because you cannot make a business without
getting a bank loan.
Chairman CROW. Mr. Shroder?
Mr. SHRODER. I am not sure I am the best one to answer the
question but I will tell you, as you think through it, if it is
more of a discussion, stay focused on the Phase III for just a
second. Because you can enter through the immigration. It is a
little bit hard for my background because from an immigration
perspective it might be hard to get Defense Department
clearances to do the classified work. So while being a
Caucasian male and having a company I am proud of, et cetera,
we have been able to hire a lot of people. We have grown from
two states to I think we are in 26 states now across the board.
So we would like to think that it is spread out at least more
geographically. But as you think of the program in the future,
whether it is capital and other things, I think you have got to
find that balancing act of when you are actually doing it to
generate the start of a new program versus actually the hiring
of those immigrants. I know we have hired significantly in
Colorado recently. To us, immigrants are fine as long as they
can work in that environment, and they have been an important
part of growth for us. But you can understand the challenge of
clearances and other things that might be associated with
Defense Department programs.
Chairman CROW. Thank you.
I would now like to recognize the gentleman from New
Jersey, Mr. Kim, for 5 minutes.
Mr. KIM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you so much for
coming here and talking with our Committee. I was rushing over
here from the Conference Committee for the National Defense
Authorization Act where we talked a lot about the importance of
innovation in our system as well, in our national security,
certainly in our energy sector, and so many other important
components.
So coming straight out of there, I wanted to rush on over
here and just really kind of get a sense from you of some of
the steps that we can take. I know that SBIR, STTR, and some of
these other programs, they play an important role in terms of
spurring the technological innovation. And these programs like
these that have allowed the United States to create not only a
sustainable workforce but also to become the leader in tech
innovation despite strong global competition. As I said, this
is particularly the case in clean energy and a number of other
places where I think this overlaps with a lot of interest,
certainly in my own district as we are thinking about the
future role that we can play in that innovation.
So I just wanted to start, Mr. Shukla, you have advised
multiple nations on technology-led innovation. What kind of
investments should the United States Government make to remain
competitive in innovation on a global scale, especially in
sectors like clean energy?
Mr. SHUKLA. So I do think that there are incredible
investments that have been made by this country in Centers of
Excellence across the United States and universities, in
cities, in clean tech foundation funds, in the competitions
that exist around clean tech. The one concern is there is
considerably less coordination than there ought to be. And so
when you have funding that comes down different silos, either
Federal or state, there really is no coordinated effort to say
what are we trying to achieve? What are the success factors
that we are looking at? What kinds of jobs are we likely to be
able to get from this? Where else can we prime the pump to make
sure that we have those kinds of investments that yield results
and monitor them?
It is easier when you have a smaller economy. I mean,
Germany decided, you know, we are going to go specifically into
solar production and solar technology and solar energy and all
of the aspects that matter, only to then be bested by China. So
when you have countries that do not play by the rules even
though they are supposed to play by the rules because they have
been inducted in, you have to be particularly careful about
this. And it is a cautionary tale only because this has
happened in food and ag. It has happened in life sciences. It
has happened in materials. And it has happened now in clean
tech and clean energy.
So I think we have got to really focus on what is our
national goal, in particular, and then make sure that we
coordinate over every single agency and also every single state
which has programs in this regard. The Federal Government
almost leaves this aside and says, you know, that is up to you
guys to do this. Under our Federal system that might make sense
but I do not think as a national objective it makes sense to be
able to leave things to the wind, so to speak.
Mr. KIM. Thank you for that. I appreciate this.
Mr. Saade, I wanted to just seek your thoughts on something
in particular.
So for 5 years the SBA has funded the Growth Accelerated
Fund competition which awards monetary prizes of $50,000 to the
Nation's most promising small business accelerators and
incubators. Now, 60 percent of the funding is steered to
support entrepreneurs in one of the following groups: women,
socially and economically disadvantaged, opportunity zones, or
those located in states underrepresented by SBIR-STTR. Can you
please speak to the value of the program and providing support
to traditionally underserved groups?
Mr. SAADE. Sure. Thanks for the question.
You can think about it as financial services or banking,
but just to focus it on the innovation economy is venture
capital and the entrepreneurial activity funding pools pursue
is concentrated in basically five states. And in those five
states it is six cities. And those cities are magnets for
people. They are magnets for the tax revenue they generate. It
is very difficult to compete with those.
The fine congresswoman from Iowa was talking about it from
her perspective, Iowa. And it cannot be overstated that
discovery can happen anywhere but typically what happens is
that one of these technologies or one of these companies gets
discovered and a venture capitalist from Menlo Park or Brooklyn
invest in them. They basically uproot the seed and move them to
Menlo Park or Brooklyn. So the reason for that is because those
places are ecosystems by design and they have been around for
years. No one is ever going to replicate Silicon Valley again
for a lot of reasons. There are a lot of ingredients that made
that happen. But the reality is that there is a lot of cities
and places in America--Boulder, Austin, suburbs of Seattle,
that are not trying to be Silicon Valley but are trying to
combine all those ingredients and make their entrepreneurial
ecosystem important.
This program essentially anchors the ecosystem literally by
building and supporting ecosystems. And the hypothesis was
pretty simple. By creating the ability for serendipitous
collisions to happen and a focus of attention on different
communities, including in your state, Mr. Kim, you will support
a more entrepreneurial economy. And it has been shown that
places with more entrepreneurial energy and more business
formation actually have better economies.
So the program, sort of like SBIR and STTR functions as
first risk capital because no one else in the private sector
would ever take the risk because it is a 30-year runway to
develop a national priority. There is no one in the private
sector that is going to take a risk on Shreveport or my home
town of San Juan. So the government's role with just that
little bit of money is to help catalyze some of those things.
And one more thing I will add is that $50,000 in the great
scheme of things is the salary of a person with a college
degree, generally. Not much. But the idea around the ecosystem
is that it attracts private capital. And at that, the program
has been pretty successful. And Congress I think has a match
requirement on some of the dollars that go into accelerators.
So it is a low risk and low dollar way to kind of open the
aperture for opportunity.
Mr. KIM. I appreciate that.
Chairman CROW. Thank you. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. KIM. I yield back.
Chairman CROW. Thank you.
Thank you to all the witnesses for your time, sharing your
expertise and experiences. This is very valuable for us as we
look at all the legislation and the fixes and things that need
to happen to make sure that we are remaining competitive.
Increasing our competitiveness by supporting small business
innovation is more critical than ever as we heard about today.
As our world continues to become increasingly connected,
America's lead in technology is crucial to our economic
prosperity and national security.
The partnership between federally funded research,
academia, and private industry has been pivotal to U.S.
technological advancement since the 1930s and has helped the
U.S. maintain leadership despite stagnating investments.
However, that lead is rapidly evaporating. That is why
investment improved access to these programs and the Growth
Accelerator Fund Competition must continue to grow and succeed.
The members of this Committee must continue to raise awareness
of the value of these programs and lead on developing policies
to ensure their success.
I look forward to working with Ranking Member Balderson so
that small businesses in the U.S. have the tools they need to
innovate, grow, and create jobs on Main Streets all around the
country.
I would ask unanimous consent that members have 5
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
And if there is no further business to come before the
Committee, we are adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:56 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]