- AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
[Senate Hearing 116-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
----------
THURSDAY, MARCH 28, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 10:42 a.m. in room SD-138, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. John Hoeven (chairman) presiding.
Present: Senators Hoeven, Merkley, Tester, Udall, Leahy,
and Baldwin.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
Food and Drug Administration
STATEMENT OF HON. SCOTT GOTTLIEB, M.D., COMMISSION
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR JOHN HOEVEN
Senator Hoeven. Good morning. We will call this hearing to
order.
Today, we are going to focus on the Food and Drug
Administration's fiscal year 2020 budget request. I would like
to thank the Ranking Member and other members for being present
today and certainly thank you, Dr. Gottlieb, for being here
today to discuss FDA's priorities for the upcoming year. Thank
you for your public service and your commitment to promote the
health and safety of American consumers.
I wish you well in your next endeavor. Although I am
certainly disappointed that you are leaving, and I appreciate
your service very much.
I look forward to working with Dr. Sharpless when he
officially takes over as Acting Commissioner.
In every budget cycle, there are winners and losers, and I
think it is fair to say that, once again, FDA is one of the
winners this time around.
For fiscal year 2020, the FDA's budget request for
appropriated funds is a 5.5 increase over fiscal year 2019.
This is one of the highest percentage increases in all of the
Department of Health and Human Services, especially when you
factor in that for 2019, the Congress provided the FDA with a
$268.6 million, or 9.6 percent, increase.
So this is an important conversation to have because your
agency impacts the lives of Americans every single day.
The FDA has authority over approximately 20 cents of every
dollar spent in America. Americans expect that the food they
eat and the drugs they take will be safe and effective.
The FDA's vast research covers more than 300,000 foreign
establishments and 185,000 domestic establishments, ranging
from food processing plants to facilities that manufacture
lifesaving medications. In addition to the facilities
themselves, FDA is tasked with the regulatory responsibility
for individual products.
In delivering these regulatory responsibilities, your
private sector partners expect transparency and certainty from
the FDA.
When I speak to small business owners and AG producers in
North Dakota, their overwhelming concern is that overly
burdensome regulations coming out of Washington, D.C. often
stifle innovation and hinder their ability to create jobs.
While we all support the FDA's mission, we must also be mindful
of these types of concerns.
I believe that the FDA must avoid the trappings of a one-
size-fits-all approach, and I urge you and your staff to take a
commonsense approach that supports our Nation's innovators.
That being said, Doctor, I look forward to your testimony
today, as well as my colleagues' questions. I will now turn to
the Ranking Member, Senator Merkley, for any opening remarks
that he may have.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR JEFF MERKLEY
Senator Merkley. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and,
Dr. Gottlieb, thank you for your 2 years of service.
And I join the Chairman in wishing you very well in the
next chapter. I am hoping you will be able to help coach the
FDA to continue on some of the initiatives that you have been
working on, particularly the challenges on food safety, on
taking on the importation of opioids.
I really appreciate the work that you have initiated in
regard to vaping. I would like to see our Government go further
faster in order to take on the epidemic of vaping use among
teenagers and the resulting challenges of nicotine addiction,
and I hope you will be able to help that from afar.
I do have significant concerns about the approval of
genetically engineered salmon. Salmon are such an amazing vital
part of Northwest ecosystem and Northwest culture, and those of
us from salmon States are concerned about any possibility of
genetically engineered fish making it into the wild. And while
always there are assurances things will not happen, crazy
things happen, and then we go, ``Why did we let that happen?''
It cannot be the case on putting this genetically altered fish
in a place where it could in fact enter the wild.
I look forward to your comments, and thank you.
Senator Hoeven. Are there other members who wish to make
opening statements?
[No response.]
Senator Hoeven. All right. Hearing none, Dr. Gottlieb,
begin. Thank you for being here, and please proceed with your
opening statement.
SUMMARY STATEMENT HON. SCOTT GOTTLIEB, M.D.
Dr. Gottlieb. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, and Members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you today to discuss the President's fiscal year 2020
Budget request for the FDA.
This is the last time I will appear before this
Subcommittee in my current role, and I am grateful for the
opportunity to work with you. I am proud of what we
accomplished together to advance the public health mission of
the FDA over the past 2 years, and I am thankful for your
willingness to support us in moments of challenge and moments
of opportunity.
We are especially grateful for the funding increases this
Subcommittee provided for FDA in fiscal year 2019. The funding
requested in the President's 2020 budget will allow the FDA to
build on these efforts to promote competition and bring better
and more affordable products to the market, to modernize a food
safety system, and strengthen our response to outbreaks and
foodborne illness and many other priorities.
OPIOID CRISIS
Today, I want to focus on one of my highest priorities
since taking my role 2 years ago, the FDA's work to combat the
opioid crisis. This remains the biggest public health crisis
facing the FDA. The 2020 Budget request requests $55 million to
continue supporting the four main areas of the FDA's work.
These funds will continue to build on the significant financial
investments this Subcommittee has provided to the FDA for our
opioids work over the last 2 fiscal years.
During those last 2 years, the FDA worked to change our
approach to this crisis. We committed to act more quickly as we
confront new risks and to take a more aggressive approach to
regulatory action.
One of the most important new steps we could now take is to
consider a comparative advantage of new opioids seeking
approval relative to other opioids already on the market. The
supply of drugs does not create demand, and it is wrong to
assume that just because the agency approves a new drug and it
is introduced to the market, it is going to somehow lead to
greater levels of abuse.
But, nonetheless, the underlying question is a fair one to
ask. In the setting of an opioid crisis, if a novel drug may be
eligible for a monopoly, should we demand that a new drug prove
it has some benefit over existing drugs in terms of how it
treats pain and preferably how it can help reduce the
propensity for diversion and abuse?
We want to ask these same questions in other therapeutic
settings for a lot of practical reasons, but we know opioids
are different. And today, I come before you to say that after
careful deliberation, we believe the FDA needs a new
comparative standard for future approvals of new opioid drugs.
Given the public health crisis we face and that American
families are still being destroyed by the epidemic, I believe
that FDA should treat opioids as a class differently from other
drugs.
We want to incentivize drug developers to focus on
developing new opioids that offer material therapeutic
advantages over already approved opioids. Safety advantages
might mean a new drug has reduced abuse liability or reduced
incidence or severity of serious adverse events. An
effectiveness advantage might be to improve pain control for
particular subpopulations that could help doctors more narrowly
tailor their prescribing of opioids to carefully selected
settings.
We hope this new approach would also incentivize developers
to increasingly focus their efforts on non-opioid alternatives
that could eventually begin to replace opioids as the drugs of
choice when it comes to products used to treat pain that
address risks of addiction.
For this to work, the FDA believes that there should be a
premarket demonstration that a new opioid is superior to an
already approved opioid or opioid-containing drug for the same
general indication. The standard should be that a new opioid
provides significant advantage relative to an already approved
opioid drug for the same general indication in terms of greater
efficacy and safety.
This type of approval framework could operate in
conjunction with our existing program for breakthrough drugs,
or it could be paired with new designations for all pain
therapies that have preliminary evidence of safer, more
effective performance.
We want to find ways to prioritize and make more efficient
the development of novel treatments for pain that have the
potential to offer significant advantages over our existing
options.
Congress could also consider how other incentives,
including exclusivity, might help drive development of drugs
with safer attributes.
At the FDA, we have considered all the options to address
this crisis, and we have already embarked on many novel
efforts. We have concluded that we need to change our approval
approach as well and continue to treat opioids differently in
order to fight one of the largest public health tragedies that
our Nation has ever faced.
Thank you.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Scott Gottlieb, M.D.
Good morning Chairman Hoeven, Ranking Member Merkley, and Members
of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today to discuss the President's fiscal year 2020 Budget request for
FDA.
First, I would like to thank the Subcommittee for your continued
support of the Agency. FDA has received strong bipartisan support
throughout the appropriations process in recent years and fiscal year
2019 was no different. I believe this support reflects our shared
commitment to the vital role FDA has protecting and promoting the
public health. The funding this Subcommittee provides is essential to
the Agency fulfilling its mission. The professional staff of FDA is
grateful for your support of their work and the funding increases the
Subcommittee provided FDA in fiscal year 2019.
Last year, FDA accomplished a broad array of scientific advances
and regulatory actions across our broad portfolio. Our work included
promoting generic drug entry as a way to foster drug competition and
lower drug prices through the implementation of the Drug Competition
Action Plan, a record-setting year for approvals of novel medical
devices and advanced several meaningful initiatives to continue
enhancing the safety of medical devices. The Agency also continued
advancing food safety and nutrition, launching our Nutrition Innovation
Strategy to leverage nutrition as a tool to reduce the burden of
chronic disease, and we took steps to empower consumers with nutrition
information by supporting retail food establishments in meeting menu
labeling requirements. We also furthered implementation of the Food
Safety Modernization Act (FSMA) which builds proactive safety
approaches into the production of human and animal foods. With your
continued support, we have more opportunity to deliver on the promises
of promoting the health of the public we serve.
The funding requested in the President's fiscal year 2020 Budget
will allow the Agency to sustain its current work--protecting the
safety of the food and medical products consumers use every day--and
build on these efforts by requesting additional resources to make
significant
progress on several important fronts; including fostering
innovation and competition to bring better and more affordable products
to market, promoting the development of innovative medical products,
combatting the opioid epidemic, modernizing food safety and
strengthening foodborne illness response, and implementing the 21st
Century Cures Act (Cures).
Overall, the Budget requests $6.1 billion in total resources for
FDA--which is an increase of $643 million or 12 percent above the
fiscal year 2019 Annualized Continuing Resolution (CR). At this total
level, the Budget includes an increase of $362 million in budget
authority and an increase of $281 million in user fees. The Budget
requests considerable new resources for FDA and makes significant new
investments in advancing critical areas of science, technology, and
public health.
As the regulatory Agency responsible for ensuring the safety and
effectiveness of more than $2.5 trillion worth of products used by
consumers, I remain steadfast that these funds are critical investments
in our public health agency.
efforts to advance safe and effective medical products
The fiscal year 2020 Budget request for medical product safety is
$3.8 billion, an increase of $428 million above the fiscal year 2019
Annualized CR, which includes increases of $316 million in budget
authority and $112 million in user fees. A few examples of the new
medical product initiatives this Budget request supports are described
below.
Transform Medical Device Safety, Cybersecurity, Review, and Innovation
FDA has been improving policies and processes to address scientific
advances and enhance the safety of medical devices. These improvements
are critical to protect patients and foster innovation. FDA's
fragmented information technology systems are not well-suited to
support these activities. The Budget requests $55 million for an
initiative to build an integrated knowledge management system and
portal for medical devices to enable safety issues to be monitored, and
effectiveness to be evaluated, across the total life cycle of the
device and to build out our digital health program. These capabilities
will better leverage pre-existing and new data in near real time. This
modernization effort is essential for implementing FDA's new approaches
for digital health technologies, breakthrough devices, use of real-
world evidence and medical device cybersecurity.
Medical Countermeasures
FDA works with partners at all levels of government--local, state,
territorial, tribal, Federal, and international--to support medical-
countermeasure-related public health preparedness and response efforts.
This includes working closely with Federal partners through the Public
Health Emergency Medical Countermeasures Enterprise to build and
sustain the medical countermeasures programs necessary to respond
effectively to chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN)
threats and emerging public health threats, such as pandemic influenza,
as well as with the Department of Defense to support the development of
medical products needed to protect American military personnel. In
fiscal year 2018, FDA approved 28 medical countermeasures, including
the first drug with an indication for treatment of smallpox.
The Budget includes $128 million for medical countermeasure
activities, of which $31.5 million is for the Medical Countermeasure
Initiative, an increase of $7 million above the fiscal year 2019
Annualized CR level. This investment will increase FDA capacity to
facilitate the development and availability of medical countermeasures
to respond to CBRN and emerging infectious disease threats by
furthering the establishment of clear, scientifically supported
regulatory pathways for medical countermeasures, filling critical
scientific gaps, and advancing platform and manufacturing technologies
for medical countermeasures.
Integrated Pathogen Reduction of the Blood Supply
Advancing the continued safety of U.S. blood supply through new
safety innovations is a critical public health priority for FDA. The
Agency currently works to prevent transmitted infections through a
combination of blood donor screening and laboratory testing methods.
Pathogen reduction technologies, however, are a potentially more
efficient method of decreasing the risks posed by viral and other
pathogens that may be found in blood. These technologies are currently
available for platelets and plasma, but with this new funding, FDA
would work to promote innovation and expand their use to improve the
protection of our blood supply.
The Budget requests $20 million to pilot this technology as a tool
that could help reduce the risk of transmission of contaminating
viruses and other microorganisms from Whole Blood and still allow its
subsequent separation into various blood components. This pathogen
reduction technology could eventually help protect the blood supply
from existing and emerging pathogens and, if successful, could
potentially reduce or eliminate certain existing blood donor screening
and testing requirements. It is possible that if this technology were
incorporated broadly, it could enhance national security by enabling a
blood supply that would be safe in the face of a wide variety of
emerging pathogens. It may also deliver these protections for a
potentially lower cost than those associated with current screening and
testing methods.
Compounding
FDA's compounding program--including implementation of the Drug
Quality and Security Act--is a priority for the Agency. We understand
that compounded products serve a critical role for many patients across
the country and we are committed to develop new policies for
outsourcing facilities, including policies to improve the quality of
outsourcing facilities' compounded products. We are also helping
address providers' needs for supplies of non-patient- specific
compounded medications (office stock). For example, with the new
resources provided by Congress in fiscal year 2019, we plan to
establish a Compounding Center of Excellence to provide training on
good manufacturing practices for outsourcing facilities and develop a
specialized group of investigators who would focus on outsourcing
facility inspectional activities. By engaging with outsourcing
facilities and states, we can help the domestic outsourcing facility
adhere to the quality standards needed to protect patient health and
support sector growth.
The Budget builds on our efforts and requests $76 million to
support compounding activities. Of this total, $14 million will be used
to catalyze the development of policies and regulations for the
outsourcing facilities, including advancement of the list of bulk drug
substances that outsourcing facilities may use in compounding and
current good manufacturing practice guidance and regulation specific to
outsourcing facilities. The activities supported by this funding would
give outsourcing facilities tools to better meet healthcare providers'
and patients' needs for compounded drugs.
efforts to advance food safety
The fiscal year 2020 Budget request for food safety is $1.4
billion, an increase of $67 million above the fiscal year 2019
Annualized CR, which includes an increase of $38 million in budget
authority and $29 million in user fees. A few highlights of the Budget
request are described below.
Advancing FSMA
As part of our ongoing implementation efforts related to FSMA, the
Budget proposes allocating an increase of $16 million above the fiscal
year 2019 Annualized CR level to provide inspections through the state
cooperative agreement programs. These additional resources are
essential to the successful implementation of FSMA and are key to
protecting public health by ensuring that manufacturing and processing
facilities comply with the new FSMA requirements.
Strengthening Response Capabilities for Foodborne Outbreaks
Efficient global markets for food production and distribution allow
American families access to a wide range of wholesome and affordable
food choices that can improve their health. We want to provide
Americans the benefits from access to a highly diverse food supply,
while reducing risks from foodborne illnesses.
In order to strengthen our response capabilities to foodborne
disease outbreaks by improving our capacity to detect early signals
associated with foodborne illness and shortening response timelines
once human or animal food contamination is detected, the Budget
requests an increase of $16 million above the fiscal year 2019
Annualized CR level. In fiscal year 2017 and fiscal year 2018, FDA's
Coordinated Outbreak Response and Evaluation network evaluated nearly
120 potential human food safety outbreak incidents per year. That is
nearly double what was reviewed in fiscal year 2015 and fiscal year
2016. The increase requested in the Budget will allow the Agency to add
new staff and resources to enhance signal detection, response to
outbreaks, and post-response evaluations. FDA will also add staff to
oversee its recall process and make the recall process timelier.
Promoting Innovation and Emerging Technology While Maintaining Product
Safety
Innovations in plant and animal biotechnology offer tremendous
opportunities for advancing public health. Promising new technologies
have the potential to improve human and animal health, animal well-
being, food productivity and food security. FDA will continue to
facilitate the safe development of these emerging technologies by
investing in continued enhancements to our review capabilities for
biotechnology products and other novel products, assessing these
products in a risk-based manner to provide predictable
commercialization pathways that can foster product innovation and
market access in a safe and timely way, and improve consumer nutrition.
To these ends, the Budget proposes a new $28 million user fee for
Innovative Food Products, which FDA intends to develop in collaboration
with industry and other stakeholders. The Budget also requests an
additional $8 million in budget authority to improve review times and
eliminate unnecessary burdens to industry related to the premarket
safety reviews of animal food ingredients.
tobacco
The Budget requests $100 million in new tobacco fees, and includes
manufacturers and importers of deemed tobacco products, including
electronic nicotine delivery systems, and certain other products within
the FDA's tobacco user fee assessments. E-cigarettes, in particular,
represent an increasing share of the tobacco marketplace. The new
resources will support the FDA in its continued efforts to create a
modern regulatory framework for the appropriate oversight of e-
cigarettes and in taking continued steps to reduce youth use of all
tobacco products. One of our most important public health efforts is to
continue standing up a framework to make sure we can put e-cigarettes
through an appropriate series of regulatory gates, and aggressively
confront youth use of these products to make sure children do not
become addicted to nicotine.
opioids
One of my highest priorities as FDA Commissioner is combatting the
ongoing crisis of opioid addiction. The FDA has changed its approach to
the opioids crisis and is taking a much more aggressive approach to
regulatory action. At the FDA, we've committed to taking more rapid
action in the face of new threats, like the growing prevalence of
illicit fentanyl that's contributing to overdose deaths, or the
continued prevalence of prescriptions being written for durations of
use that are too long for the clinical circumstances for which they're
intended. We've changed the way we're tackling these issues and stepped
up our intervention when it comes to opioids. Going forward, we're
going to be looking at the potential for evaluating the comparative
benefits and risks of new opioids relative to other opioids already on
the market. We've raised the question of whether there should be such a
standard for new opioid approvals to offer some advantage over the
existing armamentarium. We plan continue to evaluate this concept as we
work to modernize the FDA's framework for assessing the risks and
benefits of opioid drugs. FDA is focusing its efforts in the following
four priorities:
--Decreasing exposure and preventing new addiction,
--Supporting the treatment of those with opioid use disorder,
--Fostering the development of novel pain treatment therapies, and
--Increasing enforcement and assessing benefit-risk.
The Budget requests an additional $55 million above the fiscal year
2019 Annualized CR level to continue supporting the four main areas of
the Agency's work. These funds will continue to build on the tremendous
financial investments this Subcommittee has provided to the Agency for
our opioids work over the last two fiscal years.
21st century cures act
Implementation of the 21st Century Cures Act (Cures) continues to
be a top priority for the Agency. Cures includes provisions that have
the potential to impart far-reaching effects on scientific advancements
in medical product development. The law complements many efforts
underway at FDA. All of these efforts are aimed at transforming the way
we support product development and maintaining FDA's gold standard for
safety and effectiveness. Toward these efforts, the Budget requests a
total of $75 million to support our implementation work.
conclusion
The last year was historic for the Agency. We are diligently
working on a number of fronts and the vital work we do provides
Americans with better ways to improve their health and welfare,
empowering consumers to make informed choices about the products they
use and the foods they feed to their families. This Budget will help
FDA maintain and complement our current efforts, as well as provide a
renewed focus and investment in some of the Agency's and the nation's
top public health priorities. I look forward to answering your
questions today and the Agency looks forward to working with all of you
going forward.
Senator Hoeven. Thank you, Dr. Gottlieb. We will now have 5
minute rounds of questions.
OPIOIDS APPROVAL PROCESS & LABELING
Let us start on the opioid issue, in terms of labeling--not
only the approval process, but talk about what needs to be done
as far as the approval process, the labeling, and how that has
contributed to the problem and how that can be remedied.
And then also your effort to work with the drug companies
to develop drugs that help reduce opioid use and help wean
somebody off opioids in a way that actually works for them.
So, if you could, touch on all three of those aspects of
the problem.
Dr. Gottlieb. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
OPIOID LABELING
On the labeling specifically, one of the things we have
committed to, we have taken a number of steps to try to improve
the labeling and the Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies
(REMS) system that governs the prescribing of opioids,
including extending the educational requirements to all
providers, not just physician providers, but non-physician
providers, and requiring education around both the immediate-
release formulations and the long-acting formulations of the
drugs. Previously, it was just on the long-acting formulations.
OPIOID APPROVAL
But one of the more significant recent steps that we have
taken is to implement the authorities that we were given under
the Substance Use-Disorder Prevention that Promotes Opioid
Recovery and Treatment for Patients and Communities (SUPPORT)
Act to require effectiveness studies looking at the
effectiveness of drugs with long-term administration.
One of the questions is whether or not with prolonged
administration of these drugs, chronic administration of these
drugs, you have declines in effectiveness that then cause some
of these safety issues to arise, where you might have increased
prescribing that might lead to increased addiction as a result
of the declines in effectiveness, and is declining
effectiveness itself a potential safety issue? And we will look
at it that way.
So we are going to require the sponsors to do long-term
effectiveness studies for the first time, and we are going to
be embarking on that in the coming months.
MEDICATION-ASSISTED TREATMENT
With respect to the issue around Medication-Assisted
Treatment (MAT) options, we have promulgated new guidance to
try to create additional pathways to get (MAT) therapy for
opioid addiction, opioid use disorder to the market.
We know there are approved therapies that all work. They
work better in conjunction with psychosocial support, and we
want to both create new options and perhaps longer-acting
formulations of some of these drugs, as well as try to address
some of the stigma associated with some of these treatments.
There is a perception that someone who is on replacement
therapy for treatment of opioid use disorder is somehow still
addicted to an opioid because they are still receiving an
opioid to relieve the physical symptoms of withdrawal, but that
person who could be living a very productive life does not have
addiction anymore. They have physical withdrawal, and the
replacement therapy is treating the physical withdrawal, but
they are able to rejoin a productive life. And so we are trying
to address some of the stigma associated with these treatments
as well.
REPLACEMENT THERAPIES
Senator Hoeven. Are these replacement therapies coming to
market, and are you able to verify they are safe and effective?
And, again, back to the labeling issue, are you able to both
label them appropriately? Are you working not just on going
forward the new drugs coming on market and addressing the
labeling issue, but also any existing issues that you have with
labeling on drugs that have already been approved?
Dr. Gottlieb. Well, the treatments themselves are on the
market. There is a number of treatments on the market that are
approved for this indication. Where we have seen some recent
innovations is in longer-acting formulations of some of these
drugs, which can help drive patients to maintain therapy.
There might be other opportunities for new kinds of
innovations, new kinds of drugs in addition to the replacement
therapies, like buprenorphine.
OPIOID LABELING
The labeling issues I think that we have seen come up more
recently, the questions around the labeling of these drugs, is
around the labeling for chronic use, and that label and that
indication has undergone a lot of revisions over time. But the
questions that we have been asked--and they are appropriate
questions--is whether or not we have adequate information about
the long-term safety of these drugs when they are administered
chronically, and that is where we are going to be using the
authorities we were given under the SUPPORT Act to require new
studies, looking at the safety issues associated with chronic
administration and in particular whether or not efficacy
declines with respect to long-term administration. And that in
and of itself creates certain kinds of safety issues.
Senator Hoeven. How many of these replacement therapies
have we seen in the market? Do you anticipate them being a
solution to reduce the opioid use and the problems associated
with it?
Dr. Gottlieb. Well, I think it is one solution.
We see products in development. So there are products in-
house. A number of them are different formulations of some of
the existing drugs that are on the market. It is one solution.
HOLISTIC SOLUTION TO ADDRESSING THE OPIOID CRISIS
Senator Hoeven. What do you think about holistic solutions?
Give me the steps that you would see as a holistic solution to
addressing the opioid crisis.
Dr. Gottlieb. Well, trying to reduce prescribing, trying to
rationalize prescribing, so you reduce the rate of new
addiction.
A lot of the historical addiction was addiction formed in a
medical setting, people who had appropriate prescription, but
became addicted as a result of the medical use of these drugs.
We need to rationalize prescribing, make sure fewer
prescriptions are written, and when they are written, they are
for an appropriate duration of use.
We need to address the illicit drugs that are pouring into
this country. So interdiction is a cornerstone of our efforts.
We have taken down a lot of websites. We have stepped up our
work in the international mail facilities, thanks to resources
that this Committee provided to the Agency.
We also need to work on innovation. How do we get products
to market that are non-addictive alternatives to opioids, non-
opioid alternatives, as well as innovation when it comes to
treatment?
So those are the three prongs of what we are trying to do
to address this at a high level. We are working pretty
aggressively over all three of those domains.
I would just say, in sort of summing that up, the nature of
this crisis is changing. It has gone from one that was a crisis
formed from medical prescribing to one where, increasingly,
people who become newly addicted to opioids, their first
introduction is now an illicit drug, and increasingly, it is a
super-potent formulation. It might be pressed fentanyl being
sold as OxyContin or Vicodin inappropriately. That is not what
it is. It is a counterfeit drug, and so I think that we need to
recognize that.
We still look at, for example, flows of illicit drugs
coming into this country in terms of pounds of drugs seized.
What we need to be looking at is the potency of the drugs
coming in, and when you look at drugs on that basis, I think we
have a monumental challenge in terms of what is coming into
this country and the changing nature of this addiction crisis.
Senator Hoeven. Senator Merkley.
Senator Merkley. Thank you very much, and I am glad you got
to speak to the fentanyl.
We approved $140 million to FDA to help tackle opioid
crisis. I believe the bulk of those funds have been spent
trying to intercept fentanyl coming in from China and India.
I just want to check in and see if that is the case, and
from what we have learned, is that any feasible objective, or
is it just too simple to mail this incredibly potent opioid to
multiple destinations in the U.S., or do we have a handle on
how we can really intercept it?
Dr. Gottlieb. Well, I do not know that I can tell you that
we have a handle on it. I cannot even tell you that we have a
full measure of the scope of the challenge across the
Government.
Our interdiction work is primarily at the international
mail facilities and is primarily focused on non-controlled
substances. We focus on FDA-approved products.
When a controlled substance is spotted in the international
mail facilities, it goes immediately to Customs and Border
Protection. If it is screened, then United States Postal
Service (USPS) spots a controlled substance.
But what we do is we get the packages that are pills but
presumed not to be controlled substances, but even in examining
those, we find a high rate of controlled substances. So we are
basically the last line, but things are still getting through.
The reason they are getting through is people are getting
more sophisticated about how they are sending them in. They are
sending in sort of small shipments. They are disguising them as
Over-the-Counter (OTC) drugs. They are stripping labels from
it. So if a dog does not sniff it, it is in a small package, it
looks like an over-the-counter drug, it might go through the
first line of screening and then come to us. So we are the last
line of defense in the international mail facilities, even
though it is not our primary mission.
This Committee provided us about $100 million in resources.
When I got to FDA, there were seven Full-Time Employees (FTEs)
doing this mission. With the work of Mel Plaisier, the
Associate Commissioner for Regulatory Affairs (ACRA) at the
agency, we freed up, internally, resources to put about 25
people on that mission. With the resources from this Committee,
we will increase that number to about 135, I believe, and be
able to screen 100,000 packages a year, a substantial increase,
but still a small amount of what is coming in.
Senator Merkley. And just a sense of that, we probably
receive 100,000 packages or more a day across the Country to
get a scope of the challenge.
Dr. Gottlieb. Last year, I believe it was 800--it was going
to approach, I think last year, 800 million packages. It is
heading towards a billion packages a year, so this is a
fraction of a fraction.
But even though it sounds daunting and it sounds like we
are screening a trivial amount, the amount that we are
screening allows us to glean information that allows us to
dramatically improve our targeting. So we do not need to screen
a high percentage of packages to be highly effective.
Senator Merkley. Thank you, and I will look forward to
continuing to learn from FDA what is working and what is not.
Things we are trying that are not working, let us move
resources to things that are.
ONLINE ORDERING OF E-CIGARETTES
I wanted to turn to the e-cigarettes. I am going to miss
having the ongoing conversation with you about taking on the
flavors designed for children. I know that you have moved with
this regulation to have a separate room, but also to allow such
to be delivered by mail. And I am wondering if one is allowed
to order over the mail, all these different flavors that are
appealing to kids and given the sophistication of our children,
are we going to have any sort of effective barrier to keep
these many flavors designed to appeal to children out of the
hands of children?
Dr. Gottlieb. Senator, in some respects, I believe
personally the measures that can be implemented when it comes
to online ordering might be more foolproof. Nothing is
foolproof. We will accept that, but I think it might be more
foolproof than the kinds of measures that we can implement at a
retail setting or point of sale.
There are other things sold online that are adult-only
products. You think of wine ordered online where you have
stringent age verification requirements, adult signature on
delivery, where you can implement controls that can largely
keep these products out of the hands of kids.
Actually, I think from my perspective, based on what I have
known in my briefings I have received from my experts, I think
it is maybe more challenging at the point of sale and retail.
I will also close by saying--and this is not to say that
things could not shift, but only a small percentage of these
products are actually sold online, certainly less than 10
percent when you look across the different manufacturers.
Senator Merkley. So if we proceed in this fashion and you
mentioned wine. Many States are allowed to choose whether or
not they allow deliveries of alcohol being ordered through the
mail. Will States have the ability to choose as to whether to
allow these child-appealing flavors to be delivered through the
mail?
Dr. Gottlieb. It is an interesting question whether or not
States can pass statute that supersedes a Federal standard.
There is no preemption. So, presumably, they could pass laws
that supersede the Federal allowance.
Senator Merkley. Okay. Well, that would be an interesting
thing for the States to take up because, as you have rightly
acknowledged, it is such an explosion. Just in the time that we
have been in this conversation in the last 2 years, we have
seen a huge expansion.
My impression is you have come to the point of view that
this is a significant problem we have to keep working to take
on because while the vaping can help smokers stop smoking, they
do not need all these candy-flavored flavors to do that, and
those are primarily targeted at children.
Dr. Gottlieb. And your words and your warnings to me when I
talked to you during my confirmation process have sadly proven
true, Senator.
Senator Merkley. Thank you.
Senator Hoeven. Senator Leahy.
Senator Leahy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Gottlieb, I am going to miss having you here. I do
appreciate your availability when I have called and when we
have had questions. I suspect there are four people in
Westport, though, that will be glad to have you back, your wife
and your three children, and you probably will not mind that
either. Is that safe to say?
CBD REGULATION
Dr. Gottlieb. I am going to miss this position. This has
been a wonderful, wonderful journey.
Senator Leahy. Well, let us go over a couple things. I
realize everybody has got different questions.
We did a bipartisan 2018 Farm Bill. I was pretty proud of
it. Republicans and Democrats did things the way they should
do. The Chairman is a member of that Committee, and we passed a
Farm Bill with overwhelming margins, both the House and Senate.
We had some significant wins for Vermont families and dairy
farmers, organic producers, but also, what I was mostly
concerned about, rural communities across the country.
It also reclassified hemp as an agricultural product rather
than a controlled substance. We had farmers, processors,
retailers in my State and most States that want to enter this
market. They want to leverage the potential, but they have
significant regulatory and enforcement uncertainty, including
with the FDA.
You recently stated the FDA, if I have got this correct,
could take years to create an informal pathway for hemp-derived
Cannabidiol CBD products to be sold, despite the fact they are
widely available in the market.
How do you think the FDA should use its enforcement
discretion on the use of CBD as an ingredient?
Dr. Gottlieb. Well, we are using enforcement discretion
right now.
I will take enforcement action against CBD products that
are on the market if manufacturers are making what I consider
over-the-line claims. So if you are making CBD and you are
claiming it can cure cancer or prevent Alzheimer's disease, we
are going to take action against that because that could
mislead a patient to foregoing otherwise effective therapy.
But there are products on the market right now, that given
our enforcement priorities and our limited resources, we have
not taken action against. That is not an invitation for people
to continue marketing these products. We are concerned about
it.
But we heard Congress loud and clear here. We know you want
a pathway. Under our regulatory scheme, it is a challenging
route because this not only exists as a drug in the
marketplace, but it is also under substantial clinical
investigation. So even if there was an approved drug, because
it was never previously in the food supply, we do not have a
clear route to allow this to be lawfully marketed, short of
promulgating new regulations.
That is why, in closing, one of the things that the working
group that is headed up by Amy Abernethy, who is here with me
today, our Principal Deputy Commissioner, is going to be
looking at is what options we could propose to Congress to
potentially legislate on this issue in a specific manner.
Senator Leahy. Well, that is what I am thinking of, a
legislative fix. I do not envy you trying to figure out a
regulatory one because you have other agencies with
jurisdiction. Would you please, as you continue on this, make
sure my staff and I are kept apprised of what type of a
legislative fix it might be? And then the various Committees
that members of this Committee serve on will probably be where
the legislative fix will go.
I would just like to get some certainty here. I am not
diminishing the complexities, but I would like to get some
certainty.
PRESCRIPTION DRUG COSTS
And another area of certainty, we have the high cost of
prescription drugs. You and I have discussed expediting generic
drugs into the market. We have a bipartisan Creating and
Restoring Equal Access to Equivalent Samples (CREATES) Act. Key
Republicans, key Democrats have endorsed this. I think it will
save money. I think it will have a real impact. I wish we would
hurry up and pass it.
I look at things like insulin. Insulin prices increased
from 2006 to 2015 by more than 500 percent. I hear of people
who ration their insulin medicine. You are a physician. You
understand this better than I do, but my wife, who is a
medical-surgical nurse, has talked with some of these people
and told them that you cannot do that. You got to use it the
way you are told to use it.
So how is the FDA working to ensure generic developers do
not delay their current development of follow-on or generic
insulin until after March 2020 when they might have a different
regulatory procedure?
Dr. Gottlieb. Well, we have recently, as you know, Senator,
taken steps to implement the legislation that was passed to
move the biologics that were historically regulated as drugs
into the biosimilars pathway.
Historically, it has been very hard to develop a generic
version of insulin under the drug scheme because it was a
biologic regulated as a drug. So proving sameness under the
Abbreviated New Drug Application (ANDA) process, under the
traditional Hatch-Waxman process was challenging, and a lot of
the insulins came to the market through a route called
505(b)(2), which did not allow for automatic substitution.
We believe under the biosimilars pathway, we are going to
see much more vigorous competition from truly interchangeable
insulin products, and we already have a lot of applications in-
house and a lot of activity for products looking to come
through that pathway. We think it is going to be easier to get
to the market as a copy and also to claim interchangeability
under the biosimilars pathway. So we are optimistic that this
market can continue to evolve in a positive way.
Senator Leahy. Is it going to be delayed until March 2020?
Dr. Gottlieb. I do not think there should be any delay.
This has been telegraphed for a number of years, and so we have
seen companies make accommodations for the change in the market
position of these products. And so companies have filed
applications or are seeking to file applications under the
biosimilars pathway, anticipating this change.
Could there be one or two sponsors that sort of get caught
trying to slip in under the old pathway before the data
conversion? It is possible. There was always going to be the
potential for a few outliers, but by and large, we are seeing
very vigorous activity under this new proposed framework.
Senator Leahy. Thank you.
Senator Hoeven. Senator Udall.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was going to say to Ranking Member Merkley, who I think
talked earlier about the genetically modified salmon, I share
his comments and also join him in his remarks.
YOUTH E-CIGARETTE USE
Dr. Gottlieb, thank you for being here today. I am pleased
that this budget gives additional funding to help evaluate e-
cigarettes. I remain deeply concerned about the skyrocketing
use of e-cigarettes by our Nation's youth. The CDC survey data
showed an astounding 78 percent increase in e-cigarette use
among high school students in 2018.
In my home State of New Mexico, 51.5 percent of teens have
used e-cigarettes. This is significantly higher than the
national average of 42.2 percent.
The U.S. Surgeon General has said e-cigarette smoking among
youth has reached epidemic proportions. I fear that these
products, especially flavored e-cigarettes, are creating a new
generation of nicotine addicts.
I applaud you for raising the alarm about this epidemic;
however, I have been clear with you that I believe FDA must
take more aggressive steps to effectively address this pressing
public health concern.
If new CDC survey data reveal that youth e-cigarette use
does not decline in 2019, do you agree an appropriate next step
is to remove flavored e-cigarettes from the market until they
undergo review by the FDA?
Dr. Gottlieb. Well, Senator, I share your concerns.
I will say at the outset we still believe that the e-
cigarettes could be a viable tool for currently addicted adult
smokers to transition off of combustible tobacco on to
something that, while not safe, is less harmful than
combustible tobacco.
We also believe at a time when we are advancing the rule,
this year, to regulate nicotine content in combustible
cigarettes, to render them minimally and not addictive, the e-
cigarettes offer another alternative for adults who still want
to enjoy satisfying levels of nicotine, but it will no longer
be available, presumably, in a combustible cigarette.
But I have said all along that that cannot come at the
expense of addicting a whole generation of children on these
products, and what has changed our posture was the data that
you cited, which I received on August 31st. And a week later,
we gave a statement that this was an epidemic and we were going
to have to take new steps.
I think if the 2019 National Youth Tobacco Survey shows
another large increase in the rate of use among children, to
answer your question directly, I think we will have to look at
the pod-based and cartridge-based e-cigarettes as a category
and consider additional regulatory steps, including the
potential that we might need to seek the market withdrawal of
some of these products until they have approved Premarket
Tobacco Application (PMTAs) by the agency.
Senator Udall. Don't you think we have enough evidence
today to remove them from the market today for youth? For
youth?
Dr. Gottlieb. We are trying to engage in a very careful
public health balancing here, and we put forward a set of
policies that we want to see if maybe it can work, which is to
try to put in place significantly heightened age verification
requirements for the flavored products sold at point of sale.
That policy is being implemented right now. We are confident
that it will be implemented. Some companies have already taken
voluntary steps to comply with that.
But, again, to your question, if the 2019 National Youth
Tobacco Survey data reveals another sharp increase, we are
going to have to significantly reevaluate what we are doing
here and contemplate potentially taking these off the market.
Look, all of these policies come with significant
tradeoffs. We do see adults switching to e-cigarettes as
anecdotal evidence of that. There is some data to suggest that
currently addicted adult smokers are transitioning to the e-
cigarettes. So there is a very careful public health balancing
that we have been trying to engage in here, but we cannot get
caught behind the curve, to your point.
Senator Udall. Can we expect anything from you before you
leave? I mean, this would be a nice way to go out of office.
Dr. Gottlieb. Well, look, I pushed hard to get out that
policy on the issues around the flavored products at point of
sale, and I am very confident. We received broad support from
the White House within the administration. Secretary Alex Azar
is very strong on this issue, and we have got strong statements
of support from the White House. I am very confident that that
policy will be finalized and implemented.
We got out a foundational rule today with respect to
tobacco, and we will continue to make tobacco policy right out
the door, but I am also very confident that my successor is
going to pick up the mantle here and will share my concerns
around the youth use.
Senator Udall. As you know--and you and I have talked about
this before--as a State Attorney General, we sued the tobacco
companies, and our strongest case was that they were addicting
young people. And they had the studies, and they said if you
addict young people, then they get a smoker for life. And I
think that is what they are doing here, and I am glad you are
on top of it. And I hope you will be as aggressive as you can
before you leave because I think we are in the middle of an
epidemic, and I think we really need to do something about it.
Thank you very much, and we are going to miss you a lot.
Dr. Gottlieb. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Hoeven. Senator Baldwin.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I agree we will miss you.
DAIRY STANDARDS OF IDENTITY
Commissioner Gottlieb, last year, you committed to looking
into concerns that I have raised on behalf of dairy farmers
across this country who are rightly frustrated that plant-based
imitation products get away with using dairy's good name for
their own benefit.
These products use dairy's good name, and there is no
consequence, even though it is clearly against FDA rules.
While I still believe that FDA could begin enforcement
immediately, I know that you felt it was very important to
receive public input on the issue before beginning an
enforcement process, and I want to thank you for keeping your
commitment to America's dairy farmers and making some forward
progress on this issue.
Since our hearing last spring, things have gotten much
worse for our dairy farmers. In the last year, Wisconsin lost
633 mostly small- and medium-size family dairy farms, many of
which had been operating for generations.
Our trade situation has become less stable. Markets are
very tough for milk, with retaliatory tariffs on cheese, and
the trade situation is also less stable for corn and soybeans,
the commodities that keep our dairy farmers in business.
Farmers have faced also an extremely cold and snowy winter
in my State that has caused hundreds of barns to collapse, and
dangerously cold temperatures have caused livestock losses. It
is really, really hard out there right now for dairy.
So, as they face these stressful times, farmers in
Wisconsin and across the country are looking to the Food and
Drug Administration to do its job, and they are closely
following the actions you have taken thus far. It is not just
farmers who are paying attention. Among the comments that the
Food and Drug Administration received was a request from the
American Association of Pediatricians that ``FDA reserve the
labor of milk solely for traditional dairy products to ensure
that children receive the optimal nutrition they need to
thrive.''
Would you please provide me an update on what you have
learned from the comments you have received? And please
describe the next steps that the Food and Drug Administration
intends to take on this matter.
Dr. Gottlieb. Thank you, Senator.
We understand and appreciate the concerns you raise. They
are not lost on us. It is very important as we work on policy
here that we go through a deliberative process to build a
careful administrative record. We will get challenged if we do
change the standards of identity to confirm with what you are
advocating.
One of the reasons the agency has prevailed at promulgating
very important public health rules and wins in court is because
we do careful rulemaking, and we have good, good legal teams.
And we go through a very deliberative process.
With respect to this Request for Information (RFI), we
received 13,000 comments. The comment period just closed on
January 28th. So we have just begun going through those.
I will say that from a public health standpoint, the
critical question--or one of the critical questions we are
going to ask is whether or not consumers perceive a certain
nutritional value when they see the term ``milk'' used on a
product and whether or not they are getting that across a
spectrum of products that are using this.
And to build on the point that you made about the American
Academy of Pediatrics, we saw, for example, evidence in the
literature that children that were fed rice milk, if I recall
the study accurately, actually faced nutritional deficiencies
because it did not have the same nutritional content. That is
one of the places where the agency would seek to address this
issue through a potential change in the standards of identity
and kind of public health orientation that we are going to take
to this question.
Senator Baldwin. So this year's funding bill for the Food
and Drug Administration included a sizeable increase in
funding, $2 million specifically to help the Food and Drug
Administration address the staff and capacity shortages that
have been present.
With that new funding and new staff on the job, when do you
expect to have conclusion to your review of these comments?
Dr. Gottlieb. Well, the new funding was greatly appreciated
by the agency.
We just received and we are starting to spend it now. To
give you sort of a sense of the FDA's budget, within CFSAN, the
Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, 5 percent of the
overall budget of that center is related to nutrition, infant
formula reviews, and standards of identity. So it is a small
proportion of the budget. So $2 million was meaningful, and it
allowed us to go from two FTEs dedicated to this effort to as
many as five FTEs, which is going to help. We hope to continue
to support that program.
It is hard for me to give you a sense right now at what
point we will go through those 13,000 comments, but this is a
priority for the agency. It is a key component of our nutrition
innovation strategy to try to look at the standards of
identity. There are 300 out there; 100 deal with dairy. We want
to update them. We want to update them systematically, perhaps
as categories of standards of identity that we can update all
at once. So this is a very high priority for our overall
nutrition program.
Senator Baldwin. I appreciate the fact that it is a high
priority. I just want to stress that at this particular moment
and for the last couple of years, there have been a confluence
of challenges facing dairy in the United States. Whether it is
low price that farmers are being paid for milk, whether it is
oversupply in some situations, the uncertainty with tariffs and
retaliatory tariffs against dairy products, the weather, 15
percent of Wisconsin's dairy farms have gone out of business in
the last 2 years, 15 percent, mostly the small- and medium-size
family farms that have been passed down from generation to
generation. And they work so hard every day to meet the
standards of identity that exist in Federal law, and they are
only asking for the Food and Drug Administration to enforce the
law.
Dr. Gottlieb. Thank you.
Senator Hoeven. Let us see. Who is next? Oh, yeah. Senator
Tester.
[Laughter.]
Senator Tester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Commissioner, for being here. I thank you for
your good work, and I wish you the best as you go back into the
private sector. I appreciate your work as Commissioner of the
FDA.
And just to kind of dovetail on to Senator Baldwin's
comments, and I was not going to do this, but I always thought
milk came from an animal. But what the hell? You know, things
change.
[Laughter.]
BIOSIMILARS
Senator Tester. Look, earlier this week, the Department of
Justice released a statement to the Court of Appeals for the
Fifth Circuit affirming a ruling in a Texas case that found the
entire ACA unconstitutional. You know that. That is not
breaking news.
I am worried about the impact of the ruling. I am worried
on a whole bunch of reasons, but I want to touch on something
that Senator Leahy talked about because the ACA created a
pathway for FDA approval of biosimilars.
In your announcement of this plan, you had said enabling a
path to competition for biologics and biosimilars is the key
for reducing cost. It is my understanding that the judge rules
the ACA unconstitutional. There is no longer a statutory
authority for the FDA to encourage development of biosimilars.
If the biosimilars approval pathway as a part of the ACA,
which it was, and it is overturned, would not this thwart the
FDA's plan to increase access to biosimilars?
Dr. Gottlieb. Well, certainly, if the statutory framework
was overturned, it would. I would hope if that came to pass,
Congress would work to reauthorize it. So it was a very
important pathway, and we fully support it, obviously. And we
think it has been profoundly impactful with consumers.
Senator Tester. I agree, although I do not need to tell
you. You have been here long enough to know that predicting
what Congress will do or will not do, whether it requires
common sense or not, is pretty difficult.
NON-OPIOID PAINKILLERS
There was another thing here that was brought up earlier.
How close are we to a non-opioid painkiller?
Dr. Gottlieb. There are products in development that look
very promising, but they are in early stages of development. It
is hard to predict how quickly they can move through
development because a product that was a non-addictive
alternative for the treatment of pain could presumably qualify
for breakthrough designation and perhaps did, but I could not
disclose that. So they could move through efficiently.
Senator Tester. Well, it looks to me that if we ever get to
a point where it actually happens, it is effective, we could
shut some of this garbage, get it off the market.
Dr. Gottlieb. Right. I share your hopes.
I would say that, historically, there has been no free
lunch when it comes to drugs for the treatment of chronic pain.
Every drug that we have marketed has some concerns associated
with it, whether it is the opioids that have the addictive
potential or something like Tylenol. We have never had a
perfect drug here.
CELL-BASED MEAT
Senator Tester. Okay. I want to talk about something I do
not think we have talked about today yet, but maybe we have. I
was not here for the whole thing, and that is cell-based meat,
lab-grown meat, the product of genuine animal muscle cells that
are cultured in a lab to produce a meat product. It is very
similar to meat in taste and appearance and texture, but has no
bone and no fat.
Senator Hoeven. Senator, it is not meat.
Senator Tester. That is absolutely correct. That is the
point I am going to get to in a second.
[Laughter.]
Senator Tester. There was a point in time in my life where
my wife and I operated a custom butcher shop, and just as I
figured milk got to be from an animal, meat always came from an
animal, okay? And if it is done in a lab, I guess you could
make that connection back, but I wondered.
So earlier this month, Secretary Perdue announced that the
FSIS and the FDA reached an agreement to regulate cell-based
meat. Do you think that cell-based meat should be labeled meat
or poultry?
Dr. Gottlieb. Well, you do not make it sound very
appetizing, but I will let your comment stand. I will not
comment on it.
But I believe--we have worked out a framework here where
the FDA is going to have regulatory purview over the production
aspects that we know very well, the culturing process, the
biotechnology process, and we consider that the pre-harvest
process.
After the product itself comes out of the culturing process
and it is no longer in a living system, which we are calling
the post-harvest process, USDA is going to have full purview
over that process, and that would include the labeling of it.
That would include the labeling considerations. It would
include the packaging, how it gets flavored, spiced, all that.
So, ultimately, I think it is going to be within USDA's
purview to make a decision around how these products are
labeled.
Senator Tester. So you do not believe FDA will be able to
play a role.
Dr. Gottlieb. We would certainly advise on it and provide
expert input and be part of a collaborative process, but
ultimately, the authority for the post-harvest process is going
to be within the purview of USDA.
Senator Tester. So let me ask you this, as long as my time
is about up, but I do not see anybody else in line. Whose job
is it going to be to test this product to find out of it--I
mean, you talked about--and I do not want to make the parallels
here because they are a little different, but to find out if it
has the same nutritional value, the same health benefits, the
same ability.
I do not want to become a vegetarian. You can look at me.
You know I am not a vegetarian, and the truth is that I like
beef and I like pork and I like lamb. And if it is grown in a
lab and I do not know that it is growing in a lab and they call
it meat as meat is meat and there has not been any testing
done, we got a problem.
So who is doing the testing?
Dr. Gottlieb. Well, the primary mission here for the FDA is
safety, and we are going to be looking hard at these kinds of
questions through the development process, the sort of pre-
harvest process, the nutritional content of it, whether or not
it is comparable, whether or not there are risks being
introduced into the product.
But, ultimately, we are working on a framework where there
is going to be joint jurisdiction. That was the direction we
got from Congress. We appreciate that direction. We have signed
an Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to implement that, and
ultimately, the decisions about how that is implemented are
going to be determined in guidance that we are working on right
now.
So I would say in short, both agencies are going to have a
role to play here.
Senator Tester. So let me give you an example, and it is
fairly controversial. But I believe in testing. I believe in
testing for everything, whether you are talking prescription
drugs or food, when it has been altered.
In the case of genetically modified grain, for example,
when I asked a predecessor of yours about are you going to do
testing on grain that has been genetically manipulated to find
out if it has the same qualities as the original kernel, they
said a grain is grain is grain.
That same argument could be used on cell-produced, lab-
produced meat. Is that your view?
Dr. Gottlieb. I think it is getting to the original
question that you asked me, which is--and it is a fair
question, which is how are these going to be positioned in the
market, and will the consumers have any disclosure around
whether or not this is derived from a carcass versus a
culturing process, and I think those issues are yet to be
worked out. But, ultimately, USDA is going to have purview over
how this gets graded and how it gets positioned relative to
meat, so that there is consistency across that USDA process.
Senator Tester. Okay. Well, I would just say this. First of
all, thank you for your work, and I mean that. I think that you
have done an admirable job as Commissioner of the FDA, and
hopefully, in your exit memo, you will tell the next chap,
whoever it may be, to make sure they do their due diligence.
That is all I am asking because once we get something
introduced into the food system and if it is not what we think
it is, then you get all sorts of medical costs. And since the
ACA has been worked on to be done away with, who the hell is
going to pay for it?
Anyway, thank you very, very much.
Dr. Gottlieb. Thanks a lot, Senator.
CELL-BASED MEAT
Senator Hoeven. Thanks to Senator Tester for his questions
about cell-based meat or product, and I want to associate
myself with those comments.
I appreciate you coming in and discussing this at length
with me and your willingness to work with USDA to better
understand how important that issue is to our ranchers and to
our consumers. That is another area where I think you have
shown leadership and effectiveness that we appreciate, a very
important issue.
Most of my remaining questions have been asked by other
members.
REDUCING PRESCRIPTION DRUG COSTS
The President wants to bring down the price of prescription
drugs. We all do. Your thoughts on how we can do that?
Dr. Gottlieb. Well, I see within our purview at the agency
trying to create more product competition in the market, and it
is not only with respect to generic drugs, where we have
advanced a lot of initiatives to try to bring more generics
into the market, but also with novel drugs, where we see
second-to-market innovation in novel drug categories coming to
market more slowly than it has historically.
I think once you have product competition, we need to have
the mechanisms in the marketplace to inspire price competition,
and there are places in the market where that does not happen.
And then once we have price competition, we need to make sure
that the price competition results in discounts that actually
can benefit the consumer, and there are places in the market
that does not happen, especially through rebating schemes where
the consumers do not benefit directly from the discounting that
is happening.
But those two are outside the scope of my Agency. What is
within my purview is the ability to create product competition,
and that is where we focused our efforts.
REGULATION OF HEMP: HEMP-RELATED PRODUCTS
Senator Hoeven. Now that the Farm Bill has legalized
growing and selling hemp and hemp-related products, what is
FDA's role in regulating those products; for example, the oil
and those kind of things?
Dr. Gottlieb. Well, it gets back to the question with
respect to the CBD, and we are working through a process right
now on how we could allow CBD to be lawfully marketed as a
dietary supplement or a food additive or an additive in animal
food.
We recognize Congress' desire for there to be a pathway to
allow for this. We recognize--we heard Congress, through what
they said in the Farm Bill, but because this exists as a drug
product and has not previously been in the food supply, there
is not a straightforward path, currently. We have to go through
a rulemaking.
I recognize that could take time, and that is why we have
put together a very high-level working group, staffed by some
of our most creative policymakers to try to think through
alternatives, including potential legislative alternatives.
There is precedent for Congress legislating in the context
of a single ingredient, and so you could, for example,
contemplate a scheme here where Congress gave FDA authority to
contemplate CBD as a food ingredient at certain concentrations
and potency and purity and then have it exist separately as a
drug product at a different concentration, different potency
and purity. Fish oil, for example, exists that way in the
marketplace, but fish oil, we did not need to come up with a
legislative option to do that because it was previously in the
food supply. CBD obviously was not. It was a scheduled
substance prior to recent years.
Senator Hoeven. Well, again, Dr. Gottlieb, we are going to
miss having you in this role. You have been responsive,
obviously very knowledgeable on these issues, and very diligent
in pursuing them, and I think it is a testament that just about
every Senator here today thanked you for your work and
complimented you on it.
So, again, I want to do the same and wish you the best in
future endeavors. Thank you for your service.
Dr. Gottlieb. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your
support of the agency.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEEE QUESTIONS
Senator Hoeven. With that, the meeting will--let us see. I
think we have some taking some testimony. For members of the
Committee, any questions you would like to submit for the
hearing record should be turned in to the Subcommittee staff
within 1 week, which is Thursday, April 4th. We would
appreciate if we could have responses back within 4 weeks of
that time.
Questions Submitted by Senator John Hoeven
Question. The Drug Supply Chain Security Act of 2013 was enacted to
develop and enhance drug supply chain security and gave the FDA a
November 2015 deadline to finalize regulations for the licensing of
third-party logistics providers and wholesale distributors. However, as
of today, not even the proposed licensure standards have been issued.
Where is the rulemaking package related to licensure, and when can we
expect to see the proposed licensure standards?
Answer. Ensuring the security of the drug supply chain and
protecting U.S. consumers from suspect and illegitimate prescription
drugs is a paramount concern for FDA. The Agency has been diligently
working to implement the supply chain security provisions of the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as amended by the Drug Supply
Chain Security Act (DSCSA), since DSCSA's enactment in late 2013. FDA
began implementing the licensure reporting requirements for third party
logistics providers (3PLs) and wholesale distributors starting in 2014.
Self-submitted information about 3PLs and wholesale distributers is now
in one national database. Product tracing and verification requirements
began in 2015. These efforts increased the oversight of members in the
drug supply chain. Due to increased oversight, FDA and members of the
supply chain can better identify and swiftly respond to illegitimate
product to help ensure that the product is not further distributed. FDA
has issued 16 guidance for industry for stakeholder clarity on
implementation of the DSCSA. These include guidance on implementation
of product identification (serialization) requirements of the DSCSA. In
addition, FDA launched its pilot project program on February 8, 2019,
to encourage supply chain stakeholders to pilot processes, systems, or
innovative technologies to inform the development of an electronic,
interoperable system for product tracing down to the package level that
is required by 2023.
FDA has also been developing the regulations for national standards
for licensure of 3PLs and wholesale distributors. Currently, the rule
is in the proposed rulemaking stage and is listed along with other
anticipated proposed rules on the most recent Unified Agenda (UA). FDA
anticipates advancing a proposed rule later this year, following its
approval by the Office of Management and Budget. Sometimes it takes
longer to issue a proposed or final rule than predicted when the UA was
issued, but the Agency continues working to move the proposed rule
forward.
Question. This Subcommittee's fiscal year 2019 bill directed the
FDA to finalize the guidance for industry entitled ``Bacterial Risk
Control Strategies for Blood Collection Establishments'' by September
30, 2019. Are you on track to finalizing the draft guidance and do you
anticipate major changes from the draft guidance?
Answer. FDA intends to meet the September 30, 2019 date in the
Subcommittee bill to publish the final guidance document on Bacterial
Risk Control Strategies for Blood Collection Establishments and
Transfusion Services to Enhance the Safety and Availability of
Platelets for Transfusion. FDA issued a revised draft guidance in
December 2018 and the Agency is working expeditiously to finalize the
revised draft guidance after considering all comments received during
the public comment period that closed on February 4, 2019.
Question. I understand that the agency has prioritized food safety
and traceability as key drivers for protecting public health. When
Congress passed FSMA in 2011 it aimed to increase the capacity to
detect and respond to food safety problems. Part of that effort was to
expand the utilization of U.S. based accredited independent
laboratories to do more food safety testing. FSMA required FDA to
promulgate a laboratory accreditation rule by 2013 to in part
facilitate this expansion. I understand that it still has not been
promulgated. When does FDA intend to promulgate this rule?
Answer. FDA is pleased to let you know that the Agency has plans to
issue a proposed rule this year. As you know, FSMA required FDA to
engage in extensive rulemaking and develop associated supportive
material needed to establish a modernized regulatory framework. FDA
prioritized completing the seven foundational rules that implement the
core of the preventive framework of FSMA. The rulemakings for these
foundational rules were completed in May 2016 and FDA continues to
issue accompanying draft guidances and other supportive materials and
engage in training activities.
Since the seven foundational rules issued, FDA has been better able
to focus attention on the remaining FSMA priorities, including the
laboratory accreditation program.
Question. Solving for drug shortages, particularly as it relates to
the availability of robust competition in the generic drug market, is
something you have prioritized in the context of lowering prescription
drug costs. It is my understanding that the FDA has established a task
force to explore what more FDA can suggest to improve competition in
the marketplace. In our 2019 bill this committee asked for an update on
how FDA is expediting the review of generic applications in the case of
a shortage. I understand that FDA has also been working to better
harmonize regulatory work with other developed nations.
Can you please provide an update on how FDA is expediting generic
applications and leveraging efforts to harmonize inspections and
application requirements with other regulatory bodies in the effort to
move generics to market more quickly here in the United States?
Answer. Section 506C(g) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
(FD&C Act) permits FDA to expedite the review of certain submissions
and expedite inspections that could help mitigate or prevent drug
shortages. Review of ANDA submissions related to drug shortages is
prioritized in accordance with FDA's Manuals of Policies and Procedures
(MAPPs) Prioritization of the Review of Original ANDAs, Amendments, and
Supplements and Drug Shortage Management. In calendar year 2017, the
most recent year for which data are available, FDA expedited the review
of 132 submissions. These submissions included 43 NDA/NDA supplements,
71 ANDA/ANDA supplements, and 18 BLA/BLA supplements. FDA also
prioritized 30 establishment inspections to address drug shortages
under section 506C (g)(2).
FDA is also working with international regulatory partners to
advance policies that will help us continue to accelerate innovator and
generic product development. For example, FDA recently submitted to the
International Council for Harmonization of Technical Requirements for
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH), a key international body comprised
of other regulatory authorities and the pharmaceutical industry, a
proposal to develop internationally harmonized guidelines on scientific
and technical standards for generic drugs.
FDA uses ``risk-based'' targeting to prevent, uncover, and combat
data and manufacturing problems. Risk-based means that the Agency
strategically directs inspection and oversight efforts toward
facilities most likely to exhibit quality issues in need of resolution.
FDA has also leveraged its abilities to oversee a global manufacturing
market by building relationships with other international regulatory
agencies. Among many other synergies generated by these partnerships,
FDA utilizes the results of inspections done by many countries in the
European Union to avoid inefficient and unnecessary duplication of
inspections.
FDA has been implementing the Mutual Recognition Agreement with the
E.U. since November 2017. Thus far the U.S. has deemed 24 of the 28
authorities as capable. This allows the U.S. to harmonize with the EU
on surveillance inspections by sharing inspectional outcomes.
Question. Modernizing the review process at FDA for new medical
technologies and software is captured by your ongoing reorganization,
including a pre-certification pilot program for manufacturers as one
possible new way to review medical software applications.
Could you explain to the committee how the more traditional review
process can run in parallel to these modem approaches and how over time
the new efficient pathways you are proposing would be scaled up, and,
if results are not as expected, how FDA might change course in the
future?
Answer. The Software Precertification (Pre-Cert) program is
envisioned as a voluntary pathway that would be available as an
alternative to the traditional premarket review pathways for
appropriate software as a medical device (SaMD). The current Pre-Cert
model, described in three documents issued in January 2019, embodies a
regulatory model more tailored than the current regulatory framework to
assess the safety and effectiveness of software technologies without
inhibiting patient access to these technologies. Software manufacturers
would continue to have the option to pursue traditional premarket
review of their software products, instead of participating in the
Software Pre-Cert program.
In January 2019, FDA released the 2019 Test Plan, the primary
purpose of which is to assess whether the Pre-Cert components outlined
in the Working Model (version 1.0 also released in January 2019)
together produce an equivalent basis, compared to the traditional
pathways, for determining reasonable assurance of safety and
effectiveness for a SaMD product prior to its introduction to the
market. During this test phase, FDA is iteratively evaluating and
modifying the appraisal and submission elements of the Pre-Cert
framework, as appropriate. As the Pre Cert model continues to be
refined, FDA anticipates that fewer changes to the model will be
required with each iteration. At the conclusion of the Test Plan, FDA
intends to demonstrate whether the totality of evidence collected
through the Excellence Appraisal and Streamlined Review processes align
to and satisfy the regulatory requirements for making a determination
of reasonable assurance of safety and effectiveness.
If so, FDA will begin to implement the Pre-Cert program under the
De Novo pathway, as described in the Regulatory Framework for
Conducting the Pilot Program within Current Authorities (released
January 2019). This phased approach is an important first step to
inform how we establish the Software Precertification Program and scale
it for broader use.
rmat designation process
Question. How does FDA evaluate the potential for a particular
therapy when reviewing an RMAT submission? ls the same standard applied
consistently across all RMAT submissions in different indications?
Answer. Under section 506(g) of the FD&C Act, as added by the 21st
Century Cures Act, a drug is eligible for RMAT designation if:
--It meets the definition of regenerative medicine therapy,
--It is intended to treat, modify, reverse, or cure a serious or
life-threatening disease or condition; and
--Preliminary clinical evidence indicates that the drug has the
potential to address unmet medical needs for such disease or
condition.
Regarding the preliminary clinical evidence to demonstrate the
potential of a regenerative medicine therapy to address unmet medical
needs, FDA generally expects that such evidence would be obtained from
clinical investigations specifically conducted to assess the effects of
the therapy on a serious or life-threatening disease or condition. Such
clinical investigations, particularly at the initial stages of product
development, may not always be prospective clinical trials with a
concurrent control. In some cases, clinical evidence obtained from
clinical investigations with appropriately chosen historical controls
may provide sufficient preliminary clinical evidence of the potential
to address an unmet medical need. In other cases, preliminary clinical
evidence could come from well-designed retrospective studies or
clinical case series that provide data systematically collected by
treating physicians. Such clinical evidence may be from studies
conducted outside of the United States. In any case, it is essential
that the preliminary clinical evidence be generated using the product
that the sponsor intends to use for clinical development.
When determining whether the preliminary clinical evidence is
sufficient to support RMAT designation, the Agency intends to consider
factors, including but not limited to: the rigor of data collection;
the consistency and persuasiveness of the outcomes; the number of
patients or subjects, and the number of sites, contributing to the
data; and the severity, rarity, or prevalence of the disease or
condition. In addition, FDA intends to consider the potential that bias
(e.g., bias in the study design, treatment assignment, or outcome
assessment) may be a factor in the evidence provided in support of RMAT
designation.
The process and criteria for RMAT designation are discussed in
``Expedited Programs for Regenerative Medicine Therapies for Serious
Conditions; Guidance for Industry'' published in February 2019. The
Agency will make designation decisions on a case-by-case basis, but, in
doing so, will always review designation requests against the criteria
for designation set forth in section 506(g) of the FD&C Act, that is,
whether the drug meets the definition of regenerative medicine therapy;
whether it is intended to treat, modify, reverse, or cure a serious or
life-threatening disease or condition; and whether preliminary clinical
evidence indicates that the drug has the potential to address unmet
medical needs for such a disease or condition.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Mitch McConnell
Question. FDA has signaled it could take years to develop a
regulatory pathway to provide certainty for CBD as a food additive or
dietary supplement. The authority is clearly within FDA's jurisdiction
and specifically maintained under the 2018 Farm Bill. Why would a
regulation of this nature take longer than the standard time required
to issue a regulation?
Answer. Three to 5 years is the Agency's best estimate of an
expedited timeframe for completing notice-and-comment rulemaking from
start to final rule for a substantive issue where there is significant
public interest. The Agency notes that even under optimal circumstances
with a short, uncomplicated rule and no delays in the rulemaking
process (some of which is outside the agency's control) , a minimum of
2 years is necessary to complete a rulemaking. However, a two-year
period represents an optimistic timeframe, especially for rulemaking on
which the Agency anticipates receiving significant public comment.
Under the Administrative Procedure Act, the Agency has a legal
obligation to consider all relevant comments received on a proposed
rule before it can issue a final rule, and to respond to all
significant comments. Based on past experience, the comments on a
rulemaking docket of significant public interest can number in the
hundreds-of-thousands. Addressing that volume of comments can take
time.
In addition, these timeframes would apply only once the agency
reaches a preliminary determination regarding whether it is appropriate
to allow CBD in dietary supplements and/or the conventional food
supply, and whether any other restrictions or policy measures should
apply. Making such a determination involves obtaining and assessing
safety and relevant public health input to inform a decision that will
address consumer access in a way that protects public health, maintains
incentives for cannabis drug development, and creates a robust
administrative record needed to support the initiation of any
rulemaking. There are significant gaps in knowledge of the potential
safety risks of CBD, such as the effects of CBD exposure from consumer
products over an extended period. For this reason, FDA is prioritizing
the collection of data and other types of information that can support
sound, science-based policymaking regarding CBD. For example, FDA hopes
to obtain and assess relevant safety data and other input through its
public hearing and associated public docket, as well as through the
efforts of the Agency's CBD Policy Working Group. FDA will evaluate all
information once the public docket closes on July 16, 2019.
Question. FDA recognizes that the rulemaking timeframe is long and
that there is growing interest in CBD. This is why the Agency's CBD
Policy Working Group is considering whether any legislative options
might lead to more efficient and appropriate pathways than might be
available under current law. However, the Agency's priority is
obtaining and assessing safety data to inform science-based
decisionmaking consistent with FDA's public health mission. The Agency
believes any policy decisions should be based upon the outcome of the
Agency's scientific and public health process to assess safety data and
associated policy considerations. FDA also is committed to an open and
transparent process, with robust engagement with all relevant
stakeholders. Does the agency foresee a need to promulgate multiple
regulations as it relates to CBD?
Answer. FDA is still evaluating potential paths forward, and
procedural efficiency is a key consideration. If FDA decides that
rulemaking is the appropriate path forward, it will seek to proceed in
a manner that provides clarity and regulatory certainty for affected
stakeholders as early as possible. This could mean consolidating
elements into a single rulemaking to the greatest extent possible, or
breaking elements into separate rulemakings, depending on what actions
the FDA takes.
Question. Before his departure, Commissioner Gottlieb said FDA may
ask Congress to legislate a pathway forward for providing regulatory
clarity for CBD sold in the marketplace as a dietary supplement or food
additive. However, even if Congress enacted legislation, it would be up
to the FDA to implement and regulate the statute. What sort of
legislative action does FDA see as necessary to move this process
forward within a shorter period of time? Please provide proposed
legislative language for statutory changes.
Answer. Due to a lack of research, there remain many unanswered
questions related to the safety of products containing CBD, especially
outside the approved drug context. For example, there are open
questions relating to cumulative exposure, impacts to special
populations (e.g., children, the elderly, and pregnant or lactating
women), and interactions with other drugs or foods. FDA is currently
evaluating the available data and information related to the potential
risks associated with the availability of CBD in products such as
conventional foods and dietary supplements. These efforts are ongoing
and will inform FDA's evaluation regarding the extent to which existing
regulatory pathways may be available and appropriate for bringing such
products to market. FDA looks forward to working with your office and
intends to keep Congress informed of any updates and recommendations.
Question. Does FDA believe Congress should grandfather CBD products
into the marketplace?
Answer. FDA does not believe that Congress should use the
legislative process to ``grandfather'' these products into the
marketplace prior to a thorough review of the scientific evidence about
the safety of these products. As discussed above, a careful scientific
evaluation is critical to determining the appropriate path to protect
public health. CBD is known to have toxicities, including liver injury,
and allowing the legal marketing of these products could be harmful. It
could also undermine incentives for continued scientific research into
CBD uses.
In addition, many of these products are currently being marketed in
interstate commerce in violation of Federal law, including products
that make unsupported claims about therapeutic benefits. We have also
heard significant concerns that some products on the market may contain
harmful contaminants, or otherwise put consumers at risk. In contrast,
some companies have held back developing and marketing CBD products in
situations where FDA has stated that doing so would violate the FD&C
Act. ``Grandfathering'' the violative products already on the market,
while establishing a different process for products not yet on the
market, could have the unintended consequence of providing a commercial
advantage to segments of the market that have a record of jeopardizing
consumer safety.
Question. FDA has noted that more research is required on the
impact CBD has to health. Is the agency seeking funding from Congress
for this purpose?
Answer. The President's fiscal year 2020 Budget Request does not
include funding for research specific to the health effects of CBD
products. However, as the marketplace evolves and interest in producing
and consuming products containing CBD continues to grow, this may be
part of a future request.
Question. If so, how much, and to what programs or accounts?
Answer. Currently, FDA's knowledge about the health effects of CBD
products, beyond that of Epidiolex, is limited. Funding provided by
Congress could be used to help FDA support research and evidence
generation to continue to identify and fill gaps in research.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Susan M. Collins
Question. I want to thank Dr. Gottlieb for his work on the
Biosimilars Action Plan. As he noted, biologics represent 70 percent of
the growth in drug spending from 2010-2015. I recently introduced
bipartisan legislation, the Biologic Patent Transparency Act, that
would require important enhancements to what is commonly referred to as
the Purple Book, and require the makers of approved biological products
to disclose to the FDA the list of patents that cover their products.
The bill will help biosimilar products reach consumers more quickly and
prevent the use of so-called ``patent thickets'' that are used by some
companies to intentionally stifle competition. What recommendations do
you have for additional steps we can take to encourage competition and
address these harmful patent strategies so that patients can access
lower-cost alternatives?
Answer. FDA is committed to facilitating the entry of lower-cost
alternatives and improved patient access to affordable medicine.
The Agency is continuing to take steps to implement Congress's
direction that FDA transition approved applications for the subset of
biological products, which for complex historical reasons have been
approved as drugs under section 505 of the FD&C Act, to biologics
licenses under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act. This
transition will help promote competition by enabling the marketing of
products that are biosimilar to, or interchangeable with, these
biological products. Once an interchangeable product is approved and
available on the market, it can be substituted for the reference
product at the pharmacy, potentially leading to increased access and
lower costs for patients. The Agency is approaching the March 23, 2020,
transition in a manner that provides clarity and predictability to
manufacturers who have relied on FDA's recommendations regarding
product development plans, helps ensure stability for patients using
currently marketed products, and facilitates the development of new
products that are biosimilar to, or interchangeable with, these
transitioned products.
FDA supports transparency and is committed to making improvements
to the Purple Book to help promote robust competition for biologics.
FDA is currently in the process of implementing BsUFA II commitments to
improve the Purple Book interface, include key information for each
entry (i.e. the BLA number, product name, proprietary name, date of
licensure, interchangeable or biosimilar determination, and whether the
BLA has been withdrawn), and to provide timely updates of FDA
determinations of whether a reference product has qualified for
reference product exclusivity. These improvements are designed to
increase the Purple Book's value as a resource for industry and other
stakeholders. The Agency looks forward to working with you more on your
bill, S. 659, the ``Biologic Patent Transparency Act,'' as it continues
to move forward.
Question. Drug shortages have become an ever-increasing burden for
patients, providers, and the healthcare system as a whole. I hear from
panicked constituents on a regular basis on this topic, including
patients, pharmacists, physicians, and hospitals. A constituent with
Mast Cell Activation Syndrome wrote how she was feeling helpless as two
lifesaving drugs she needs were experiencing shortages. One major
health system in Maine told me that they have to commit three to four
unbudgeted, full time employees each week to address approximately two
new significant shortages a week. Another hospital had to manage a
shortage of a certain endocrine drug by turning to another product that
cost ten times as much. I'm encouraged FDA has convened a Drug Shortage
Task Force, and I am also developing legislation to help address this
critical issue. What are the most promising recommendations to emerge
from the Task Force's recent workshop?
Answer. FDA established the Task Force, which includes Federal
officials from several agencies, to identify the root causes of drug
shortages and to advance potential solutions. The Task Force has also
included opportunities for public input on the issue. These have
included:
--Public Meeting--The Task Force hosted a public meeting on November
27, 2018, in Washington, D.C.
--Stakeholder Listening Sessions--The Task Force held a series of
stakeholder listening sessions in September and October 2018.
The sessions were held with nationally recognized experts on
the drug supply chain and leaders of organizations representing
broad segments of the healthcare system.
--Public Docket--FDA opened a docket to receive comments from
stakeholders about the root causes of drug shortages and
potential enduring solutions. The docket closed on January 11,
2019.
FDA is currently reviewing input from the public meetings and the
meetings with members of the Task Force. The Task Force intends to
issue a report which will include recommendations from the Task Force
based on input from stakeholders and may discuss new authorities that
could further support FDA's ability to address drug shortages. It is
too early in the process to provide the recommendations that may be
discussed in the final Task Force report.
However, FDA would like to point to the proposals included in the
``Department of Health and Human Services fiscal year 2020 Food and
Drug Administration Justification of Estimates for Appropriations
Committees" \1\ document. In this document, FDA discusses three
legislative priorities to help prevent or mitigate drug shortages. The
proposals include:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.fda.gov/media/121408/download
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
--Lengthening Expiration Dates to Mitigate Critical Drug Shortages
--Improving Critical Infrastructure by Requiring Risk Management
Plans
--Improving Critical Infrastructure Through Improved Data Sharing:
Requiring More Accurate Supply Chain Information
Question. Are new authorities needs to make greater progress?
Answer. See response above.
Question. The safety of personal care products is an issue of
growing interest to many Americans. The average consumer uses IO
personal care products every day, yet the laws governing such products
haven't been updated since 1938, and states have been acting on their
own in the absence of a national standard. I have been working with
Senator Feinstein on legislation that would modernize cosmetic safety
laws and provide greater transparency for consumers and regulatory
certainty for manufacturers. During Commissioner Gottlieb's nomination
hearing, Dr. Gottlieb committed to working with Congress to explore
options to modernize FDA's authorities, and I am pleased that the
agency is taking action on lead acetate. What other actions is the
Agency taking in regards to the regulation of personal care products?
Answer. On March 5, 2019, FDA issued a statement outlining new
steps the Agency could take to better ensure the safety of cosmetic
products, including steps to reinforce the obligations of manufacturers
to assure the safety of their products.\2\ Although FDA does not have
pre-market authority for cosmetics, there are other tools that the
Agency can use to ensure the safety of such products. The Food, Drug
and Cosmetic Act imparts on FDA the responsibility to monitor cosmetics
on the market and to take action to protect consumers if
``adulterated'' or ``misbranded'' cosmetics are marketed. Three recent
examples of actions the Agency has pursued to protect consumers are the
recall by Claire's in March 2019 of three talc-containing products (eye
shadow, compact powder and contour palette) due to the presence of
fibers consistent with asbestos contamination, an updated safety alert
in June 2019 regarding recalls of two additional talc-containing
products (a contour palette and a makeup set) with asbestos
contamination, and six tattoo inks that were recalled from March
through April 2019 because of microbial contamination. To ensure that
consumers were aware of these issues, FDA made certain that the
information was conveyed through a variety of media outlets, including
the Agency's website, Twitter, and social media venues.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/statement-
fda-commissioner-scott-gottlieb-md-and-susanmayne-phd-director-center-
food-safety-and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, FDA is committed to working with stakeholders and
Congress to modernize the outdated regulatory framework for cosmetics
that FDA has been operating under for more than 80 years. There are
basic elements to a modern regulatory framework to promote and protect
public health including: registration and listing of products and their
ingredients, so the Agency knows who's making the regulated products
and what's in them; explicit authority to establish good manufacturing
practice regulations; company reporting of adverse events; access to
records (including consumer complaints) during routine or for-cause
inspections; mandatory recalls; disclosure of known cosmetic allergens
on a product's label; and sufficient resources to implement these
public health protections. FDA recognizes that some elements of the
legislation that you have introduced align with these priorities. FDA
looks forward to working with you on this important issue in the months
ahead.
Question. In 2017, the FDA reported that cosmetic imports, by
volume, are one of the FDA's largest categories of imports, consisting
of more than 2.9 million entry lines in 2016. Have cosmetics imports
risen since 2016?
Answer. The data shows that the number of imported cosmetic lines
declared to FDA has decreased slightly from fiscal year 2016 to fiscal
year 2018:
Question. Do such imports receive a physical examination by FDA
inspectors?
Answer. FDA electronically screens 100 percent of import entries
prior to the products being permitted into the country and directs
inspection resources to those entries that are found to be higher-risk
and may have the greatest impact on public health. FDA's screening tool
for imports, the Predictive Risk-based Evaluation for Dynamic Import
Compliance Targeting (PREDICT), enhances the Agency's ability to target
higher-risk products for further review and improves FDA's ability to
detect trends and investigate import entry patterns. FDA staff
physically inspect and/or sample a subset of import entries at varying
rates, depending on the type of product and the risk factors.
Question. The FDA noted that is inspectors reported adverse
findings, including the presence of microbial contamination and illegal
color additives, with 15 percent of cosmetic imports that received
physical inspections in 2017. Since that time, has the FDA been issuing
import alerts and for what types of adverse findings?
Answer. An import alert allows FDA to detain, without physically
examining, products that either have or potentially could violate the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. The alert lets FDA field staff
know that the Agency has enough evidence or other information to refuse
admission of future shipments of an imported article.
Import alerts include lists of products and their manufacturers who
have a history of violative products specific to the problem covered by
the import alert (such as adulteration due to the presence of mercury).
A single import alert will often list multiple product/firm
combinations. At this time, FDA has 10 active cosmetics-related import
alerts covering various types of violations, such as undeclared and
non-permitted color additive violations, the presence of
microbiological contamination, and the presence of mercury. Each active
import alert associated with a specified type of violation may be
revised to add firm/product combinations to be subject to detention
without physical examination. In the past three fiscal years (fiscal
year 2016-fiscal year 2018), FDA added a total of 169 firm/product
combinations to these 10 cosmetics-related import alerts: 150 additions
to import alerts for color issues; 18 additions to import alerts for
microbiological contamination issues; and 1 addition to the import
alert for a violation due to the presence of mercury.
Question. I appreciate Commissioner Gottlieb's commitment to help
protect pure maple syrup and honey producers from labeling requirements
that could have created widespread consumer confusion and negatively
affected these industries by revising the final rule regarding ``added
sugar'' Nutrition Facts labeling requirements for single-ingredient
sweetener products. Will you please provide the committee with a status
update on the FDA's ``added sugar'' rulemaking and treatment of single-
ingredient sweeteners like pure maple syrup and honey?
Answer. In March 2018, FDA published a draft guidance outlining its
thinking at the time on how single-ingredient honey and maple producers
could flexibly provide additional information to explain that no sugars
are added to these single-ingredient products. FDA received nearly
3,700 comments to the draft guidance. Subsequently, the President
signed into law the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018 on December 20,
2018. The law exempts any single-ingredient sugar, honey, agave, or
syrup that is packaged and offered for sale as a single-ingredient food
from bearing the declaration ``Includes Xg Added Sugars.'' FDA is
considering the statutory provisions of the Agriculture Improvement Act
of 2018 and the comments received on the draft guidance and plans to
issue the final guidance very soon.
Question. I am concerned that the FDA has yet to issue guidance
regarding a product called allulose, despite the fiscal year 2018
report language requiring the FDA to do so. Allulose is a naturally
occurring sugar that does not act like a traditional carbohydrate/
sugar, in that it adds negligible calories, is not metabolized, and
does not raise blood glucose levels. Would you please provide a status
update on the treatment of allulose under the ``added sugars''
regulation and the timeline for the issuance of this guidance?
Answer. FDA issued draft guidance on April 17, 2019, about the
declaration of allulose on the Nutrition Facts label. The guidance
advises manufacturers that FDA intends to exercise enforcement
discretion to allow for the exclusion of allulose from the amount of
Total Sugars and Added Sugars on the Nutrition Facts label. Allulose
still must be included in the amount of Total Carbohydrates on the
Nutrition Facts label. The draft guidance also advises manufacturers of
FDA's intent to exercise enforcement discretion to allow manufacturers
to use a caloric value of 0.4 calories per gram to calculate the
caloric contribution of allulose instead of 4 calories per gram of
sweetener. Comments on the draft guidance should be submitted by June
17, 2019 to ensure that they are considered before FDA begins work on
the final guidance.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Cindy Hyde-Smith
Question. Dr. Gottlieb, Canada imports most of its drugs from other
countries. It is my understanding that, while Canada's regulators
oversee the safety of the supply of medicines intended for and used in
Canada, they do not apply those standards to drugs intended only for
export. As a result, drugs imported to the United States form Canada
could be coming from another country and simply passing through Canada.
Is it possible to ensure the drugs imported into the U.S. from Canada
have appropriate safety, quality, and effectiveness so that they do not
put U.S. patients at risk, and if so, how would we do that?
Answer. FDA understands the importance of Americans having access
to high-quality medicines they can afford. The Agency is an important
partner in bringing forward innovative, life-saving therapies and
expanding the therapeutic options available to patients. FDA takes very
seriously our responsibility to ensure that the drugs Americans take
are safe and effective, and that our actions live up to our reputation
as the world's ``gold standard.''
Section 804(b) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C
Act) allows for the importation of prescription drugs from Canada if
the Secretary first certifies that the importation would pose no
additional risk to the public's health and safety and would result in
significant cost savings to American consumers. Any such certification
by the Secretary would be made only after careful consideration of
numerous factors. The answers to these questions will help ensure that
any importation policy developed by FDA meets the requirements of
section 804 and safeguards the reputation of FDA's drug approval
process. In addition, any resulting importation policy would be
narrowly tailored to avoid the risks of counterfeits or other unsafe
drugs getting into the U.S. supply chain that a broader importation
policy would present.
Question. FDA cannot ensure the safety and effectiveness of
products that come from unknown sources and foreign locations, or that
may not have been manufactured under proper conditions. These unknowns
put patients' health at risk if they cannot be sure of the product's
identity, purity, and source. How would we be able to trace the origin
of a drug imported into the U.S. from Canada if there were a problem or
need for investigation?
Answer. Additional requirements that could apply to drugs imported
from Canada include, but are not limited to, those that were put in
place by the Drug Supply Chain Security Act (DSCSA) to protect the
security of the supply chain from suspect and illegitimate products.
The DSCSA outlines steps to build an electronic, interoperable system
to identify and trace certain prescription drugs as they are
distributed in the United States.
The DSCSA requirements apply to manufacturers, repackagers,
wholesale distributors, third-party logistics providers (3PLs), and
dispensers (primarily pharmacies). These requirements include:
--Appropriate State or Federal licensure or registration with FDA, as
applicable
--Reporting licensure to FDA by wholesale distributors and 3PLs
--Product tracing, which involves providing transaction documentation
to the purchaser with each sale
--Product verification, which includes quarantine and investigation
of suspect and illegitimate product, and notifications of
illegitimate product to FDA and certain immediate trading
partners
--Product identification on each package of product by manufacturers
and repackagers
If these requirements were applied to drugs imported into the U.S.
that were originally intended for the Canadian market, these
requirements would enhance FDA's ability to help protect consumers from
exposure to drugs that may be counterfeit, stolen, contaminated, or
otherwise harmful. The system will also improve detection and removal
of potentially dangerous drugs from the drug supply chain to protect
U.S. consumers. Additional information about the DSCSA can be found on
FDA's website at: https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/
DrugintegrityandSupplyChainSecurity/DrugSupplyChainSecurityAct/
default.htm.
Question. The fiscal year 2019 Consolidated Appropriations Act
enacted into law on February 14, 2019, provided a near 9 percent
increase in FDA's budget. It reflects the agency's largest increase in
a number of years, and specifically provides $2 million for standard of
identity and product labeling. How does FDA intend to use the
additional $2 million in funding for standard of identity and product
labeling, and will these funds be used to ensure that products labeled
as rice are indeed rice?
Answer. FDA appreciates the support from Congress in providing
additional funding to help the Agency further its mission to advance
the health and safety of the American public. The Agency notes that the
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2019, provided an increase of 6.8
percent in total program level funding when compared with the fiscal
year 2018 Omnibus.
FDA is using the $2,000,000 Congress provided in fiscal year 2019
to accelerate FDA's work on standards of identity and related product
labeling by hiring additional staff with expertise in food processing
and technology. Additionally, FDA will use the funds to engage with
stakeholders and otherwise expand FDA's understanding of market trends
and economic factors, as well as consumer understanding and perceptions
of standardized and non-standardized foods and their labeling.
FDA's efforts to modernize standards of identity is multipronged.
First, FDA is considering a broader approach to make the current
standards framework more flexible, which would benefit multiple
industries. The Agency indicated its intent in the Fall 2018 Unified
Agenda to reopen the comment period on a 2005 proposed rule, issued
jointly with the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Food Safety and
Inspection Service, to establish general principles as a first step in
modernizing the standards of identity framework. Second, FDA is
planning to issue a final rule amending the standard of identity for
yogurt. Third, FDA is also planning to propose revoking the standards
of identity for French dressing and frozen cherry pie; if finalized,
those actions may provide manufacturers with greater flexibility in the
production of those products.
FDA is sensitive to concerns about the use of the term ``rice'' for
non-grain products and is engaging with the rice industry to better
understand their concerns and perspective. FDA maintains a strong
interest in monitoring the marketplace for potentially false and
misleading labeling.
Question. Over the past 2 years, the number of products using the
term ``rice'' to describe products made from other vegetables has
increased dramatically. Examples range from ``RightRice'' derived from
vegetables and a little rice flour, to ``Rice made from chickpeas'' or
``Rice made from legumes.'' Rice is grown--not manufactured--and this
puts America's rice farmers at a disadvantage.
What does your agency plan to do about products such as these which
are misleading to consumers?
Will standards of identity and product labeling continue to be a
priority in fiscal year 2019 and fiscal year 2020 following your
departure?
Answer. FDA is sensitive to concerns about non-grain products
labeled with the term ``rice'' in their names. FDA has met, and will
continue to engage, with representatives of the rice industry to better
understand the rice industry's concerns and perspective.
FDA maintains a strong interest in monitoring the marketplace for
potentially false and misleading labeling. FDA considers taking action
as appropriate, consistent with our priorities and resources, against
products that are misbranded. In addition, FDA is reviewing a citizen
petition from The Good Food Institute that asks FDA to issue
regulations clarifying how foods may be named by reference to the names
of other foods (Docket No. FDA-20l 7-P-1298).
FDA's work on food labeling, including food naming issues, is a
priority, and the Agency fully expects to continue this important work
in fiscal year 2020. In addition, the Agency's work on modernizing
standards of identity also continues to be a priority and will carry
over to fiscal year 2020.
Question. Pan American Grain, Inc. based in Guaynabo, Puerto Rico
is an importer and packager of both foreign-origin and U.S.-origin
rice. U.S. rice producers and millers have raised concerns that Pan
American has been engaging in some, if not all, of the following
illegal activities: fictitious Country-of-Origin markings; deceptive
marking concerning rice sources; and undervaluing and under-reporting
customs entries. The rice appears to be marketed as Medium Grain Rice,
when it is actually Short Grain Rice and being labeled as product of
U.S. and/or China, which is not consistent with Customs and Border
Protection or FDA labeling regulations (19 C.F.R. Sec. 134.46 and 21
C.F.R. Sec. 101.l 8(c), respectively). This is an egregious example of
intentional mislabeling of not only the origin of the product, but also
description of the type of rice on the label. This was raised with U.S.
Customs and Border Protection officials in San Juan in January, and
just last week on March 19th , Pan American Grain was fined by the
Puerto Rico Department of Consumer Affairs for fake advertising. How is
FDA using its resources to combat false labeling like this example of
improper origin labeling?
Answer. FDA shares the Committee's concern for the truthful
labeling of products and the importance of having consumers be able to
make informed choices about their foods. FDA maintains a strong
interest in monitoring the marketplace for potentially false and
misleading labeling and works closely with U.S. Customs and Border
Protection (CBP) to monitor imported products for compliance, taking
action against products that are misbranded as appropriate, consistent
with our priorities and resources.
A statement of the country of origin on the label of imported foods
is not required under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
However, a false or misleading country of origin on labeling is a
violation of the both FD&C Act and the Tariff Act of 1930, and is
generally enforced by CBP. Standards for milled rice are established by
the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and FDA would refer possible
violations to USDA.
Question. The draft guidance that FDA released on March 13th
regarding deemed tobacco products lacks clarity. Once the proposal goes
into effect, which according to the guidance is 30 days after the
guidance is finalized, will it be legal for any type of retail outlet
to sell flavored e-cigarette products (other than mint, menthol and
tobacco) that have not received pre-market approval? And, if so, what
retail outlets will be able to sell those products?
Answer. As you note, on March 13, 2019, FDA announced a proposed
modification of its enforcement policy aimed at preventing youth access
to, and appeal of, flavored tobacco products, including e-cigarettes
(``March 13 draft guidance''). In that draft guidance, the Agency
explained that it had reconsidered and was proposing to modify its
previously articulated compliance policy as to the premarket
authorization requirements for certain Electronic Nicotine Delivery
Systems (ENDS) products that were on the market on August 8, 2016, when
the deeming rule took effect and they became subject to FDA regulation.
The March 13 draft guidance proposes to modify the policy that had been
articulated in a guidance issued in August 2017 (``August 2017
compliance guidance''). The draft guidance is premised on the reality
that all new ENDS products that lack marketing authorization are not
lawfully on the market, and that, to protect our nation's youth from
the growing epidemic of e-cigarette use, it is appropriate to revisit
the August 2017 compliance guidance. In the draft guidance, FDA
proposes to prioritize enforcement for lack of marketing authorization
against flavored ENDS products (other than tobacco-flavored, mint-
flavored, and menthol-flavored ENDS products) that are offered for sale
in ways that pose a greater risk for minors to access the products--
whether the sale is online or at retail establishments. The March 13
draft guidance, as drafted, would apply to such products as they are
offered for sale by all retailers, such that no type of retailer would
be singled out. The draft guidance provides examples of products that
are offered for sale in ways that pose greater risk for minors to
access such products. These examples include products offered for sale
both in brick and mortar stores and online.
FDA sought comment on its proposed approach and on the most
appropriate means to prevent youth access to ENDS products. Interested
persons had until April 30, 2019, to submit comments before the Agency
began work on the final version of the March 13 draft guidance, and FDA
is carefully reviewing over 15 ,000 comments received. In addition,
please note that the Agency's August 2017 compliance guidance was the
subject of litigation and on May 15, 2019, the U.S. District Court for
the District of Maryland ruled against the FDA, vacated the August 2017
compliance guidance, and ordered the parties to brief remedies. The
parties are awaiting the Court's order on remedies.
Question. Once the draft guidance is finalized and goes into
effect, do you expect that e-cigarettes in flavors other than tobacco,
mint and menthol will continue to be sold? If so, in what types of
outlets will those flavors be sold?
Answer. See response above.
Question. Will the final guidance explain to the regulated
community which retailers will be able to sell exactly what e-cigarette
products and what those retailers need to do in order to be able to
sell those products?
Answer. See response above.
Question. The draft guidance seems to make enforcement against
stores that allow minors to enter the store its number I enforcement
priority and example in the guidance. But, we have seen data indicating
that Internet sellers and adult only stores such as vape shops and
tobacco stores sell more e-cigarettes to minors than all of the outlets
that allow minors to enter. Why would FDA prioritize enforcement
against retail outlets making the fewest sales to minors, when the data
shows these outlets have fewer sales to minors that adult-only
locations?
Answer. FDA is committed to addressing the alarming trend of youth
use of electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS). Minors are
accessing such products through both brick-and-mortar and online
retailers. FDA wishes to clarify that the March 13 draft guidance
(``March 13 draft guidance'') does not propose to give a higher
priority to enforcement against brick-and-mortar retailers, as compared
to online retailers. FDA has proposed prioritizing enforcement for
flavored ENDS products (other than tobacco-flavored, mint-flavored, and
menthol-flavored ENDS products) that are offered for sale in ways that
pose a greater risk for minors to access the products--whether the
product is offered for sale online or at retail establishments. The
guidance, if finalized as drafted, would apply to all products offered
for sale by retailers, such that no type of retailer would be singled
out.
The March 13 draft guidance provides examples of products that are
offered for sale in ways that pose greater risk for minors to access
such products. These examples include products offered for sale both in
brick-and-mortar stores and online stores.
FDA sought comment on its proposed approach and on the most
appropriate means to prevent youth access to ENDS products. Interested
persons had until April 30, 2019, to submit comments before the Agency
began work on the final version of the March 13 draft guidance, and FDA
is carefully reviewing over 15,000 comments received. In addition,
please note that the Agency's August 2017 compliance guidance was the
subject of litigation and on May 15, 2019, the U.S. District Court for
the District of Maryland ruled against the FDA, vacated the August 2017
compliance guidance, and ordered the parties to brief remedies. The
parties are awaiting the Court's order on remedies.
Question. The draft guidance that FDA released on March 13th
regarding deemed tobacco products including e-cigarettes says that FDA
will prioritize enforcement for flavored e-cigarettes that are sold
``in ways that pose a greater risk for minors to access such
products.'' The guidance says that means FDA will enforce in locations
where minors are able to enter. But, the same guidance also says that
more minors reported getting e-cigarettes from vape shops, which are
only open to adults, than from convenience stores, which are open to
minors as well. The enforcement priority in guidance is contradicted by
the facts in the guidance itself. Why would enforcement focus on places
that actually have a lower risk of selling to minors?
Answer. FDA is committed to addressing the alarming trend of youth
use of electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS). Minors are
accessing such products through both brick-and-mortar retailers
(including a range of different types of establishments) and online
retailers. Accordingly, the March 13 draft guidance (``March 13 draft
guidance'') focuses on all types of retailers and no type of retailer
is being singled out. FDA has taken swift action aimed at the
manufacturers and retailers of youth-appealing ENDS products and
continues to take action to stop sales to minors.
The March 13 draft guidance provides examples of products that are
offered for sale in ways that pose greater risk for minors to access
such products. The examples provided include sales that happen both in
brick-and-mortar stores and online stores. Please note that the term
``vape shop,'' as used in the guidance, is in reference to the study
conducted by S.T. Liu et al., which appears to encompass a wide variety
of establishments, and FDA is not aware of evidence that all vape shops
permit only adults to enter.
During the draft guidance comment period, FDA sought comment on its
proposed approach and on appropriate means to prevent youth access to
ENDS products. The comment period for the March 13 guidance closed on
April 30, 2019, and FDA is carefully reviewing over 15,000 comments
received. In addition, please note that the Agency's August 2017
compliance guidance was the subject of litigation and on May 15, 2019,
the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland ruled against the
FDA, vacated the August 2017 compliance guidance, and ordered the
parties to brief remedies. The parties are awaiting the Court's order
on remedies.
Question. The American Journal of Health Promotion published a
study in August 2018 that showed that online sellers, vape shops, and
tobacco stores all sold many more e-cigarettes to minor s than
convenience stores, grocers, drug stores and others that are open to
the general public. Doesn't that mean your proposed enforcement
priority is the wrong one?
Answer. FDA is committed to addressing the alarming trend of youth
use of electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS). Minors are
accessing such products through both brick-and-mortar (including a
range of different types of establishments) and online retailers.
Accordingly, the March 13 draft guidance (``March 13 draft guidance'')
focuses on all types of retailers and no type of retailer is being
singled out. FDA has taken swift action aimed at the manufacturers and
retailers of youth-appealing ENDS products and continues to take action
to stop sales to minors.
The March 13 draft guidance proposed to modify the policy that had
been articulated in a guidance issued in August 2017 (``August 2017
compliance guidance''). In the March 13 draft guidance, FDA was
proposing to prioritize enforcement, on a case-by-case basis, of, among
other things, flavored ENDS products (other than tobacco-flavored,
mint-flavored, and menthol-flavored ENDS products) that are offered for
sale in ways that pose a greater risk for minors to access such
products.
The March 13 draft guidance provides examples of products that are
offered for sale in ways that pose greater risk for minors to access
such products. These examples include sales that happen in brick-and-
mortar stores (and without distinction as to whether the stores meet
any particular definition of ``vape shop,'' ``grocer,'' or other term)
and online stores.
During the draft guidance comment period, FDA sought comment on its
proposed approach and on appropriate means to prevent youth access to
ENDS products. The comment period for the March 13 guidance closed on
April 30, 2019, and FDA is carefully reviewing over 15,000 comments
received. In addition, please note that the Agency's August 2017
compliance guidance was the subject of litigation and on May 15, 2019,
the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland ruled against the
FDA, vacated the August 2017 compliance guidance, and ordered the
parties to brief remedies. The parties are awaiting the Court's order
on remedies.
Question. The draft guidance that FDA released March 13th says that
enforcement against the sale of flavored e-cigarettes will be
prioritized in outlets where minors are able to enter the retail
establishment ``or an area within the establishment.'' What does an
area within an establishment mean and where in the guidance does it
explain to retailers what that means and how to have an adult-only
area?
Answer. FDA is committed to addressing the alarming trend of youth
use of electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS). Minors are
accessing such products through both brick-and-mortar and online
retailers. FDA has taken swift action aimed at products that are
offered for sale in ways that pose greater risk for minors to access
such products and continues to take action to stop sales to minors.
Question. As you note, in March, FDA issued a draft guidance (''
March 13 draft guidance'') proposing to modify the policy that had been
articulated in a guidance issued in August 2017 (``August 2017
compliance guidance''). In the March 13 draft guidance, FDA has
proposed to prioritize enforcement of flavored ENDS products (other
than tobacco-flavored, mint-flavored, and menthol-flavored ENDS
products) that are offered for sale in ways that pose a greater risk
for minors to access such products. The draft guidance document
provides flexibility for retailers so they can decide how to further
restrict the access of these products to youth based on their specific
circumstance. The intent is that the flavored products would be
maintained in an age restricted location. FDA requested and received
comments on this issue during the public comment period and plans to
address the comments in the final guidance.
FDA sought comment on its proposed approach. Interested persons had
until April 30, 2019, to submit comments before the Agency began work
on the final version of the March 13 draft guidance, and FDA is
carefully reviewing over 15 ,000 comments received, including some
addressing age restricted locations. In addition, please note that the
Agency's August 2017 compliance guidance was the subject of litigation
and on May 15, 2019, the U.S. District Court for the District of
Maryland ruled against the FDA, vacated the August 2017 compliance
guidance, and ordered the parties to brief remedies. The parties are
awaiting the Court's order on remedies.
For example, if e-cigarette products are kept behind the sales
counter of a store and only adult employees are allowed behind that
counter, is that an adult-only area of a store that would mean it would
not be an enforcement priority?
Answer. See response above.
Question. The study from the American Journal of Health Promotion
that FDA cited in its proposal shows Internet sellers, vape shops and
tobacco stores are the top three types of retail outlets where youth
reported acquiring e-cigarettes. Vape shops and tobacco stores are
adult only and under the FDA's proposal, they plus Internet sellers
will be able to sell flavored e-cigarettes while stores that sell far
fewer of these products to minors will get most of the enforcement.
That seems like it will hurt the problem more than help. Don't you
agree?
Answer. FDA is committed to addressing the alarming trend of youth
use of electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS). Minors are
accessing such products through both brick-and-mortar retailers
(including a range of different types of establishments) and online
retailers. Accordingly, the March 13 draft guidance (``March 13 draft
guidance'') focuses on products offered for sale at all types of
retailers and no type of retailer is being singled out. FDA has taken
swift action aimed at products that are offered for sale in ways that
pose greater risk for minors to access such products and continues to
take action to stop sales to minors.
The March 13 draft guidance proposed to modify the policy that had
been articulated in a guidance issued in August 2017 (``August 2017
compliance guidance''). In the March 13 draft guidance, FDA has
proposed to prioritize enforcement, on a case-by-case basis, of
flavored ENDS products (other than tobacco-flavored, mint-flavored, and
menthol-flavored ENDS products) that are offered for sale in ways that
pose a greater risk for minors to access such products.
FDA sought comment on its proposed approach and on the most
appropriate means to prevent youth access to ENDS products. Interested
persons had until April 30, 2019, to submit comments before the Agency
began work on the final version of the March 13 draft guidance, and FDA
is carefully reviewing over 15,000 comments received. In addition,
please note that the Agency's August 2017 compliance guidance was the
subject of litigation and on May 15, 2019, the U.S. District Court for
the District of Maryland ruled against the FDA, vacated the August 2017
compliance guidance, and ordered the parties to brief remedies. The
parties are awaiting the Court's order on remedies.
Question. The second priority for enforcement under the draft
guidance includes online sellers that have sold to minors after the
guidance. But, the guidance indicates that online enforcement will
focus on those online sellers that don't have purchase quantity limits
or don't use third party identity verification services. So, this seems
like a self-fulfilling prophecy that as long as an online seller has
purchase quantity limits and uses third party identity verification it
can avoid enforcement and, of course, avoid having violations. This
seems like a big loophole for online sellers to be able to sell
products that other retailers can't sell and potentially sell them to
minors without real oversight, don't you think?
Answer. FDA has proposed prioritizing enforcement of flavored
electronic nicotine delivery system (ENDS) products (other than
tobacco-flavored, mint-flavored, and menthol-flavored ENDS products)
that are offered for sale in ways that pose a greater risk for minors
to access the products--whether the sale is online or at retail
establishments. The March 13 draft guidance applies to such products as
they are offered for sale by all retailers and no type of retailer is
being singled out.
The March 13 draft guidance provides examples of products that are
offered for sale in ways that pose greater risk for minors to access
such products. FDA would like to clarify that the examples are not
listed in any priority or weighted order. Although the example of
products sold through retailers (i.e., brick-and-mortar and online
sellers) that have sold to minors after issuance of the final guidance
is listed as the second example, it is not more or less important than
the other examples provided. The examples provided in the March 13
draft guidance include products offered for sale both in brick-and-
mortar stores and online. For example, flavored ENDS products (other
than tobacco-flavored, mint-flavored, and menthol-flavored ENDS
products) sold in locations where minors can enter at any time (e.g.,
the entire establishment or an area within the establishment); or, for
online sales, products sold without limits on the quantity that a
customer may purchase within a given period of time, and products sold
without independent, third-party, age- and identity-verification
services that compare customer information against third-party data
sources, such as public records. An example that applies to products as
they are sold by both types of retailers is the consideration of the
sales history of retail establishments and online retailers to minors
after issuance of the final guidance. FDA maintains a searchable,
publicly available retail inspection database that contains information
about sales to minors.
FDA sought comment on its proposed approach and on the most
appropriate means to prevent youth access to ENDS products. Interested
persons had until April 30, 2019, to submit comments before the Agency
began work on the final version of the March 13 draft guidance, and FDA
is carefully reviewing over 15,000 comments received.
The March 13 draft guidance proposes to modify the policy that had
been articulated in a guidance issued in August 2017 (``August 2017
compliance guidance''). Please note that the Agency's August 2017
compliance guidance was the subject oflitigation and on May 15, 2019,
the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland ruled against the
FDA, vacated the August 2017 compliance guidance, and ordered the
parties to briefremedies. The parties are awaiting the Court's order on
remedies.
Question. The Tobacco Control Act limits the FDA's authority to
regulate the sale and distribution of tobacco products. It says any
such regulation must be the product of full notice and comment
rulemaking. Why is FDA using guidance to effectuate e-cigarette sales
policy changes when the Act so clearly calls for a rulemaking in this
situation?
Answer. FDA's draft guidance related to enforcement of the Tobacco
Control Act's premarket review requirements. Currently, all electronic
nicotine delivery systems (ENDS) products are on the market in the
United States without a premarket authorization by FDA. In addition,
certain cigar products that meet the statutory definition of a new
tobacco product likewise remain on the market without FDA premarket
authorization. To address the epidemic rise in youth use of ENDS
products and public health concerns regarding flavored cigars (other
than tobacco flavored), FDA's draft guidance proposed to modify the
Agency's existing policy of exercising enforcement discretion regarding
the (lack of) premarket authorization for these products. These
proposed changes did not seek to impose a new regulatory requirement;
rather, they sought to prioritize FDA enforcement of the existing
premarket authorization requirement in ways that would maximize the
public health benefit of FDA's potential enforcement activity.
Question. In contrast, an action to ban menthol in cigarettes would
require notice and comment rulemaking. Section 907 of the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act gives FDA the authority to issue tobacco product
standards that are appropriate for the protection of public health, but
only via notice-and-comment rulemaking. Why then is the policy change
to ban menthol in cigarettes going through the full notice and comment
rulemaking process?
Answer. See response above.
Question. The last published Population Assessment of Tobacco and
Health (PATH) study from FDA found that among the 14 percent of young
people that did get their e-cigarettes from stores, 76% said they got
them from vape shops and only 16 percent said they got them from
convenience stores. Why does the FDA proposal focus on prohibiting and
enforcing against the sale of flavors in convenience stores and not in
vape shops if the data shows that many more kids buy e-cigarettes from
vape shops rather than convenience stores?
Answer. FDA is committed to addressing the alarming trend of youth
use of electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS). Minors are
accessing such products through both brick-and-mortar and online
retailers. FDA has taken swift action aimed at the manufacturers and
retailers of youth-appealing ENDS products and continues to take action
to stop sales to minors.
On March 13, 2019, FDA issued a draft guidance which proposed to
modify its previously articulated compliance policy as to the premarket
review of certain ENDS products as an additional way to help prevent
youth from accessing and using these products. For example, under the
draft guidance, FDA proposes prioritizing enforcement of flavored ENDS
products (other than tobacco-flavored, mint-flavored, and menthol-
flavored ENDS products) that are offered for sale in ways that pose a
greater risk for minors to access the products--regardless of whether
the product is offered for sale from vape shops (however that term is
defined) or from convenience stores. The draft guidance applies to such
products as they are offered for sale by all retailers and no type of
retailer is being singled out. Please note also that the term ``vape
shop'' appears to encompass a wide variety of establishments, and FDA
is not aware of evidence that all vape shops permit only adults to
enter.
The draft guidance provides examples of products that are offered
for sale in ways that pose greater risk for minors to access such
products. The examples provided include products as they are offered
for sale both in brick and mortar stores (of various types) and online
stores. For example, the draft guidance uses as an example flavored
ENDS products (other than tobacco- flavored, mint-flavored, and
menthol-flavored ENDS products) sold in locations where minors can
enter at any time (e.g., the entire establishment or an area within the
establishment); or, for online sales, products sold without limits on
the quantity that a customer may purchase within a given period of
time, and products sold without independent third-party, age- and
identity-verification services that compare customer information
against third-party data sources, such as public records. An example
that applies to products as they are sold by both types of retailers is
the consideration of the sales history of retail establishments and
online retailers to minors after issuance of the final guidance;
information about sales to minors identified by FDA is publicly
available on FDA's searchable retail inspection database.
FDA sought comment on its proposed approach in the draft guidance
and on the most appropriate means to prevent youth access to ENDS
products. Interested persons had until April 30, 2019, to submit
comments before the Agency began work on the final version of the
guidance, and FDA is carefully reviewing over 15,000 comments received.
The March 13 draft guidance proposes to modify the policy that had
been articulated in a guidance issued in August 2017 (``August 2017
compliance guidance''). Please note that the Agency's August 2017
compliance guidance was the subject of litigation and on May 15, 2019 ,
the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland ruled against the
FDA, vacated the August 2017 compliance guidance, and ordered the
parties to brief remedies. The parties are awaiting the Court' s order
on remedies.
Question. The FDA draft guidance references internal analyses of
Population Assessment of Tobacco and Health (PATH) data a number of
times. Please provide all of those internal analyses to this committee.
Why haven't those analyses and all of the most recent PATH data been
published?
Answer. The draft guidance issued on March 13, 2019 proposed
changes to the Agency' s previously articulated compliance policy
(``August 2017 compliance guidance'') as to the premarket authorization
requirements for certain electronic nicotine delivery system (ENDS)
products and flavored cigars that were on the market on August 8, 2016,
when the deeming rule took effect and they became subject to FDA
regulation. The draft guidance puts manufacturers and retailers on
notice of FDA's enforcement priorities. In that guidance, FDA has
proposed to prioritize enforcement, on a case-by-case basis, of
flavored ENDS products (other than tobacco-flavored, mint-flavored, and
menthol-flavored ENDS products) that are offered for sale in ways that
pose a greater risk for minors to access such products.
When the draft guidance was issued, FDA posted in the docket a memo
entitled, ``Summary of Internal Analyses from Wave 4 of the Population
Assessment of Tobacco and Health (PATH) Study.'' The memo provides a
summary of FDA's internal analyses, including the estimates and
information from the PATH study upon which they rely. Data from the
PATH Study are available in restricted-use and public-use files. The
Restricted Use File (RUF) is available to researchers by application
through the National Addiction & HIV Data Archive Program (NAHDAP) at
the University of Michigan. The RUF is accessed through a virtual data
enclave (VDE) which the University of Michigan oversees. The Public Use
File (PUF) is available for download, also through NAHDAP. Those
interested in downloading the PUF are required to create a user
account. These files, along with additional study documentation, can be
found at https://doi.org/10.3886/Series606. The Wave 4 RUF was released
to the public on May 31, 2019. Public release of the Wave 4 PUF is
anticipated for Fall 2019.
The PATH data is not the sole basis for the draft guidance; FDA
referenced several other sources of data in explaining the reasoning
behind the proposed revisions to its compliance policies. For example,
the guidance also cites 2018 National Youth Tobacco Survey (NYTS) data,
National Adolescent Drug Trends in 2018 from Monitoring the Future, and
other research published in medical journals. The evidence FDA
considered highlighted the need for the Agency to revisit its
compliance policies in a timely manner with respect to the continued
marketing of deemed tobacco products that have not obtained premarket
authorization.
Question. Please note that the Agency's August 2017 compliance
guidance was the subject of litigation and on May 15, 2019, the U.S.
District Court for the District of Maryland ruled against the FDA,
vacated the August 2017 compliance guidance, and ordered the parties to
brief remedies. The parties are awaiting the Court's order on remedies.
Why would you move forward with a proposed new policy before the PATH
study is finished and public?
Answer. See response above.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator John Kennedy
Question. Recently, FDA took decisive action to reduce youth access
toe-cigarettes. There is draft guidance and it needs to be implemented.
When will the recently announced ENDS (electronic nicotine delivery
system) guidance be final?
Answer. On March 13, 2019, FDA announced a new proposed policy
aimed at preventing youth access to, and appeal of, flavored tobacco
products, including e-cigarettes and cigars (``March 13 guidance''). In
that guidance, the Agency explained that it had reconsidered and was
proposing to modify its previously articulated compliance policy as to
the premarket authorization requirements for certain Electronic
Nicotine Delivery Systems (ENDS) products and flavored cigars that were
on the market on August 8, 2016, when the deeming rule took effect and
they became subject to FDA regulation. The March 13 guidance proposed
to modify the policy that had been articulated in a guidance issued in
August 2017 (``August 2017 compliance guidance'').
The comment period for the March 13 guidance closed on April 30,
2019, and FDA is carefully reviewing over 15,000 comments received. In
addition, please note that the Agency's August 2017 compliance guidance
was the subject of litigation and on May 15, 2019, the U.S. District
Court for the District of Maryland ruled against the FDA, vacated the
August 2017 compliance guidance, and ordered the parties to brief
remedies. On June 13, 2019, the Agency filed its response in the case
and the litigation is still pending. In the meantime, FDA remains
committed to tackling the troubling epidemic of e-cigarette use among
kids. Preventing youth access to and use of ENDS remains one of FDA' s
top priorities.
Question. I understand that the 2019 National Youth Tobacco Survey
is in the field now and that you expect to see early results this
summer. Knowing FDA's actions will take a period of time to be
finalized and enforced, the 2019 results won't be able to capture the
effects of the ENDS guidance. When can we reasonably expect that the
data will reflect youth trends reversing?
Answer. While FDA is not able to predict when youth use of
electronic nicotine delivery system (ENDS) products will begin to
decline, the Agency is committed to addressing this alarming trend.
Minors are accessing such products through both brick-and-mortar and
online retailers, and FDA has taken swift action aimed at the
manufacturers of youth-appealing ENDS products and continues to take
action to stop sales to minors.
In fiscal year 2018 and 2019, as part of the Youth Tobacco
Prevention Plan, FDA took multiple enforcement actions to stop youth
use of, and access to, e-cigarette products. For example, FDA has sent
letters to more than 60 companies seeking information on over 90 brands
of tobacco products, including ENDS, to determine the date on which
those products entered the market. FDA also requested a meeting with
the corporate management of Walgreen Co. to discuss the company's track
record of illegally selling tobacco products, including ENDS, to kids.
Other national retail chains have similar track records and FDA plans
to hold those companies accountable as well. The Agency held a public
hearing to discuss efforts to eliminate youth e-cigarette use, with a
focus on the potential role of drug therapies to support cessation
among youth, and the issues impacting the development of such therapies
for children. FDA also conducted a nationwide blitz to crack down on
the sale of e-cigarettes to minors at both brick-and-mortar and online
retailers, and subsequently issued more than 1,300 warning letters and
civil money penalty complaints to retailers who illegally sold e-
cigarette products to minors. The Agency has partnered with the Federal
Trade Commission (FTC) to issue warning letters to manufacturers,
distributors, and retailers for selling e-liquids used in e-cigarettes
with labeling and/or advertising that falsely and/or misleadingly cause
the products to imitate food products, particularly ones that are
marketed toward, and/or appealing to children such as juice boxes,
candy, or cookies some of them with cartoon-like imagery. Further, FDA
requested that certain e-cigarette manufacturers submit documents to
help the Agency better understand the reportedly high rates of youth
use and youth appeal of e-cigarette products, and also issued letters
to the manufacturers of five top-selling vape product brands asking
each company to submit plans addressing youth access and use of their
products. The Agency also investigated e-cigarette companies that may
have been illegally marketing their products to youth. Finally, FDA
contacted eBay to raise concerns over several listings of JUUL products
listed for sale on their website, which appeared to be inconsistent
with eBay's policy on tobacco products. As a result, eBay removed the
listings and voluntarily implemented measures to prevent future
listings from being posted on their website.
Throughout fiscal year 2018 and 2019, FDA took many more similar
actions against retailers for selling e-cigarettes and other tobacco
products to minors. From the start of fiscal year 18 through March 31,
2019, FDA conducted 214,293 inspections of retail establishments that
sell tobacco products, issued 20,121 warning letters to retailers for
violating the law, and initiated about 5,729 civil money penalty cases.
FDA also issued 54 No-Tobacco-Sale Orders, which can result in
retailers being prohibited from selling tobacco products for specified
periods of time.
FDA also expanded its successful ``The Real Cost'' public education
campaign to address Youth E-Cigarette Prevention, aimed at educating
kids about the dangers of e-cigarettes. The campaign targets nearly
10.7 million youth, aged 12-17, who have used e-cigarettes or are open
to trying them, and features hard-hitting advertising on digital and
social media sites popular among teens, as well as placing posters with
e-cigarette prevention messages in high schools across the nation. FDA
has also joined forces with Scholastic to provide educational resources
to more than 750,000 high school educators. Resources include the
National Youth Tobacco Survey (NYTS) infographic, an e-cigarette
``mythbusters'' infographic, a lesson plan and an activity sheet. All
materials are available online at: www.scholastic.com/youthvapingrisks.
On March 13, 2019, FDA issued a draft guidance (``March 13
guidance'') proposing to modify the compliance policy that had been
articulated in a guidance issued in August 2017 (``August 2017
compliance guidance''). In the March 13 guidance, FDA was proposing to
prioritize enforcement, on a case-by-case basis, of flavored ENDS
products (other than tobacco-flavored, mint-flavored, and menthol-
flavored ENDS products) that are offered for sale in ways that pose a
greater risk for minors to access such products. The comment period for
the March 13 guidance closed on April 30, 2019, and FDA is carefully
reviewing over 15,000 comments received. In addition, please note that
the Agency's August 2017 compliance guidance was the subject of
litigation and on May 15, 2019, the U.S. District Court for the
District of Maryland ruled against the FDA, vacated the August 2017
compliance guidance, and ordered the parties to brief remedies. On June
13, 2019, the Agency filed its response in the case and the litigation
is still pending.
These are just some examples of the work FDA has done to protect
children from tobacco products, but the Agency still has much work to
accomplish. FDA will continue to take strong action to protect youth
and will monitor the effectiveness of our actions. FDA's comprehensive
approach to date of addressing youth use of ENDS reflects a careful
balancing of public health considerations.
Question. Last year I met with hundreds of shrimpers who told me
they're struggling to compete with imported seafood that drives down
the cost of their product. The prices have gotten so low that you'd
think it was the 1980s if the cost of living weren't so high. As one
shrimper put it, he can't make it on cents. He needs dollars. Foreign
seafood is full of antibiotics. It's subsidized by foreign governments.
And it's reaching U.S. tables and undercutting the market because we
can't inspect enough of it and filter out the cheaters. The fiscal year
2019 appropriations bill included my amendment to increase imported
seafood inspections by 26 percent to $15 million. In order for your
staff to do the job that they need to, how much funding would you need?
Answer. Consistent with the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2019,
FDA will dedicate at least $15 million of our base resources toward
foreign seafood inspections and seafood import field examinations in
fiscal year 2019.
Question. While sampling and testing food before admitting it into
the country is one effective method for detecting contamination, it is
labor-intensive and costly. Therefore, FDA uses an approach for
examinations and sampling that targets the highest-risk products,
allows regular monitoring and surveillance of imported products,
facilitates targeted assignments to collect data that informs oversight
activities, and assists with verification of other countries' related
programs. FDA plans to evaluate the use of artificial intelligence and
machine learning, a method of data analysis, for screening of imported
food, including seafood, to assess the applicability of emerging new
technologies in fiscal year 2020. What else can be done to tackle the
issue with foreign seafood coming through our ports?
Answer. FDA relies on a number of tools to prevent food safety
problems in the foreign supply chain prior to entry into the United
States, to detect and to refuse entry of unsafe foods at U.S. borders,
to respond quickly when FDA learns of unsafe imported foods, and to
measure our progress to ensure that our imported food safety program
remains effective and efficient. Inspections are just one important
tool that FDA relies on to meet these goals. Seafood importer
inspections are conducted in the United States and are a review of the
importer's compliance with the importer verification requirements under
the seafood Hazard Analysis and Critical Con trol Points (HACCP)
regulations. In addition to these importer inspections, FDA also
conducts foreign surveillance inspections at overseas manufacturing
sites. FDA's foreign surveillance inspections are designed to identify
potential food safety problems before products arrive in the United
States, to determine the compliance status of facilities with FDA's
requirements and food safety standards, to help the Agency make
admissibility decisions when food products are offered for importation
into the United States, and to help ensure that imported food products
under FDA's jurisdiction meet U.S. requirements under the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act. These routine inspections are an important way
for FDA to ensure that foreign food facilities exporting to the United
States, and their products, meet U.S. requirements.
While FDA does not have the resources to inspect every foreign
facility, the Agency uses additional programs and tools to help ensure
that food produced in foreign facilities is safe. Programs like the
Voluntary Qualified Importer Program and third-party audits are
resources that complement our facility inspections and help ensure the
safety of our food supply. Regulatory partners here in the United
States and abroad play an important role in identifying and rejecting
unsafe food offered for import into the country as well as marshalling
effective responses when foodborne illness or injury does occur. The
Agency also monitors imported food safety through sample collections
and field exams of food products at the border.
FDA also works to ensure that problematic foreign seafood and other
imported foods are detected and refused during the import process. FDA
electronically screens all commercial entries and targets its work on
high-risk products in import sampling and examination, as well as by
relying on other types of evidence. To accomplish this task, FDA uses
its Predictive Risk-based Evaluation for Dynamic Import Compliance
Targeting (PREDICT) system, an automated import screening tool that
helps us to identify high-risk shipments of food offered for import.
Additionally, the Agency may list a firm on an Import Alert, which
informs the FDA field staff and the public that the Agency has enough
evidence to allow for Detention Without Physical Examination (DWPE) of
products that appear to be in violation of FDA laws and regulations.
Violations may be related to the product, manufacturer, shipper, or
other information. Based on the information in an Import Alert, FDA
field staff may detain the product without physically examining it, and
potentially refuse admission into the United States if the shipper does
not provide evidence to FDA to overcome the appearance of the
violation. The Agency currently has several Import Alerts that address
hazards in shrimp, including country-wide Import Alerts, Import Alerts
for unapproved aquaculture drugs in shrimp, and Import Alerts for
undeclared sulfites in shrimp. More information on Import Alerts,
including shrimp-related Import Alerts, can be found on the FDA
website.
FDA field laboratories currently test imported seafood for a wide
variety of the most commonly found drug residues. The Agency is always
working to expand the types of drug residues the labs can test for to
include the latest residues of interest and to update the testing
methods to use the newest detection platforms available.
FDA is working to use these various tools in combination as
effectively as possible to address potential food safety hazards.
Further information about these tools is available in the ``FDA
Strategy for the Safety of Imported Food,'' which the Agency released
on February 26.
In addition, the Agency continues to consider new methods to ensure
the safety of imported seafood, such as exploration of the use of
artificial intelligence and machine learning, as discussed in the
previous response.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Merkley on behalf of Senator Murkowski
Question. One issue that is important to this Subcommittee on both
sides of the aisle is ensuring that pregnant women receive the best,
science-based advice they can on how to make healthy decisions during
their pregnancy. To this end, the Food and Drug Administration
published a comprehensive analysis of the net effects of seafood
consumption for pregnant women, nursing mothers and young children in
June 2014. In January 2017, however, FDA published advice that does not
reflect the findings of the net effects report. FDA's published advice
not only fails to promote the actual nutrient value of fish and the
benefits of consumption for fetal and child development, but it
contradicts science-the FDA's own nutrition science, the Dietary
Guidelines, and others. For instance, the advice on FDA's website
recommends pregnant women limit seafood consumption of halibut,
sablefish, snapper and albacore tuna to 1 serving per week, when the
FDA's own nutrition science, the June 2014 Net Effects Report,
concludes pregnant women benefit from eating over 14 servings of these
fish per week. The advice also strongly implies that parents avoid
seafood for children under age 2 when the American Academy of
Pediatrics recommends introducing seafood starting at 4 to 6 months.
The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2019 requires FDA to reissue,
following the traditional interagency review process, the seafood
advice so that it is consistent with the agency's recognized science on
the net effects of seafood consumption. Will the FDA commit to promptly
reissuing the January 19, 2017 advice to pregnant women in a manner
that is consistent with nutrition science recognized by the FDA in the
June 2014 Net Effects Report?
Answer. FDA shares the Committee's interest in ensuring that
pregnant and breastfeeding women and caregivers of young children have
clear, useful, and science-based information that encourages them to
eat more fish. FDA is currently working to address the directive in
Section 773 of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2019.
The Agency notes that the 2017 advice was based on a scientific
evaluation that accounts for the net effects- the Agency did consider
net effects evidence in developing the advice. The 2017 advice is also
consistent with the latest nutrition science. FDA has looked at the
totality of the scientific evidence, and based on that evidence, FDA
remains confident that the advice meets the goal of encouraging
pregnant women, breastfeeding women, women considering becoming
pregnant, and young children to eat more fish, particularly fish lower
in mercury, and supports that the vast majority of fish species can be
consumed on a regular basis.
While FDA released the net effects report in connection with the
draft advice issued in 2014, additional analyses, studies, and comments
received on the draft advice caused FDA and EPA to base final fish
consumption categories on methylmercury exposure. Specifically, newer
research has brought into question the validity of several assumptions
underpinning the net effects report. As stated above, FDA considered
the results of the net effects report in developing the 2017 fish
advice but did not use the net effects report as the basis for
determining the categories of species of fish.
The current 2015-2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans provides
quantitative recommendations for amounts of seafood to consume to
promote health for the general population, pregnant and breastfeeding
women, and young children (over 2 years), noting pregnant and
breastfeeding women should make choices lower in methylmercury. The
2015-2020 Dietary Guidelines, however, do not provide information on
levels of methylmercury in fish, and instead acknowledge the 2017 FDA/
EPA fish advice as a tool that pregnant and breastfeeding women can use
to make informed choices when it comes to fish that are healthy and
safe to eat. The 2017 fish advice provides an easy-to-use reference
chart that sorts 62 types of fish into three categories: ``best
choices,'' ``good choices,'' and ``fish to avoid.'' The relatively
small list of ``fish to avoid'' helps the target audience narrow down
the fish that should be avoided, while giving many examples of fish
that should be consumed. As a science-based agency, FDA continues to
monitor and consider an array of scientific literature relevant to the
2017 fish advice in addition to the net effects report.
The process to develop the 2020-2025 Dietary Guidelines for
Americans is under way and will include a comprehensive review of
scientific evidence and development of guidance for infants and
toddlers from birth to 24 months, as well as for women who are
pregnant. USDA and HHS have published topics and priority scientific
questions \3\ for review by the Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee,
which were open for public comment, including questions related to the
benefits of seafood consumption during pregnancy. The 2020-2025 Dietary
Guidelines are expected to be signed into policy by Secretary Azar and
Secretary Perdue in late 2020. FDA is committed to ensuring that its
fish advice is consistent with the Dietary Guidelines and supports
consumers as they work towards meeting these guidelines. FDA looks
forward to their availability to further promote the role of fish
within a healthy dietary pattern for these populations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ About the Dietary Guideline Advisory Committee--Topics and
Questions to be examined by the Committee. Available at https://
www.dietaryguidelines.gov/work-under-way/review-science.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
Senator Hoeven. And with that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:37 a.m., Thursday, March 28, the
committee was recessed, to reconvene subject to the call of the
Chair.]