- CHAIRMAN'S HOUSING REFORM OUTLINE: PART 1
[Senate Hearing 116-91, Part 1]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-91
CHAIRMAN'S HOUSING REFORM OUTLINE:
PART 1
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
BANKING,HOUSING,AND URBAN AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
ON
DISCUSSING THE FEASIBILITY OF THE CHAIRMAN'S HOUSING REFORM OUTLINE,
ASSESSING THE APPROPRIATE LEVEL AND STRUCTURE OF TAXPAYER PROTECTIONS
OUTLINED
__________
MARCH 26, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available at: https: //www.govinfo.gov /
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-478 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2021
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON BANKING, HOUSING, AND URBAN AFFAIRS
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho, Chairman
RICHARD C. SHELBY, Alabama
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
PATRICK J. TOOMEY, Pennsylvania
JACK REED, Rhode Island
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
BEN SASSE, Nebraska
JON TESTER, Montana
TOM COTTON, Arkansas
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
JOHN KENNEDY, Louisiana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
DOUG JONES, Alabama
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
Gregg Richard, Staff Director
Joe Carapiet, Chief Counsel
Matt Jones, Counsel
Laura Swanson, Democratic Deputy Staff Director
Elisha Tuku, Democratic Chief Counsel
Beth Cooper, Democratic Professional Staff Member
Megan Cheney, Democratic Professional Staff Member
Cameron Ricker, Chief Clerk
Shelvin Simmons, IT Director
Charles J. Moffat, Hearing Clerk
Jim Crowell, Editor
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
TUESDAY, MARCH 26, 2019
Page
Opening statement of Chairman Crapo..............................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
40
Opening statements, comments, or prepared statements of:
Senator Brown................................................
2
Prepared statement.......................................
40
WITNESSES
Sue Ansel, President and Chief Executive Officer, Gables
Residential, on behalf of the National Multifamily Housing
Council and the National Apartment Association.................
4
Prepared statement...........................................
42
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Brown............................................
89
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
89
Edward J. DeMarco, President, Housing Policy Council.............
6
Prepared statement...........................................
58
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Brown............................................
95
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
96
Senator Moran............................................
99
Senator Sinema...........................................
100
Greg Ugalde, Chairman of the Board, National Association of Home
Builders.......................................................
7
Prepared statement...........................................
65
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Brown............................................
100
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
100
Mark M. Zandi, Ph.D., Chief Economist, Moody's Analytics.........
8
Prepared statement...........................................
72
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Brown............................................
103
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
117
Senator Moran............................................
120
Hilary O. Shelton, Director, Washington Bureau, and Senior Vice
President for Advocacy and Policy, NAACP.......................
10
Prepared statement...........................................
77
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Menendez.........................................
120
Adam J. Levitin, Professor of Law, Georgetown University Law
Center.........................................................
12
Prepared statement...........................................
80
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Menendez.........................................
121
Additional Material Supplied for the Record
Reports submitted by Sue Ansel...................................
123
Prepared statement of the American Homeowners Alliance (AHA).....
170
Prepared statement of Diane Yentel, President and CEO, National
Low Income Housing Coalition...................................
174
Prepared statement of the Housing Assistance Council.............
188
Prepared statement of the Independent Community Bankers of
America (ICBA).................................................
192
Letter submitted by the Manufactured Housing Institute (MHI).....
199
Prepared statement of the Community Mortgage Lenders of America
(CMLA).........................................................
201
CHAIRMAN'S HOUSING REFORM OUTLINE: PART 1
----------
TUESDAY, MARCH 26, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met at 10:01 a.m., in room SD-538, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Mike Crapo, Chairman of the
Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MIKE CRAPO
Chairman Crapo. The hearing will come to order.
Today the Committee returns to its focus on the state of
our housing finance system. It has now been a full decade since
the Government asserted control of the GSEs, Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac.
After 10 years of market recovery, these mortgage giants
remain stuck in conservatorship, with taxpayers still on the
hook in the event of a housing market downturn.
It appears that the old, failed status quo is slowly
beginning to take hold again, with the Government in some ways
expanding its reach even further, entering new markets where it
has never been before.
Today Fannie and Freddie, along with Government-insured
mortgages, dominate the mortgage market. Approximately 70
percent of all single-family mortgages originated in this
country are in some way touched by the Federal Government.
I have long said that the status quo is not a viable
option, and I consider it a top priority this Congress to find
a comprehensive, legislative solution.
During the 113th Congress, this Committee made progress by
favorably reporting the bipartisan Housing Finance Reform and
Taxpayer Protection Act.
Since that time, the Committee has continued to study the
issue, learn from previous iterations, and analyze a variety of
proposals that have been put forward by the stakeholders and
policymakers.
Last month I introduced an outline for potential housing
reform legislation.
This outline sets out a blueprint for a permanent,
sustainable new housing finance system that: protects taxpayers
by reducing the systemic, too-big-to-fail risk posed by the
current duopoly of mortgage guarantors; preserves existing
infrastructure in the housing finance system that works well,
while significantly increasing the role of private risk-bearing
capital; establishes several new
layers of protection between mortgage credit risk and
taxpayers; ensures a level playing field for originators of all
sizes and types, while also locking in uniform, responsible
underwriting standards; and promotes broad accessibility to
mortgage credit, including in underserved markets.
This outline is the byproduct of over a dozen hearings
conducted by this Committee over the past decade. It also
incorporates key elements of several housing finance reform
plans that have been advanced by thought leaders. Many of those
thought leaders have joined us today and will join us tomorrow.
We will hear from 12 witnesses over the next 2 days on my
housing finance reform outline and other general issues
relating to our housing finance system.
Thank you to our witnesses for your willingness to appear
here today and for your continued participation in this
important conversation.
Today I am interested in discussing the viability of our
framework, the impact it will have on various market
participants, and to highlight the areas where work remains to
be done.
We are dedicated to getting this done, to bring to a close
the conservatorship era, and to establish a durable,
sustainable new housing finance system that works for all
Americans.
The time is now to resolve this issue, and I look forward
to working with my colleagues to that end.
Senator Brown.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SHERROD BROWN
Senator Brown. Thank you, Chairman Crapo, and thanks to all
the witnesses for being here today.
I have long said that the ``housing'' part of this
Committee--this Committee's name is ``Banking, Housing, and
Urban Affairs.'' The Housing and Urban Affairs agenda has been
pretty nonexistent over the years of Republican rule, but
clearly housing has not gotten enough attention, and I look
forward to the next 2 days of discussions and working with
Chairman Crapo to address our Nation's housing needs.
Whether you rent or own a house, a house is not just where
you live. One of the best books about housing is Matthew
Desmond's book ``Evicted.'' A couple of years ago, he wrote in
the front cover of my book, ``home = life.''
Home equals life. That is how we should all approach this.
A house is where you go after a long day at work. It is
where you make memories with your children, marking time with a
growth chart perhaps on the bedroom wall. It determines what
neighborhood you live in, in many cases where you worship,
where your kids go to school.
Too many Americans, as we know, cannot afford that home.
One-third of households are paying more than 30 percent of
their income for housing, 21 million renters and more than one
in five rural homeowners.
In the fallout from the financial crisis, millions of
people, especially of color, lost vast amounts of housing
wealth they had finally been able to build after a century of
redlining and discrimination.
Today home ownership among African American households has
fallen under 43 percent--30 percentage points below the white
home-ownership rate.
When work has dignity, everyone can afford housing and can
choose to build wealth through home ownership and to pass that
on to their children and grandchildren--something simply not
available to nearly enough people of color in this country.
That is simply not the reality we live in today. Any
changes we make to our housing finance system should be to help
working people, not more legislation coming out of the Banking
Committee for Wall Street.
In 2008, when Congress last passed substantial, bipartisan
housing finance legislation, we strengthened oversight of our
housing system; we took important steps toward serving
Americans who too often are left behind.
We maintained the GSEs' responsibility to facilitate
national access to mortgage credit.
This broad, national market means that interest rates for
borrowers in Idaho look a lot like they do in Arizona or Ohio.
We further targeted affordable housing goals. We
established a duty to serve underserved rural areas,
manufactured housing, and affordable housing preservation
markets, all monitored by a new regulator.
We also created the Housing Trust Fund and Capital Magnet
Fund to allocate dedicated resources each year to the
development of affordable housing opportunities for the lowest-
income households.
We know markets do not always work perfectly, and the
market is not serving those Americans on its own.
These funds are far from enough to solve our affordable
housing crisis, but they are part of the solution.
Since 2008, FHFA has been an independent regulator that has
worked to serve underserved markets, closely monitored the
GSEs' business, and built up the capability to collect the
housing data we need to help us help families.
Unfortunately, not all of the 2008 changes have been
consistently implemented. Even though they are funded outside
the appropriations process, the Housing Trust and Capital
Magnet Funds have not been safe from attempts to eliminate
them. For the last 3 years, this Administration has proposed
cutting these funds. And this year, nearly 3 months after the
close-out of the GSEs' books and a month and a half after
Fannie and Freddie told investors they had set aside funds for
the Housing Trust Fund and the Capital Magnet Fund, the Acting
FHFA Director still has not distributed these affordable
housing dollars.
Clearly, there is more work to be done to make sure every
family can access the home-ownership opportunities and rental
housing that meets their needs.
As we begin these 2 days of discussions, we should start by
asking: What housing options do families have today, and what
housing opportunities we will make available for families in
the future?
Failure to put working families first in this process will
only make it harder for families to afford rent or to buy a
house; put the viability of the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage at
risk; and, again, hit lower-income communities, communities of
color, and rural Americans particularly hard.
I look forward to hearing from each of our witnesses today
about how the housing market is working for homeowners and
renters and what we do about it.
Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Senator Brown.
Our six witnesses today are: Sue Ansel, President and CEO
of Gables Residential, on behalf of the National Multifamily
Housing Council and the National Apartment Association;
Mr. Ed DeMarco, President of the Housing Policy Council;
Mr. Greg Ugalde, Chairman of the National Association of
Home Builders;
Mr. Mark Zandi, Chief Economist for Moody's Analytics;
Mr. Hilary Shelton, Senior Vice President for Advocacy and
Policy and Washington Bureau Director of the NAACP;
And Adam Levitin, Professor of Law at Georgetown University
Law Center.
As you may notice, Mr. Shelton is not here yet. We are
informed that he will be arriving shortly. If he does not
arrive by the time he would ordinarily be scheduled for his
testimony, we will make arrangements for him to give his
testimony when he gets here.
Ms. Ansel, you may proceed.
STATEMENT OF SUE ANSEL, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
GABLES RESIDENTIAL, ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL MULTIFAMILY
HOUSING COUNCIL AND THE NATIONAL APARTMENT ASSOCIATION
Ms. Ansel. Thank you. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown,
and Members of the Committee, it is my privilege to appear
before you on behalf of the National Multifamily Housing
Council and the National Apartment Association to provide the
one industry's perspective on housing finance reform.
I am the Chairwoman of NMHC and the Chief Executive Officer
of Gables Residential, a vertically integrated real estate
company specializing in developing, constructing, financing,
and managing multifamily and mixed-use communities. Gables
manages over 30,000 apartment homes and approximately 430,000
square feet of retail space.
The apartment sector is a competitive and robust industry
that helps 39 million people live in homes that are right for
them. We help build vibrant communities by offering housing
choice, creating millions of jobs and contributing to the
fabric of the communities across the country.
Demand for rental housing is at historical levels as a
growing number of people choose the convenience and flexibility
of renting. Millions of new apartment households have been
formed since the mid-2000s. Because of this unprecedented
demand, the United States will need to build 4.6 million new
apartments by 2030. That translates to an average of 328,000
new apartments every year. Yet we have only hit this mark twice
since 1989. I tell you that to provide some context to help you
understand how important it is to get housing finance reform
correct.
The apartment industry is extremely capital intensive. To
perform effectively, we need consistent and reliable access to
debt capital across all geographies for all different types of
apartments and during all economic cycles. Today we are
fortunate to be able to access several private capital sources,
including banks, life insurance companies, commercial mortgage-
backed securities, pension funds, and private mortgage
companies.
Unfortunately, even during healthy times, the private
market has been unwilling or unable to meet all our capital
needs. Private capital generally focuses on larger metropolitan
areas. The GSEs' multifamily programs and their access to the
Government guarantees ensures that there is capital for
projects located in smaller secondary and tertiary markets that
do not meet the private sector's credit or return standards.
Private capital is also generally not available or not a
good fit for companies trying to acquire and preserve
affordable housing. Affordable housing is extremely complex and
often involves securing and layering numerous funding sources
together. Many private capital providers consider this too
complicated, but the enterprises understand these complexities
and have proven capabilities to serve that market.
The GSEs are critical to the entire industry, even for
firms like mine, who secure most of our debt from private
markets. Knowing that debt capital is available at all times is
a critical factor for our ability to develop new apartments.
The reasons those private lenders are willing to give us loans
is because they know there is a source of takeout capital when
construction is done. The GSEs' multifamily programs provide
that confidence by operating in all markets.
Mr. Chairman, my written testimony provides comments
specific to your reform outline. As you consider any housing
finance reform proposals, NMHC and NAA urge you to recognize
the unique needs of the multifamily industry, and we offer
several goals that we believe any new system for the
multifamily industry must be met.
First and foremost, include an explicit, paid-for Federal
guarantee for multifamily backed mortgage securities available
in all markets at all times.
Second, recognize the inherent differences between
operational and historical performance of the single-family and
multifamily sectors requires different solutions to avoid
putting at risk the 39 million Americans who rely on apartment
housing. The GSEs' multifamily programs were not part of the
housing crash because of their adherence to prudent
underwriting standards, sound credit policies, and, most
importantly, the fact that they place private capital at risk
ahead of taxpayer dollars.
Third, retain the successful components of the existing
multifamily programs and whatever succeeds them. Establishing a
new business model for our sector would only serve to disrupt
capital flows. Lawmakers should preserve the enterprises'
proven technology, processes, and personnel.
Fourth, avoid market disruption during the transition to a
new system by clearly defining the Government's role, analyzing
the cost and the market impact, and developing a detailed and
realistic timeframe for transition. By retaining the successful
elements of the current system and providing an explicit
guarantee for multifamily debt, we believe this Committee can
succeed in ``doing no harm'' to our industry and our ability to
produce the housing that the country needs.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I look
forward to answering your questions.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Mr. DeMarco.
STATEMENT OF EDWARD J. DeMARCO, PRESIDENT, HOUSING POLICY
COUNCIL
Mr. DeMarco. Good morning. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member
Brown, Members of the Committee, thanks for inviting me to
testify on the Chairman's outline for housing finance reform.
Nearly 2 years ago, I appeared on behalf of the Housing
Policy Council before this Committee to discuss the need for
housing finance reform legislation. At that hearing we
discussed why Congress needed to act, and we discussed the
emerging consensus on many of the key features such legislation
should contain. Since that time, we have seen continued
progress toward consensus on the structural building blocks of
reform. The Chairman's outline reflects that progress.
As I explain in my written statement, the framework set
forth in the Chairman's outline bridges the two leading
approaches proposed for securitizing and guaranteeing
conventional conforming mortgages. This is accomplished rather
simply by allowing both approaches to co-exist. In my written
statement, we call this a ``hybrid model'' for reform.
My written statement also explains many of the technical
features of the Chairman's outline and how those features would
facilitate reform by reducing risk in the system, including
systemic risk; expanding opportunities for market participants
of all types and sizes; and creating more financing options for
home buyers. I look forward to discussing any of these features
with you.
The Housing Policy Council's big-picture view on housing
finance reform is this: The need for housing finance reform
remains as critical as ever. True reform can only be
accomplished by Congress. Only Congress can replace the GSE
duopoly with a more competitive market that reduces risk to
taxpayers while ensuring a steady flow of mortgage finance for
home buyers.
HPC members believe that housing finance reform will create
a stronger, more resilient system. We seek a more competitive
market that puts private capital in front of a Government
guarantee and that operates on a more level playing field.
Getting to a bipartisan consensus on housing finance reform has
been a long process, but we are moving closer to that goal.
With each new version of reform put forth in Congress, we see
both refinements in the models and steady movement toward a
broad consensus.
Last year, we saw a bipartisan bill introduced in the House
of Representatives, and we hope the Chairman's outline
continues the progression toward a bipartisan consensus.
The members of the Housing Policy Council are encouraged by
these developments, and we are committed to working with
Congress and the Administration to get this long-sought
legislation to the finish line.
HPC members also recognize that reform will not happen
absent meaningful progress on questions of affordability and
availability of credit. Here, too, there has been progress,
although some work remains. Fundamentally, this discussion
should focus on the unique opportunity presented by housing
finance reform. We can reassess the effectiveness of existing
programs and whether they are adequate to meet the substantial
housing needs our Nation faces today.
Housing finance reform gives us a chance to make meaningful
improvements in our programs and policies. For example, there
is broad acceptance of an affordability fee that can provide
meaningful financial support for the production and
preservation of affordable housing. Since affordable rental
housing is a critical challenge in many communities across the
country, additional targeted resources in this area can help.
The GSE housing goals targeted certain borrower segments
based on income and geography, but the subsidy was delivered by
a modest and broad reduction in interest rates, compensating
for higher risk rather than directing these scarce resources to
addressing the real obstacles these borrowers face in achieving
and sustaining home ownership. I think we can do better than
that, and with housing finance reform, we should be striving to
do so.
In short, the Housing Policy Council continues to believe
housing finance reform is needed. The Chairman's outline
captures the consensus elements of prior reform proposals and
serves as a solid, workable foundation from which to develop
legislation. HPC is ready to assist.
Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Mr. Ugalde.
STATEMENT OF GREG UGALDE, CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF HOME BUILDERS
Mr. Ugalde. Thank you. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member
Brown, and Members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today. My name is Greg Ugalde, and I am
the 2019 Chairman of the Board of the National Association of
Home Builders. I am a builder and developer from Burlington,
Connecticut, where I build in multiple communities and focus on
first-time and move-up buyers.
Safe, decent, affordable housing provides fundamental
benefits that are essential to the well-being of families,
communities, and the Nation. Unfortunately, NAHB's research
shows that housing affordability remains at a 10-year low.
For this reason, NAHB calls on Congress to make housing
affordability a national priority. Advancing comprehensive
housing finance reform will ensure the capital and liquidity
necessary for consumers and home builders to access stable
financing. We believe an effective housing finance system must
address liquidity as well as affordability, regardless of
domestic and international economic financial conditions.
Additionally, we believe that comprehensive reform must
originate in Congress and focus on fixing the structural flaws
that still persist 10 years after the Great Recession.
Comprehensive legislation, including a determination of the
future of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, is the only way to ensure
a stable housing finance system, preserve access to credit, and
protects taxpayers.
NAHB appreciates and supports Chairman Crapo's effort to
put forth a thoughtful outline for housing finance reform that
includes what we believe are essential elements for a
comprehensive reform bill while leaving other significant
details open for discussion and, most importantly, bipartisan
agreement.
In particular, we appreciate the Chairman's continued
support for an explicit Government backstop for a key portion
of the conventional mortgage market. We firmly believe this
support is critical to the ongoing availability of a 30-year
fixed-rate mortgage and financing of affordable multifamily
properties.
In addition to allowing for new market participants, the
Chairman's outline calls for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to
become private guarantors, which preserves the current
secondary market role for the enterprises and allows the
mortgage market to continue to benefit from their comprehensive
and well-tested infrastructure.
The outline would designate Ginnie Mae as an operator of
the securitization platform and provide the explicit Federal
Government guarantee for MBS. Employing a known and successful
guarantee entity provides an advantage, but substantial
upgrades will be needed for Ginnie Mae to successfully perform
this expanded role.
NAHB is pleased that the Chairman's outline proposes a
continued role for the multifamily financing infrastructure of
the GSEs. While we have concerns that the outline appears to
require the enterprises to divest their multifamily businesses,
we look forward to working with the Committee to ensure that
reform preserves the successful elements of the current system.
Finally, one of the barriers to increase housing supply and
affordability is the lack of acquisition, development, and
construction--or AD&C--financing for home builders and
developers. We believe the enterprises should be authorized to
support community bank AD&C lending activities in the future
housing finance reform legislation. Overall, NAHB is encouraged
that the Chairman's outline demonstrates that agreement on key
elements of reform is emerging. The need for bipartisan
legislation is urgent. We look forward to working with this
Committee to find solutions for the remaining issues that
continue to elude consensus.
Thank you, and I look forward to answering any questions.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Mr. Zandi.
STATEMENT OF MARK M. ZANDI, Ph.D., CHIEF ECONOMIST, MOODY'S
ANALYTICS
Mr. Zandi. Thank you, Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown,
and other Members of the Committee, for the opportunity to be
here. I appreciate it.
I am the Chief Economist at Moody's Analytics. It is an
independent subsidiary of the Moody's Corporation. But the
views I express here today are my own views.
You should also know that I am on the Board of Directors of
the MGIC, a national mortgage insurer. I am also lead director
of Reinvestment Fund, which is a national CDFI. We are
headquartered in Philadelphia, which is my home.
If you take nothing away from my testimony today, it should
be this: The housing finance system is in critical need of
reform, and Chairman Crapo's proposed framework for reform is
an excellent place to begin. It reflects much of the hard work
on reform that has been done on both sides of the aisle over
the past decade since Fannie and Freddie were put into
conservatorship, and there are many Members here today that
have been very active in this effort over the years. So I would
implore policymakers to use your outline as a framework to
finish the job of reform.
Your proposed framework does leave open several critical
design issues that must be resolved for reform to be a success,
but I believe they are resolvable. I will quickly describe your
framework from my perspective and recommend how to address
several of these issues.
In the proposed future housing finance system, mortgage
lenders will effectively have two options:
First, as in the current system, lenders can sell their
loans to guarantors like Fannie and Freddie, although there
will be multiple guarantors in the proposed system, who then
securitize the loan, manage the credit risk in the loan, and
perform the role of master servicer. This is know as the
``guarantor channel.'' This is the channel that we now exist
in.
Lenders' second option is to pool their loans, purchase
insurance to cover the credit risk on those pools, and issue
securities and perform the master servicing themselves. This is
known as the ``lender-issuer channel.'' In either channel, the
Federal Government provides a catastrophic guarantee that is
provided by Ginnie Mae and paid for by mortgage borrowers.
The first key structural issue is how to ensure that enough
guarantors enter the system that there are none that are too
big to be allowed to fail. Fannie and Freddie's complete
domination of today's market will frankly make it impossible to
attract new entrants absent significant steps to reduce
barriers to entry. A more fulsome common securitization
platform, increased transparency, and a multi-issuer single
security will at the very least be required to support
sufficient entry.
The second key issue is to ensure that lender-issuers are
not on the hook for the failure of the guarantors from which
they purchase insurance. If they are, then they will not get
true sale accounting for the loans that they make, which would
make this channel entirely unworkable; and if they do get true
sale accounting, exposure to the counterparty risk would put
small lenders and nondepositories at a significant
disadvantage. So for the issuer channel to work, the Government
must assume the risk of a failed guarantor.
The final key issue is how to ensure broad, consistent
access to affordable mortgage credit, particularly in areas
that the market may be less inclined to serve well when left on
its own. Your
outline states that the current affordability goals and duty to
serve will be replaced by a 10-basis-point market access fee to
lower housing costs for low- and moderate-income borrowers.
While this fee will generate much more funds than the current
system to promote access, more needs to be done. Critically
important is that all guarantors have a national footprint so
that they cannot simply serve those markets that happen to be
most profitable. It will also be important to effectively
target the market access fund for those borrowers, lower- and
middle-income borrowers, who actually need the help with the
kind of help they actually need.
There are, of course, other choices to be made: what
capital and regulatory regime to impose on the guarantors and
those providing credit insurance to ensure that they are
protecting taxpayers standing behind the system; how to ensure
the common securitization platform has the flexibility and
autonomy it needs to be an effective market utility; and how to
integrate the FHA--this is very key--how to integrate the FHA,
VA, and USDA into a more seamless coherent system of Government
support for the mortgage market.
If lawmakers can effectively address these structural
issues that I have identified, the remaining challenges are
manageable. Your outline, Chairman Crapo, thus holds
significant promise, in my view, making it a worthy place to
renew the much delayed but desperately needed effort to
overhaul the housing finance system.
Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Mr. Shelton.
STATEMENT OF HILARY O. SHELTON, DIRECTOR, WASHINGTON BUREAU,
AND SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT FOR ADVOCACY AND POLICY, NAACP
Mr. Shelton. Thank you very much, and good morning,
Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and esteemed Members of
this Committee. I would like to thank you for asking me here
today to discuss a topic of extreme importance to the NAACP and
all the individuals, families, neighborhoods, and communities
we serve and represent: the topic of home ownership.
While no one would argue that housing is not a very
important issue for our Nation and our economy, it is my hope
that when reforming the policy, you do not forget the impact
your actions will have on every American, especially those who
for a multitude of reasons may be most reliant on a strong
mortgage and secondary market, particularly Americans of color
and low- and moderate-income Americans.
In my written testimony, I provide the Committee with a
history of laws and legal actions. In the interest of time, I
will summarize the primary statistics here.
Today the home-ownership rate among African Americans is
approximately where it was when discrimination was legal, prior
to the enactment of the Fair Housing Act of 1968. Any changes
to the current system must continue to incorporate and protect
important market segments--namely, people of color and low- to
moderate-income families, on which a well-functioning future
system depends and a just society demands. These changes must
also continue to protect taxpayers.
The successful reform of our current system would produce
one that adequately serves the full universe of creditworthy
borrowers, takes into account the unique needs and
characteristics of communities of color. We should not and
cannot return to the days of a loosely regulated system which
led to reckless, unsustainable lending practices like those
that caused the financial crisis and led to the devastating
loss of wealth for too many Americans and disproportionately
for people of color, costing taxpayers billions of dollars.
Moreover, any housing reform policy must remedy the
historical marginalization of communities of color and
discriminatory practices within the mortgage market due to
societal constraints and, in too many cases, to Federal
policies. A secondary market structure that is too narrow
increases the risks of perpetuating the current two-tiered
lending system in which white, more affluent buyers are
channeled into one system with one set of fees, and racial and
ethnic minorities, people of color, and low- to moderate-income
buyers are funneled into yet another.
Specifically, the NAACP calls on Congress to retain and
strengthen any and all duty-to-serve provisions by GSEs or any
governmental program. Without an enforceable, robust obligation
to serve all markets, history has proven that communities of
color within our Nation will find it extremely difficult to
access the mortgage market.
We must retain if not strengthen any and all Federal
mandates to ensure broad access and affordability in our
Nation's housing finance system.
Any alteration to our current housing system must also
preserve and enhance fair housing and antidiscrimination laws.
To wit, we must ensure that there is a rigorous, consistent,
effective, and well-resourced structure to oversee and enforce
fair lending rules and regulations, and we must be able to
fully and adequately measure trends in lending to make sure
that fair and sustainable loans are being made to all
creditworthy borrowers, regardless of where they are looking to
purchase their homes.
Congress must preserve FHA-insured lending, responsible
low-downpayment mortgage loans, and ensure access to existing
downpayment assistance programs as well as promote cost-
effective loan modifications for existing homeowners.
Congress must also formally recognize and boost the role of
housing counseling. This entails both pre- and post-purchase
counseling to help families understand what their obligations
may be and how to best manage them, especially in times of
unexpected stress.
Any future housing reform proposal must also provide broad
access to capital for all borrowers as well as institutions of
every size.
Any housing proposal must also protect and increase funding
for the National Housing Trust Fund. There is still a dire need
for the Housing Trust Fund throughout the Nation, and until
that need is met, we must continue to fund and promote it.
Last, but not of least importance, any housing reform
policy must protect taxpayers.
In conclusion, I would point out that Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac have provided critical mortgage capital to
underserved communities.
More than 50 years after the enactment of the Fair Housing
Act of 1968, Congress has an opportunity to put some teeth into
the promises made by that law. Although racial and ethnic
minorities combined already represent a significant segment of
the housing market, we are projected to be an even larger
portion of the market over the next one to two decades.
If we as a Nation are going to continue to grow and
prosper, we must foster and accommodate our unique needs and
characteristics that make efforts to provide us with
affordable, sustainable home-ownership opportunities.
I recognize the impact that any changes, or even no
changes, to housing policy will have on our national and even
global economy, and I do not envy the task ahead for you.
However, I pledge to you that the NAACP stands ready to work
with you to ensure that we get it right, that we do not make
changes we will come to regret later.
I stand ready to answer any of your questions. Thank you
very much.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Mr. Levitin.
Mr. Levitin. I am not sure if this is working, the
microphone.
Chairman Crapo. It is.
STATEMENT OF ADAM J. LEVITIN, PROFESSOR OF LAW, GEORGETOWN
UNIVERSITY LAW CENTER
Mr. Levitin. Good morning, Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member
Brown, and Members of the Committee. Thank you for inviting me
to testify at this hearing.
I appreciate the Chairman's concern about the so-called
unfinished business of housing finance reform. Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac have been in conservatorship for over a decade now,
and there is uncertainty about their ultimate future.
Nonetheless, nothing about the market today suggests the need
for a wholesale redesign of the housing finance system as
proposed in the Chairman's outline.
The housing finance market has already been extensively
reformed since 2008. FHFA has replaced OFHEO and been a more
effective regulator. Fannie and Freddie have become much better
capitalized, and the guarantee fees now better reflect the
risks they assume.
Fannie and Freddie have also been substantially de-risked.
Their portfolio holdings and mortgages have been reduced, and
their exposure on mortgage-backed securities has been minimized
through various credit-risk transfers.
Moreover, the mortgage market as a whole is safer because
of Title XIV of the Dodd-Frank Act and the activities of the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. This reform has happened
piecemeal, but as a result, we have a housing finance market
that works quite well today. Let us not lose sight of that.
Most creditworthy Americans are today able to obtain
mortgage financing on reasonable terms. The terms that peer
borrowers
receive are substantially similar, no matter where they live.
East, West, North, and South, urban, suburban, ex-urban, and
rural, borrowers today can readily obtain a long-term fixed-
rate mortgage. That is, they can obtain the product that has
built the American middle class and for which there is a strong
consumer preference.
Borrowers can also lock in an interest rate prior to
closing, so they can budget their home purchase bids with
confidence. And they can choose to get their loan from among
thousands of institutions, including local community banks and
credit unions.
We have today a system that provides some support for
affordable mortgage credit to low- to moderate-income
households,
although we could do much better there. And we have a
fundamentally stable system because of the backstopping of the
Federal Government.
While the current system is not perfect, it is basically
performing fairly well on every metric by which we ought to
judge a housing finance system. Given this, we should be very
hesitant to embrace radical reform proposals.
The first rule for dealing with housing finance should be,
``Do no harm.'' Yet the Chairman's outline risks having very
serious unintended consequences: a loss of credit access for
rural communities, the unavailability of the 30-year fixed-rate
mortgage on competitive terms, the inability to readily get a
pre-closing rate lock, a lack of secondary market access for
community banks and credit unions, and an unstable procyclical
market.
These potential harms all follow from the fundamental
design of the Chairman's proposal, namely, a system based on
multiple guarantors that compete with each other for market
share and credit risk. Such competition will result in the
segmentation of the national market. For example, guarantors
will charge one rate for urban mortgages and another rate for
rural borrowers, if they serve them at all, because rural loans
are riskier.
Guarantors will also adopt procyclical pricing because they
will not account for the systemic effects of their pricing due
to the correlated nature of housing prices.
I explain the mechanisms of this in some detail in my
written testimony, but the short of the story is that we have
seen this before. This is the story of the housing bubble that
resulted in the 2008 financial crisis. The bubble was driven by
private label securitization by Wall Street banks that engaged
in a race to the bottom in underwriting standards as they
sought to gain market share. Competition among guarantors for
credit risk is likely to follow the same script.
Fortunately, there is a better approach, namely, a single-
guarantor system with back-end synthetic credit-risk transfers.
That is, a single entity would serve as a securitization
utility and provide a uniform guarantee of the mortgage-backed
securities it issues. The utility would then swap out most of
the credit risk to capital markets using synthetic credit-risk
transfers. Such a single-guarantor system avoids the harmful
competition for market share among guarantors because it can
transfer market-wide exposure through the credit-risk
transfers. Such market-wide exposures forces investors to price
in externalities.
A single-guarantor system is also more stable than a multi-
guarantor system because the utility can temporarily carry the
market itself during adverse market conditions when the credit-
risk transfers are not possible and thereby ensuring a steady
provision of credit through the cycle.
The best part is that we know that a single-guarantor
system works. It is what we have today in all but name. We
should either make our peace with the de facto single-guarantor
system we have or take steps to formalize and perfect it rather
than engaging in radical experimentation with a vital $11
trillion market.
I look forward to your questions.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
First of all, I appreciated the testimony of all of you. I
found it very helpful and insightful. My first question is
going to be on the multifamily market. I am going to ask Ms.
Ansel and Mr. Ugalde to please respond.
My plan envisions preserving a lot of the existing
infrastructure and technology that market participants are
familiar with, where possible. That includes taking advantage
of the common securitization platform as a potential issuing
platform for single-family MBS and Ginnie Mae to explicitly
guarantee MBS that meet specific underwriting guidelines, and
keeping the GSEs' multifamily business largely intact but as
new entities.
Ms. Ansel and Mr. Ugalde, do you agree that the multifamily
businesses at Fannie and Freddie performed very well through
the crisis and that we should follow the model that we have
talked about here, which would be spinning off of the GSEs the
multifamily businesses as private guarantors? I think that at
least one of you said there may be some questions you have
about that, but I would appreciate your response to it.
Ms. Ansel. Thank you. Yes, obviously the multifamily
housing performed very well during the housing crisis, and we
think the proposed Johnson-Crapo Act is a very solid place to
start to consider housing finance reform. We believe there are
a number of unanswered questions and details that need to be
worked out, and we look very forward to working with the
Committee on resolving those details.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Mr. Ugalde?
Mr. Ugalde. Yes, Mr. Chairman, we stand committed to making
sure that the finance needs of our multifamily members are met,
and it is a good starting point. We echo a lot of those
thoughts as well. But we are ready to work with the Committee
to find ways into the future to continue the success of the
multifamily financing.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Thank you.
And for Mr. DeMarco and Dr. Zandi, what is the best way to
take advantage of the common securitization platform? And do
you agree with the Ginnie Mae ``wrap'' that has been proposed
in my outline?
Mr. DeMarco. Certainly, Mr. Chairman, the Housing Policy
Council agrees with the use of the Ginnie Mae ``wrap.'' Ginnie
Mae's name is known around the globe, and global investors that
provide capital for financing U.S. mortgages already have their
investment procedures that allow for the investment in Ginnie
Mae. So I think that is very much the right thing to do.
With regard to the common securitization platform, I think
this is really a great opportunity and a benefit that we have
in doing reform, is that we have the development that has been
going on at the CSP, but we also have at Ginnie Mae a common
securitization platform, if you will, that itself has been
modernizing a great deal over the last 10 years. I give a great
deal of credit to the people at Ginnie Mae there. I think you
have got an opportunity to meld these two technology platforms
and get the best of both.
Mr. Zandi. I think using the Ginnie ``wrap'' is a great
idea. This is one reason why we need reform, because mortgage
rates are higher today than they otherwise would be if not for
an explicit Government guarantee provided by Ginnie. There is
debate about how much mortgage rates would be lower, but for
the typical borrower, on average through the business cycle, it
is probably about 20 basis points, 0.2 percentage points. That
does not sound like a lot, but when you do the arithmetic, that
is real money for a lot of people. And that is even more
important for underserved communities in dark times when the
economy is not performing well and housing markets are not
performing well. The benefit to mortgage rates will be even
greater.
This is one of the key reasons why we do need reform, and
using the Ginnie ``wrap'' makes perfect sense. There is no
reason not to do that.
With regard to the common securitization platform, I think,
you know, Ed is the father of the CSP, so we owe him a lot.
There was a lot of skepticism around the CSP and whether this
would ever come to fruition and make a difference. It has been,
in my view, a slam-dunk success. And here we are on the verge
of issuing a single security off the CSP. I think that happens
in June or July. Everything feels like we are on track to do
that. And going to a single security also critically important
to bringing down mortgage rates, because there had become this
bifurcation in guarantee fees offered by Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac because of a range of differences that are now going away
because of the CSP.
The work on the CSP, though, is not complete. There is a
lot more work that needs to be done, and if your framework is
going to work and we are going to get entry of other guarantors
into the system--so you are proposing Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac
as guarantors in some future system, and then entry by multiple
guarantors, other guarantors to compete with Fannie and
Freddie--we need to lower the fixed costs of operating
guarantors, and one of the fixed costs centers around the use
of the CSP. So the CSP has to be expanded, hardened, to allow
for other potential future guarantors to put their pipe and
connect it to the CSP and operate in the same way that Fannie
and Freddie do.
There are other things we can talk about on the CSP, but it
is a great starting point. It has been very costly. There has
been criticism about the cost. But it feels like it has been
worth the money, and this is key to any future reform.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you. My time has expired.
Senator Brown.
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shelton, the GSEs' current charter along with their
affordable housing goals and the duty to serve underserved
markets requires the GSEs to promote access to credit across
all markets, not just those that are the easiest to serve. If
the GSEs' charter, duty to serve, and affordable housing goals
were eliminated, what impact would you expect to see in
underserved communities, particularly communities of color,
which already are underserved by our housing system?
Mr. Shelton. We expect to see a lack of opportunity, quite
frankly, as we think about meeting the challenges that we have
had. One of the reasons in my testimony I spoke to the issues
of how the housing market functioned and lending opportunities
were made available prior to the Fair Housing Act in 1968 is
because that is exactly what we would be returning to. In
essence, we would find ourselves without even the access to
credit that we have seen before and the access to capital for
many startup families to be able to actually raise their
families, buy homes, and plan for the future.
Senator Brown. And nothing in the Crapo outline would
compensate for that?
Mr. Shelton. No, sir. As a matter of fact, it is a little
too short-term. As we think about caps and other issues along
those lines, it begins a process, but does not allow the
continuation or, quite frankly, from our perspective, the
aggressiveness that is needed to protect the market and
continue to make it available. So a duty to serve means we are
being affirmative about seeing to it that those resources and
opportunities are available to all.
Senator Brown. Thank you.
Mr. Levitin, and then I want to follow up and ask Mr. Zandi
the sort of serious questions I am going to ask you, and I will
ask his thoughts. We hear about the benefits of a broad
national market for mortgage credit, a national market that
ensures that at any given time a borrower in Lancaster, Ohio,
or New Orleans can get a mortgage with a similar interest rate.
Without the existing requirements for each of the GSEs to serve
all markets, would you expect borrowers across the country to
have the same certainty?
Mr. Levitin. Absolutely not. Before we had the GSEs, we had
regionalized housing markets with tremendous credit disparities
across regions. Rural areas, the South and the West in
particular, were less served than urban areas in the East.
Senator Brown. So what would you predict, what parts of the
country might have the most trouble accessing credit? Which
ones would pay more? Describe regions or demographics, whatever
you think you can figure out.
Mr. Levitin. Rural areas will have a lot more trouble
obtaining credit if there is not a duty to serve a national
market. Urban communities, particularly communities of color,
will have a lot more trouble accessing mortgage credit. And I
think what we will see is a strong--we will continue to see a
strong market for affluent, primarily white suburbs and ex-
urbs, and the rest of the country will have trouble getting
mortgages at all; and if they do, it will not be on the same
terms as wealthy suburbs.
Senator Brown. Mr. Zandi, do you agree with that?
Mr. Zandi. Yes, I agree that if the guarantors in the
future system do not have a national requirement, a duty to
serve a national market, we could see this bifurcation of the
market, and we want to avoid that.
Clearly, this creates a tension in that if guarantors are
required to have a national footprint, that raises the cost of
becoming a guarantor and raises the entry barriers and reduces
the odds of getting entry into the system, getting those
multiple guarantors that we need to get if we are going to get
the competition that we want and also to reduce the systemic
risk in the system, the too-big-to-fail risk. If you have two
guarantors in the system--one guarantor, obviously, they are
too big to fail. We need multiple guarantors. So there is a
tension that we need to resolve there, but, yes, I do agree
that the guarantors in the future system should have a national
footprint.
Senator Brown. So how would you do that? How would you
change the outline to do that?
Mr. Zandi. It is not a matter of changing the outline. It
is coloring in the outline with more detail. I think there are
several ways to do it. I mentioned the common securitization
platform. Make that a more robust platform so that it lowers
the cost of doing business to become a national guarantor.
Provide more data and information. Fannie and Freddie today
have released more data and information as part of their
credit-risk transfers, but they still have a repository of lots
of information that they are keeping close and that they can
use. It is like Google having all this information and using AI
to be able to use that to target the customers they want. The
same with Fannie and Freddie. This data should be shared more
broadly.
Here is another idea, and I think it is very workable. You
could make the cost of doing business higher for Fannie and
Freddie requiring them to continue paying the 10 basis point
fee for the 2012 payroll tax cut for awhile after its
expiration in 2022, while allowing new guarantors not to pay
the fee. This will give the new guarantors an advantage to
allow them to gain the market share they need to become viable
competitors.
So there are multiple ways--I just mentioned a few. There
are many others ways to make this work in a way that we get the
national footprint, but we also get the multiple guarantors
that we need to ensure competition in the system.
Senator Brown. Thanks.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Rounds.
Senator Rounds. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is always easier to fix the roof of a house while it is
sunny out, and so it is important to hold this hearing on GSE
reform today while our housing market and economy are both
healthy. And yet because our housing market and our economy are
healthy, there appears to be no crisis immediately in front of
us. And if there is no crisis immediately in front of us,
Congress has a tendency not to act or to do anything in a
proactive manner. At least that is my observation after being
here for 4 years. I would suspect that others who have been
here longer might disagree with me, but it seems to me that
since right now there is not a crisis, we are not giving this
the due credibility that it needs in terms of a proposal.
Before we get into the specifics even of this proposal, as
the Chairman has laid out, I would like to ask about a
potential course of administrative action that has been
discussed in the absence of legislation being proposed. In
light of congressional inaction on housing finance reform, some
have suggested that the Administration recapitalize the GSEs
and then release them out of conservatorship. What would be the
consequences of this action? Mr. Zandi, I would like to star
with you, sir.
Mr. Zandi. I think that would be a serious error. I think
that would be going back to the future system we had before the
crisis. The duopoly like we had before. Maybe more highly
regulated and more highly capitalized than before, but they
will have the same incentives to make the same errors and
mistakes they made in the past, and I fear that in future
generations we will be back here discussing how to bail them
out. So that would be the last thing I would do. And that, by
the way, is why it is another reason why we need reform, to
your point that the sun is out, let us get this done before it
starts to rain and starts to flood us out, because if we do, we
are going to go down the wrong path.
Senator Rounds. Unfortunately, we are not quite set up for
flood insurance yet either, are we?
Mr. Zandi. No, we are not.
[Laughter.]
Senator Rounds. Imagine that. Recap and release is the--of
all of our options--and, believe me, we have thought about all
of these. There is an old adage. Americans go down--I think
Winston Churchill--I will botch this, but, you know, we try
everything and we ultimately do not do anything until we do the
right--whatever. You get what I am saying.
Mr. Zandi. After we try everything else, then we----
Senator Rounds. Yes, I have got to go back and read that.
But my point is we have already gone down the path, and recap
and release is at the bottom of the list of things we should be
doing. Thank you.
Ms. Ansel, would you care to comment?
Ms. Ansel. Yes, I would agree, recap and release, some
people have called for that, and we would--there has been a
letter recently sent to the Administration signed by 28 real
estate associations that call on the Administration and
Congress to recognize the vital role that GSEs currently play.
It is critical that any administrative reforms do not disturb
the essential functions of the secondary mortgage market, and
any reform, as we have said in my testimony, it is important
that it is transparent and that it is well laid out so that any
time for transition is carefully executed.
Senator Rounds. Mr. DeMarco, your thoughts?
Mr. DeMarco. Senator, I agree with Ms. Ansel and Mr. Zandi
that recap and release should not even be on the table for
discussion. It is the responsibility of the Congress of the
United States to dispose of what happens to Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac and their charters. Congress reserved that to
itself when it enacted HERA, and we are looking for the
Congress to make those determinations for us.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
Mr. Ugalde, you specifically mentioned the need for
appraisal reform in your written testimony. I know firsthand
the difficulty that can come with having to find an appraisal
to complete a real estate transaction. I am not exaggerating it
when I say that it takes weeks or even months to receive
appraisals in certain parts of South Dakota. We made progress
on this in S. 2155, and the banking regulators have also
provided relief. Yet clearly the current system still is far
from perfect.
How can we improve the current appraisal system through the
housing finance reform efforts?
Mr. Ugalde. So when we look at the end of the day to be
able to sell homes to our buyers, to our customers, they need
to have certainty and predictability. One of their main
obstacles when you are getting financing is that whole
appraisal system. So any future efforts have to include making
sure that appraisals can be delivered timely and in a
financially sound manner.
When you look at the restrictions now, for example, on
comps, comparable house sales within areas, they are very
difficult to do, especially as you get into rural areas and
things and the timeframes that are set on those. So we really
need to look at that as we move forward and make sure that
people that are applying for mortgages can have the confidence
that they will be approved for a loan in a timely manner and be
able to buy a house.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Warner.
Senator Warner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
holding this hearing.
Let me state for the record that, having been involved in
this subject for a long time, I never wanted to learn this much
about housing finance.
[Laughter.]
Senator Warner. But I do think, echoing a number of the
comments, that we are seeing some movement forward, and I
applaud the Chairman for at least putting out a starting point.
I am glad to hear such consensus around recap and release would
be a disaster. I am glad to hear a number--and, Ms. Ansel,
particularly in multifamily, did not cause the problem, first
do no harm.
I also think, Mr. Chairman, that we are seeing increasing
recognition that we need additional transparency, that we need
to do and continue to advance credit-risk sharing.
I think the comments by Mr. Zandi about the common
securitization platform, any reform means we need to build that
up.
I am particularly interested--and, Mr. Shelton, you and I
have had a number of these conversations--about protecting low-
and moderate-income households. That will be a majority of new
households coming into the marketplace.
And one of the things I would hope that would give us a
sense of urgency, particularly on issues around access and
affordability, is that the FHFA Director has broad authority to
pursue these changes without Congress' involvement. And we know
that in the near future, Mr. Calabria will take his position,
and he could
actually start to dramatically change the housing market
without Congress' involvement.
So I want to point out--and I will direct this question to
Mr. DeMarco, since he was head of the agency, and Dr. Zandi:
Won't the new FHFA Director have the discretion to pull back on
affordability goals and dilute the duty to serve? Can't he also
lower loan limits, increase guarantee fees, and reduce product
availability? He could reduce as well the cross-subsidy that is
currently built into the system. He could eliminate the GSE
patch and turn off funding for the Housing Trust Funds. And he
could significantly increase capital requirements on the GSEs.
He could do all that without any congressional input. Is that
not correct, Dr. Zandi and Mr. DeMarco?
Mr. DeMarco. Senator Warner, the statute gives the FHFA
Director authority over all those issues that you have
enumerated.
Mr. Zandi. Yes, I concur. He has significant latitude.
Senator Warner. And I guess, again, the notion that the
status quo is going to mean simply the status quo I believe is
a great, great risk.
Specifically, I want to talk about the changes, how it
could affect home ownership. Today--and we have spent a lot of
time on this, many of us on the panel--we have spent about $4
billion in cross-subsidies that are built into the system. Some
of our proposals increase that by almost 50 percent. But if the
FHFA Director decides to cut that cross-subsidy from $4 billion
to $2 billion, Dr. Zandi, what effect would that have on home
ownership?
Mr. Zandi. It would be significant. Just to give you a
sense of the numbers, cutting the cross-subsidy, let us say, in
half--it is about $4 billion per annum currently--to, say, $2
billion per annum, that would mean that roughly 350,000
homeowners that were Fannie and Freddie homeowners would now
face higher mortgage rates because they would be pushed into
the FHA, VA, USDA system. So what would happen is that the
share of mortgages that are done by FHA, VA, and USDA would
increase; the amount done by Fannie and Freddie would decline--
which, by the way, also increases taxpayer risk, because FHA,
VA, and USDA cover most of the credit risk, and in the case of
FHA, all of the credit risk in the mortgage loans. Currently
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, through the risk transfers, are
offloading a lot of the risks to private investors. So not only
are you raising mortgage rates for these borrowers, reducing
home ownership, but you are adding to taxpayer risk.
Senator Warner. Let me add one more thing in the weeds on
this. If the Director chose to basically release the GSEs from
conservatorship, the QM exemption or the patch would go away.
The patch allows GSEs to purchase higher DTI loans and,
frankly, they accounted for about 30 percent of the purchases
in 2018. If we got rid of the patch, Dr. Zandi, what would that
do on affordability?
Mr. Zandi. That would also have similarly significant
effects. If you look at the data, over the last 5 years, nearly
20 percent of all of the loans that Fannie and Freddie have
purchased have been through the GSE patch because the debt-to-
income ratios of the borrowers have been above the 43-percent
threshold that are in the qualified mortgage rule. So they are
outside of being QM, and they are under the GSE patch. That is
20 percent of all their loans.
Senator Warner. I just want to make one final comment.
Having gone down this path a number of times, I do understand
the challenges about how we would have a fully functioning
market. But I think there are ways that we can put speed bumps
or guarantees in there, and I just want to urge my friends on
the panel that there does remain potentially with the FHFA
Director enormous risks of this being taken away from the
Congress and done administratively, and I do hope we can
continue to work in a bipartisan way to get this done.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Toomey.
Senator Toomey. Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman, and thanks
to all the witnesses.
Just a quick follow-up question on this patch, and this
will be for Mr. DeMarco. When I think about it, isn't it fair
to say that the existence of this patch is really the CFPB
subbing out to Fannie and Freddie the determination of what
constitutes QM in a not terribly transparent way and in a way,
as we just heard, that lowers credit standards?
Mr. DeMarco. That is correct, Senator.
Senator Toomey. So that is what it does. Thanks.
I also want to talk about guarantors because there has been
a general discussion that, under the Crapo model, we would like
to see multiple guarantors enter the market under such a model.
I would like to see that. If we mandated a nationwide universal
duty to serve, doesn't that potentially discourage some
potential entrants to the market who might, for instance, have
an expertise for rural communities or a geographical expertise?
So I will target this to Mr. DeMarco. First of all, do you
think that such a mandate might discourage some entrants into
the market? And what would you suggest we do to ensure that
there are a lot of participants in the market?
Mr. DeMarco. I think that requiring that certainly creates
a barrier to entry, Senator, and it also creates potential
unintended consequences. And I rather like the example that you
posed in framing the question. Concern has been expressed
already in this hearing about credit in rural markets, what
makes rural markets different.
I will give you another example: manufactured housing. Duty
to serve as written in the law today actually has three
component parts, of which one is manufactured housing. So why
would we want to create a system in which we actually
discouraged or created a barrier to entry to credit guarantors
that we are going to take the time and effort to specialize in
those market segments and specialize in serving those market
segments.
Senator Toomey. And, Dr. Zandi, you alluded to an interest
in having multiple participants. Do you share the concern that
Mr. DeMarco has just articulated?
Mr. Zandi. I do. It is a balance. I do think the concern
that allowing for the multiple guarantors that serve sub-
markets runs the risk of creating problems to address
affordability and access more broadly. And----
Senator Toomey. But it could also actually serve more
communities by creating a lower barrier--lowering the barrier
to entry.
Mr. Zandi. It is possible, but my sense is you would
probably get the opposite. I mean, that is what I fear. And,
you know, I think if we could get to multiple guarantors and
still maintain the national footprint, that is both desirable
from an economic perspective and a political economy
perspective. But you are right, there is a tension there.
Senator Toomey. Let me go back to Mr. DeMarco for a second.
Again, thinking about the Crapo outline, obviously Fannie and
Freddie now have a huge legacy portfolio of mortgage-backed
securities and guarantees. How do you envision dealing with
that in a world in which they are just two of potentially many
guarantors going forward?
Mr. DeMarco. Since the Chairman's outline and most other
reform proposals appear to envision there being some kind of
transformation of Fannie and Freddie as two companies in
conservatorship to--I do not know whether they pass through
receivership and allow themselves to be rechartered and
recapitalized, certainly the existing books of business that
they manage could be licensed out to the new Fannie and the new
Freddie to be serviced on behalf of the Government. But,
actually, it also could look at the opportunity to take in
those books of business and licensing them to other entrants as
well to allow for--to ease this notion of entry and to create
more opportunity for new guarantors to enter this market. But I
certainly think the existing book would have to be managed
under contract, the same way the FDIC does when it takes over a
failed bank and then takes the existing loan portfolio and
assigns it to other entities.
Senator Toomey. So the mortgage-backed security market is,
I think, probably the second most liquid fixed-income market in
the world behind Treasurys. In this scenario, do you think the
liquidity in that market would be preserved?
Mr. DeMarco. I do, and there are some technical steps we
could get into that Congress could take in the path of actual
legislating to ensure that. But, look, I mean, these securities
are trading out there today with the backstop of the U.S.
taxpayer, and that backstop would continue--continues for the
life of those securities. So that Treasury support that
supports that $5 trillion in MBS today would exist for the life
of the securities even if Fannie and Freddie themselves do not
exist.
Senator Toomey. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Smith.
Senator Smith. Thank you very much, Chair Crapo, and also
to Ranking Member Brown for holding this hearing. And thanks to
all of you for being here.
So I am starting from the core value that affordability of
housing is really central to people being able to build the
lives that they want, and so how we structure a housing finance
system to support that goal is what is uppermost on my mind.
So I would like to continue on this topic of the GSEs' duty
to serve and how that works and what would happen if it were to
change. And let me ask this really of anybody on the panel. Why
do you think it is important for GSEs to continue targeted
support for affordable housing and mortgage lending,
especially--and I am very interested especially in native
communities and rural areas. Does anybody want to start with
this? Thank you.
Mr. Ugalde. So when you look at the data and recently
released statistics, in the last 15 years, for example, we have
pushed entry-level home ownership back 5 years. So where we
used to have 25-year-olds entering home ownership, it is now
30-plus years.
Senator Smith. Right.
Mr. Ugalde. And when we look at many of the markets across
the country, we need to focus on housing affordability. We have
dropped in key sectors of the market as much as 10 percent
home-ownership levels over the last 10 to 15 years. We have a
lot of those stats in our testimony, but the issue that you are
raising is critical. If we do not start focusing on that today
and start plugging some of these holes, we are just going to
keep going down that path and forcing some of the young people
with college debt and credit card debt and all these things
that we need to give them certainty in financing and the
ability to have a set plan on getting to the American Dream of
home ownership, and that is really one of our goals.
Senator Smith. And so how does this duty-to-serve
requirement or goal, how should--what impact is it having
specifically, or what impact should it be having especially on
rural areas and tribal communities?
Mr. Ugalde. So just to finish the thought, if you do not
impose a duty to serve, especially in specialized areas, you
are going to leave too many holes, so it is going to become
just for-profit and you are going to see cream skimming and a
lot of the loans made in the more lucrative areas.
Senator Smith. Thank you. Yes?
Mr. DeMarco. Senator, maybe a moment of background on duty
to serve, what that term actually means in law. The duty-to-
serve requirement was actually created in 2008, just 6 weeks
before Fannie and Freddie ended up in conservatorship. So this
is not a longstanding part of the GSE structure. Congress in
2008 said to Fannie and Freddie, ``We want to see you focus
more attention in three particular segments: manufactured
housing, affordable housing preservation, and rural housing.''
It has only been in the last few years that there has actually
been implementing regulations on that.
So I do not think that we, you know, are in a place today
where this is a longstanding, well-developed infrastructure at
Fannie and Freddie that has had some longstanding, meaningful
impact. I think I would take your question differently and say,
look, as we are doing housing finance reform, as we are ending
the GSE charters, and moving to a new secondary market, we want
to make sure that we are creating robust liquidity for
affordable housing preservation, for rural housing, and so
forth. And so I think, for
example, the exchange I had with Senator Toomey a minute ago
actually addressed the manufactured housing and rural housing
question. So I think that those are ways to think about the
issues that you are raising.
Senator Smith. Please, Mr. Levitin.
Mr. Levitin. Mr. DeMarco is technically correct that when
duty to serve----
Chairman Crapo. Could you push the button on your
microphone?
Mr. Levitin. Mr. DeMarco is technically correct about when
duty to serve became--using that phrase became part of law. But
we have had a broader sense of duty to serve for much longer.
The Fannie Mae Charter Act--I think it is 12 U.S.C. 1716,
something like that--lays out what the purposes of Fannie Mae
are, and it is to serve a national market. It is expressly
required to do so. So it is not targeted duties about, you
know, manufactured housing or affordable housing, but it is
serving a national market, and that includes all communities,
including tribal communities.
Senator Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Zandi. Can I point out that the beauty of the current
system is that we have similar mortgage rates across the entire
country throughout the business cycle, in good times and bad
times, and that is because of the fact that Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac are national guarantors with a national footprint
and view their mission as providing credit broadly through all
market circumstances. That principal I think needs to be
preserved in any future system. If we lose that, then we go
back to a system that prevailed many, many years ago where some
communities faced much higher mortgage rates than others, and
that was in an economy and a housing market that I do not think
is desirable. So we need to ensure that, and the debate is: Can
you get there with multiple guarantors without a requirement
that they serve all markets at all times across the country?
Senator Smith. Right. Well, thank you, Mr. Chair. This is a
very interesting topic, and I look forward to continuing to
work with you on this.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you. We appreciate that.
Senator Kennedy.
Senator Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. DeMarco, can we agree that we put Fannie and Freddie
under conservatorship?
Mr. DeMarco. We did.
Senator Kennedy. When did we do that? 2009?
Mr. DeMarco. September 6, 2008.
Senator Kennedy. 2008, so it has been 11 years. Why did we
do that other than the fact that they were broke?
Mr. DeMarco. We did it because they were broke and because
they posed a huge systemic risk to the U.S. and global
financial system.
Senator Kennedy. But wasn't the charge to them, wasn't it
to go forth and try to improve their financial condition?
Mr. DeMarco. They certainly had that responsibility.
Senator Kennedy. Have they done that?
Mr. DeMarco. Apparently not.
Senator Kennedy. Well, what have they been doing other than
sucking on their teeth for 11 years?
Mr. DeMarco. For the last 11 years, the Government through
the agency of FHFA has been ensuring that the systems that
Fannie and Freddie have to create and issue mortgage-backed
securities--that is, to have the plumbing for a secondary
mortgage market--that that plumbing remained active and
operable and that the securities that were issued by these
companies would still be purchased by investors around the
globe for the protection of the U.S. housing finance system.
And so for 11 years, we have successfully kept those two
companies' systems operating and done so in a way that
investors want to purchase these MBS still. So that provides
liquidity to our system.
Senator Kennedy. Well, could the GSEs right now survive a
recession, a deep recession? Or are we going to be right back
at square one?
Mr. DeMarco. Well, certainly, I think if there was a deep
recession and house prices declined, foreclosures went up,
because they are so heavily involved in guaranteeing mortgage
credit, there would certainly be losses. And because the
capital of those companies comes from the taxpayer, the losses
would go to the taxpayer.
Senator Kennedy. Well, does anybody agree that the GSEs are
still too big to fail?
Mr. DeMarco. I agree they are.
Mr. Zandi. Yes, they are. They are the largest financial
institutions on the planet.
Senator Kennedy. Right. Does anybody disagree with that?
[No response.]
Senator Kennedy. Well, then, how do you make them self-
sustaining? Are they not charging enough? Or do we just
apparently subsidize them forever and a day?
Mr. Zandi. No, they are actually charging plenty, and if
they use that money to--if we reform them and have a reformed
system and take them out of conservatorship and put them into,
let us say, a multiple-guarantor system, as Chairman Crapo has
proposed, at the current pricing, at their current guarantee
fee based on everything they are doing, this would be a viable
system over time. So we are there. It just takes an act of
Congress. It takes the will to address these fundamental issues
that are stopping us from passing legislation.
Senator Kennedy. So it is Congress' fault?
Mr. Zandi. No, these are complicated issues.
Senator Kennedy. I mean, what has been going on for 11
years?
Mr. Levitin. I think that, unfortunately, there is no way
to get around the fact that the Federal Government at the end
of the day will bear the catastrophic risk in the mortgage
market. The Chairman's proposal would have Ginnie Mae serving
as an ultimate backstop. There is really no way around it.
Senator Kennedy. Yeah.
Mr. Levitin. When everything fails, it is going to fall on
the Federal Government. We can try and minimize the chances----
Senator Kennedy. I get it, Professor. It is going to fall
on the American taxpayer. I know that is what you really meant.
Let me ask you about flood insurance. Some of these
mortgages, the people who take out these mortgages are required
to carry flood insurance. Is that correct?
Mr. DeMarco. It is certainly for loans sold to Fannie and
Freddie, yes. If they are in a flood zone, they are required to
have mortgage----
Senator Kennedy. OK. What are the GSEs, what are Fannie and
Freddie doing to make sure, if anything, that there is flood
insurance other than sucking on their teeth?
Mr. DeMarco. Senator, other than requiring loan originators
and the servicers to make sure it is there, I cannot speak to
what they specifically do today.
Senator Kennedy. They do not have any follow-up system?
Mr. DeMarco. Senator, I have been out for over 5 years, so
I am just not----
Senator Kennedy. Does anybody know? Or is this the
attitude, if something goes wrong, that is OK, somebody will
pay for it?
Mr. Levitin. If there is a representation that there is
flood insurance given to Fannie and Freddie and there is not,
Fannie and Freddie should be following up on that and putting
the mortgage----
Senator Kennedy. Are they? Are they?
Mr. Levitin. That I do not know.
Senator Kennedy. I mean, sometimes people lie.
Mr. Levitin. I do not know how vigorously they are
prosecuting representation and warranty violations. That I
cannot say.
Ms. Ansel. Senator Kennedy, I would point out----
Senator Kennedy. Yes, ma'am?
Ms. Ansel.----in the past 11 years on the multifamily side
that the GSEs have contributed over $37 billion of profits, so
the multifamily side has been capitalized well and has a very
careful, conservative underwriting and risk-taking strategy
that served well during the global financial crisis and
continues to do so going forward. So in any reform, we would
encourage to do no harm and maintain those important statutes
that have worked so well.
Senator Kennedy. Well, you make a valid point, and I do not
mean to be overly cynical about all of this. But the fact is
that the GSEs have done much good. They have done a lot of
harm, too. They have just done a lot of harm.
Ms. Ansel. They have worked well in our segment of the
industry. We have a very competitive industry, and they have
been an important part of that. They are an important part of
serving parts of the market that the private capital does not
serve as well or as easily. So we would ask you to take that
into consideration in reform.
Senator Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Schatz.
Senator Schatz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
panelists.
I want to ask a question of Dr. Zandi because we have had
multiple long conversations about this topic. I want you to
respond to what Mr. Levitin said, because as I leaned over to
my friend Mark Warner, I said, ``Yeah, that is what I have been
trying to say this whole time,'' which is to say that I do not
doubt that there is a need to make at the sort of securities
transaction level reforms, but it seems to me that, with the
exception of some panelists and some advocates, that this is
characterized primarily as a securities transaction and not as
public policy to advance affordable housing. And I do not mean
affordable housing purely in the sort of LIHTC officially, you
know, AMI level but just making sure that people can afford to
live in apartments and homes.
So how do you address Professor Levitin's basic assertion,
which is that what you are proposing is quite radical, quite
experimental, it is an $11 trillion market, and from the
standpoint of the consumer right now, there are a lot of basic
protections that ought to remain enshrined in statute, and a
lot of what is being talked about is aspirational, interesting,
might work, but does not have the kind of ironclad guarantee
that consumers and lenders at the sort of ground level have
right now?
Mr. Zandi. I do not think it is experimental. I think this
is just evolutionary and just an add-on to the current system
that we have been talking about since we started talking about
reform.
Senator Schatz. Well, except that you are also getting--I
mean, at least people are contemplating getting rid of the duty
to serve----
Mr. Zandi. OK, so----
Senator Schatz.----people are contemplating getting rid of
certain standards that the FHFA establishes pursuant to statute
and replace it with basically a pile of money that provides
what is called a ``cross-subsidy.'' And I do not know if that
will work.
Mr. Zandi. If I were king for the day, I would increase the
monies that go to the cross-subsidy. Right now, by my
calculation, it is about $4 billion per annum. The 10-basis-
point fee that Chairman Crapo has in his proposal would raise
that to roughly $5 billion. We would have a mortgage insurance
fund to ensure that the catastrophic insurance that the
taxpayers are on the hook for are paid for. You make that
level. That is another cross-subsidy in the system, now up to
about $5.5 billion.
I would not stop there. I do understand that----
Senator Schatz. But what about the duty to serve? What
about all the rules that are sort of in exchange for increasing
the cross-subsidy? Which, by the way, mortgage payers pay,
right? It is a cross-subsidy, but, you know, we are all paying
it. You increase the pile of money. I am all for that. But why
in exchange for diminishing some of these bedrock protections?
Mr. Zandi. I am not arguing that. I am still king and what
I would say----
[Laughter.]
Senator Schatz. A king. So far, OK.
Mr. Zandi. Yeah, I would have a national footprint--
right?--to ensure that we have equal access across the system.
And if you insisted that we should have the same affordability
regime, affordable housing goals, then I would say, OK, I would
be OK with that. This is why: In my view--I am not a fan of the
affordable goals, not because I am not interested in making
sure that underserved communities are served. But I think the
affordable housing goals are very ineffective. They do not
work. But if you feel like you need those to provide certainty
that we are going to get to where you want to go in terms of
access across certain communities, if I were king, I would say
fine, no big deal, because at the end of the day in my view it
is irrelevant.
Senator Schatz. Well, we have a minute left. I just want to
challenge you on that. I tend to--I mean, I am not sure we
totally disagree about the affordable housing goals or the duty
to serve. I would argue not that they do not work, but they do
not work well enough.
Mr. Zandi. OK.
Senator Schatz. Right?
Mr. Zandi. Right.
Senator Schatz. And that as difficult as it is to find
affordable housing, as much as we are as a panel and as a
country failing on this, we can, in fact, make this worse. And
that is what worries me.
It is true that we are not succeeding, but, therefore, we
should eliminate what little protections we have seems to me to
be a bit of a stretch, and I want you to respond to that in
your last--in my last 30 seconds. You are king. It is your 30
seconds.
Mr. Zandi. Yeah, I mean, I am very sympathetic to what you
are saying. The only thing I would say, though, is, you know,
at $4 billion to 5--I am an economist, and I am focused on
numbers. That is a big deal. That is a billion and a half more.
Senator Schatz. Hold on. You think a billion and a half
deal is not basically a drop in the bucket as it relates to----
Mr. Zandi. No.
Senator Schatz.----the entire housing market?
Mr. Zandi. It would make a significant difference to
hundreds of thousands of homeowners each year. And, by the way,
it does not have to be 10 basis points. You know, if you do the
arithmetic--and we have done the arithmetic--you could actually
take this up to 15 basis points, and now we are talking, you
know, substantively more money.
Senator Schatz. I am for all of that. I just do not
understand why the trade.
Mr. Zandi. Well, my point is I do not think the affordable
goals get you what people think they are getting, but I would
take that trade because I am going to be able to provide much
more funding to the people I am trying to help and the people
you are trying to help.
Senator Schatz. Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Warren.
Senator Warren. So we know there is a housing crisis in
this country and that millions of families who can afford to
pay a mortgage and should be able to buy a home are shut out
and trapped in a rental market with skyrocketing costs because
they cannot get a mortgage. This is especially true for
families of color who are more likely to be renters because
they were denied opportunities to buy a home that white
families had had those opportunities for generations. And then
these same black families were targeted with the most abusive
mortgages and loans in the run-up to the financial crisis. So
it is a double blow.
Today the black home-ownership rate in America is 43
percent, and it is 47 percent for Hispanic Americans. The
African Ameri-
can home-ownership rate is now 30 points below that of white
Americans. That is the kind of gap we saw back when housing
discrimination was legal.
We are here today to talk about housing finance reform, and
it is clear that any housing finance reform effort must focus
on responsibly opening doors to home ownership to these
families and easing the strain on renters, both of those
things, plain and simple.
So, Mr. Shelton, I would like to start with you. Under the
current system, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have affordable
housing goals that help banks make more loans to low-income
borrowers in low-income communities. The Chairman's housing
reform outline eliminates these goals altogether. If the goals
are eliminated, would you expect the home-ownership gap between
black and Hispanic Americans and white Americans to grow or to
shrink?
Mr. Shelton. The gaps will grow.
Senator Warren. The gaps will grow. I agree. The affordable
housing goals have been crucial in making mortgage credit
available for communities of color, and any effort at reform
should make them stronger, not throw them in the trash. To
replace the goals in a program known as duty to serve that also
helps expand access to home ownership, the Chairman's proposal
creates a new Market Access Fund. This is the argument, that
you are going to get to the same place with a new Market Access
Fund. The proposed Market Access Fund shares funding with two
other programs: the Houston Trust Fund and the Capital Magnet
Fund. A generous estimate suggests that funding for the whole
pot is no more than $5 billion a year. I think we all agree on
that fact.
So, Mr. Shelton, say the whole $5 billion went to the
Market Access Fund, which is unlikely if we are going to have
three dipping into it. Would low- and moderate-income borrowers
and borrowers of color be in the same position, in a better
position, or in worse shape than under the current system?
Mr. Shelton. In much worse shape.
Senator Warren. So the plan scraps the goal. It replaces
the goals with a pot of money that is way too small to do the
same job. Is that how you see it, Mr. Shelton?
Mr. Shelton. Yes, ma'am, absolutely.
Senator Warren. So I recently reintroduced my housing bill
which puts about $47 billion per year in the Housing Trust Fund
and Capital Magnet Fund. In the Chairman's plan, these same
programs at most would get maybe 10 percent of that funding.
So, Dr. Zandi, in an independent analysis you did of my
bill, you wrote that because of those investments, the
investments that would be made under my bill, and other reforms
that are in the bill, ``By the end of the 10-year horizon,
affordable housing supply should be approximately equal to
demand.'' We would get supply and demand back in balance. Would
a $5 billion per year investment split between three programs
have the same effect?
Mr. Zandi. No. I would argue that your legislation should
be on top of and in addition to, separate from the discussion
around GSE reform. What we are trying to do here is make the
current system work better for underserved communities, and I
think that is a reasonable debate, and we had it. But I
entirely agree with you that that is not the end of the story.
We need to help address another increasingly more serious
crisis, and that is an affordability crisis. We have a serious
shortfall of affordable housing, rental housing and for home
ownership across the country, and each and every year this
crisis is getting worse because the amount of--the home
builders are having--for lots of reasons that Mr. Ugalde gave,
they are not being able to supply the market with what they
need, particularly at the low end, particularly at low price
points. So your legislation, which provides significant
financing and funding to the Housing Trust Fund and the Capital
Magnet Fund to increase the supply of affordable housing--by
the way, the brilliance of that is that it directs funds to
organizations that are able to address complicated problems
involved in developing affordable housing in urban centers and
rural areas. That is what I do as lead director at CDFI in
Philadelphia. That is what we are trying to do. Every home has
a story, right? Title problem, tax issues and liens, all kinds
of neighborhood issues. The only people who can solve that are
people who are going to get the funding from the Housing Trust
Fund and the Capital Magnet Fund.
So, in my view, that is on top of everything we are talking
about. It is not in lieu of everything we are talking about.
Senator Warren. OK. So it is going to take both to fix the
problem.
Mr. Zandi. Oh, it is absolutely going to take both. These
are different problems. We have got two different problems.
Senator Warren. That is right--well, they are not different
problems. They are related to each other. They are how we get
people into homes that they can afford and how we also at the
same time address the racial gap that is yawning in front of
us. And that is the part I just wanted to underline here. The
outline does not address the housing costs that families all
across this country--black, white, Latino, urban, rural,
Republican, Democrat--face. And unless we set some real goals
and put some real resources into doing this, we are not going
to make the changes that we need to make. So thank you. And
thank you, Mr. Shelton.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Tester.
Senator Tester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was waiting for
the other side of the aisle, but evidently Kennedy is done. And
I do not mean that literally, OK?
[Laughter.]
Chairman Crapo. Do not ever underestimate Senator Kennedy.
Senator Tester. Never, never.
Mr. DeMarco and Dr. Zandi, one of the most important parts
of housing finance reform for me is to ensure that small
lenders have access, that both urban and rural America continue
to have equal and fair access to secondary markets. Currently
small lenders are able to access what is referred to as a
``cash window,'' which allows them to sell individual loans for
cash to Fannie and Freddie. I want to know your view on that
and if that is enough to give small lenders equal access.
Mr. DeMarco. Well, they certainly have it today, Senator,
and I think under the Chairman's outline, they would preserve
all of those options they have today, and they would have more.
So this ought to be better for small lenders because it
preserves the cash windows at Fannie and Freddie. It allows new
guarantor entrants, so that creates new cash windows. And it
creates the opportunity for other issuers, because not all
small lenders sell their loans directly to Fannie and Freddie.
Many of them sell them to other loan aggregators, and that
channel is also expanded under the Chairman's outline.
Mr. Zandi. Yes, I agree. I think Chairman Crapo's proposal
would address the small lender issue. Each of the guarantors in
the system, the multiple guarantors, would have a cash window,
and I think that is key for small lenders. That is what they
are looking for, that is what they need, and I think that is
what is provided in the outline.
Senator Tester. All right. And so when it comes to rural
America, is there anything additional we need, or do you think
that is adequate? Now, I talk about rural America as all of
Montana being rural, OK? And I want to get to the Home Builders
fellow in a second here--is it Ugalde?
Mr. Ugalde. Close, yeah.
Senator Tester. Ugalde is good, but in rural America, you
know, if there is a town of 5,000 people or more in Montana,
housing is an issue. And it is a huge issue. It is an issue
that is stopping businesses to expand. It is stopping
communities to recruit new businesses. It is stopping economic
development cold in rural America, at least in my State.
And so are there other things we need to do as we look at
GSE reform to try to drive the investment into places where,
quite frankly, home builders are--there are not a lot of them,
and those there are currently pretty busy. So, Mr. DeMarco and
Dr. Zandi, could you see if there is any--talk about if there
is anything else we need to do to drive? And then, Mr. Ugalde,
I would love to get your opinion on what we need to do in these
rural areas to try to get more housing?
Mr. DeMarco. Well, one thing, Senator, we talked earlier
when you were not here about appraisals being a challenge in
rural areas. One of the things that at least a couple of the
panelists, I believe, certainly I have suggested, is that this
is something Fannie and Freddie are sitting on a massive mound
of appraisal records and data, and making that more available
would certainly assist, not just in rural areas but across the
country. It certainly would be an assist with the appraisal
problem in rural areas.
Senator Tester. Dr. Zandi?
Mr. Zandi. It is critical that the guarantors in the future
system have a national footprint. They have an obligation to
serve all markets in all conditions.
Senator Tester. OK. Mr. Ugalde?
Mr. Ugalde. Sure. What you say is so true as well. You
know, home builders are challenged at the single-family and
multifamily levels. They need remodeling, for that matter,
across the country to get predictable financing. And our
membership relies heavily on small and community banks. So the
more that we can do, as was just discussed, about providing
access at those levels and through those lenders, it does our
members a world of good, and that is where we have to head into
the future as this housing affordability issue keeps increasing
rather than is curtailed at all or we need to make inroads
pretty quickly into that whole issue.
Senator Tester. Well, I want to thank--and I am not going
to use all my time, but I want to thank the Chairman and the
Ranking Member. I think we do need GSE reform. I think we need
to move forward. Hopefully the Ranking Member and the Chairman
can come up with a plan that works, that this Committee can get
behind, and that works for this country. I can tell you, if
there is one thing right now in my State that is stopping
growth, it is housing. And it may be the same thing in Boise,
and it may be the same thing in Minneapolis. But I can tell
you, in our State it is housing. It is just putting a lock on
all economic growth.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Senator Tester.
Senator Reed.
Senator Reed. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank
you for getting the kickoff, getting this going again. It is an
important issue.
Let me go down, and I want to start with Ms. Ansel. I have
three questions which might be repetitive since I am about the
last person that has been asking questions. But, first, in
Senator Crapo's outline, who will be left out of the mortgage
market? What category of borrowers will be left out, if any?
Ms. Ansel. So, with respect, my expertise is in the
multifamily market side, sir, and with respect to Senator
Crapo's outline, he has called for a separate solution for the
multifamily industry. We are strongly supportive of that. We
believe there are more details to be hammered out yet, and so
we look forward to participating in that. But we do not believe
that anybody in the multifamily side will be left out as long
as we are able to participate in this process.
Senator Reed. And, Mr. DeMarco, your sense who might be
left out?
Mr. DeMarco. I do not see any borrowers being left out in
this framework.
Senator Reed. And from Home Builders, Mr. Ugalde?
Mr. Ugalde. So we see it the same way, actually, that the
Chairman's outline actually provides across the board, and we
look forward to working to make sure that that is the case in
the long run.
Senator Reed. And, Dr. Zandi? Mark?
Mr. Zandi. None.
Senator Reed. Mr. Shelton?
Mr. Shelton. Thank you. Without a robust duty to serve, our
concerns are that racial and ethnic minorities and others will
be left out yet again.
Senator Reed. And, Mr. Levitin?
Mr. Levitin. I think there are two markets that will be
left out. I think rural markets will be left behind, and I
think low- to moderate-income households will have trouble
accessing capital.
Senator Reed. And let me begin again with Ms. Ansel. Will
it cost more to get a mortgage under this outline? I know it is
very preliminary, but will it cost more?
Ms. Ansel. Again, sir, as we work through the details, we
do not believe it will cost more. We think it will be--there is
a good competitive process in the multifamily side. We have
access to private capital as well, and we believe that this
solution will continue to provide a good competition for
mortgages.
Senator Reed. Mr. DeMarco, please.
Mr. DeMarco. I do not see reform having any meaningful
impact on mortgage rates.
Senator Reed. And, Mr. Ugalde?
Mr. Ugalde. The same thing. I think, though, to further
that a bit, if our members are braced that if there is a modest
cost to this, it is well worth going through it.
Senator Reed. OK. And, Dr. Zandi?
Mr. Zandi. It will lower mortgage rates. I mean, you have
to fill in some blanks because it is an outline, and there are
numbers you have to fill in. But under reasonable assumptions
and filling--and they are reasonable because they are mine, I
will fill them in, you know. They are going to be lower, and a
key reason is we are going to get an explicit Government
guarantee, Ginnie Mae guarantee. That is worth something, and
that is going to bring mortgage rates down. So that is why we
need reform.
Senator Reed. Mr. Shelton?
Mr. Shelton. Because it is just an outline at this point,
we can see a number of scenarios in which we would have
problems. We would be delighted to provide some of those
options to consider.
Senator Reed. Thank you.
Mr. Levitin. I am going to disagree with Dr. Zandi. I think
it actually could cost more, and here is why. The system that
is proposed is likely to be more procyclical, and when you have
a more unstable market, lenders are going to start pricing that
in. They are going to be pricing in for the instability. Having
the guarantee provides some stability here with the Ginnie Mae
backstop, but the Ginnie Mae backstop is only a catastrophic
backstop. It does not cover noncatastrophic losses, and that
will still be a problem.
Senator Reed. And then, Senator Tester touched upon this,
the impact on credit unions and community banks: Will they do
better or worse? Ms. Ansel.
Ms. Ansel. Again, in the multifamily industry, we have
strong competition. We rely on multiple sources. So, again,
based on the outline, we do not see an impact to----
Senator Reed. Mr. DeMarco, please.
Mr. DeMarco. Such institutions retain all the options that
they have in today's system, and they gain more, so I would
have to believe that this helps them.
Senator Reed. OK.
Mr. Ugalde. Positive impact.
Senator Reed. Positive impact. Dr. Zandi?
Mr. Zandi. Yeah, if anything, positive.
Senator Reed. Positive.
Mr. Shelton. And, again, we are deeply concerned about the
prospects, and certainly those small lending institutions have
had major struggles over the years. Without the additional
support we would love to see, and certainly those things that
are part of the system we discussed, we could see a scenario in
which there would be problems.
Senator Reed. And, Mr. Levitin?
Mr. Levitin. Well, once again, I am going to disagree. I
think that this system could be a real problem for small
institutions, that the basic economics are that if you are a
guarantor, you are going to prefer dealing with a large
institution to a smaller one. And while I appreciate that the
Chairman has said in the outline no volume discounts, there are
lots of other ways that a guarantor could prefer large
institutions to small ones, simply having different pricing for
a cash execution than from a swap execution.
Senator Reed. I just have a few moments left, but in your
written testimony, Professor Levitin, you recognize that
competition is a very good way to allocate scarce resources,
but there might be some dangers in competition. Can you just
quickly, within seconds?
Mr. Levitin. Absolutely. Competition can be a wonderful
source for getting efficient allocation of resources, but it
can also go too far. If you want to see the simplest example of
this, what this Committee has been dealing with, with Wells
Fargo, where competitive pressures have pushed Wells into a
bunch of really bad behaviors.
Senator Reed. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Cortez Masto.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. Let me just start off by
thanking the Chairman for having this hearing.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Cortez Masto. Housing and affordable housing and
the lack of affordable housing in Nevada is the number one
issue, and I know it is an issue across the country. So I just
appreciate the outline that you have put out there, the ability
to have a starting foundation to have this discussion. So thank
you so much for that.
And I apologize, I had to step out for some other work, and
am back here with all of you, so you may be repeating. But the
initial conversation really was interesting to me, and there
are a couple of things that I kind of want to get in the weeds
on.
But first let me start with this. I think it was Professor
Levitin, you talked about a single-guarantor system is the best
and it just needed to be perfected. Can you give me examples of
what that perfection would look like, kind of the top three
things?
Mr. Levitin. I think it might mean something along the
lines of merging Fannie and Freddie so we really have one
single guarantor, and we are taking steps already in that
regard with the common securitization platform that will be
producing a single security.
It would be making explicit that their credit-risk transfer
transactions must be on a market-wide basis rather than on
segments of the market. Right now they are only segmenting
their credit-risk transfers based on LTV, on loan-to-value
ratio. They have got high and low loan-to-value ratio pools.
They should be required, though, to preserve national pools so
that we would not get the very problem that we have been
discussing with a multi-guarantor system where you get
geographic segmentation of the market. I think if you do that,
and then also I would formalize the system of credit-risk
transfers but have an exception for adverse market conditions,
so that the default setting would be credit-risk transfers, but
when the market is frozen, then the single guarantor can carry
the system temporarily.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
And, Dr. Zandi, would you agree with that?
Mr. Zandi. I am sympathetic to a single-guarantor system or
maintaining Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac as Government
corporations, so we avoid the problems of trying to merge these
two institutions and continue to maintain the same competition.
I wrote a series of papers describing how you would go about
doing this.
Having said that, I think we need to recognize the
political economy issues involved, and if we want to get
something done, if we really want to reform the system, if you
want to get a piece of legislation done, that is not going to
win the day, I do not think. And I do think we can use Chairman
Crapo's proposal as a starting point, take the current system,
two guarantors, open it up for entry, and do the things we need
to do to lower barriers to entry and get that competition into
the system.
Senator Cortez Masto. So when you are talking about
competition, are you talking about that you would expand the
number of privately owned institutions to be allowed to do what
Fannie and Freddie do?
Mr. Zandi. Correct. So----
Senator Cortez Masto. Can I ask--so let me just--I am
trying to understand this, because I am looking at your--I
think you wrote a Washington Post piece with Jim Parrott,
September 2018, and you talked about Fannie and Freddie reform,
and you said there were two choices. The first is to expand the
number of privately owned institutions, and this would move to
multiple guarantors. Or the second choice would be to combine
Fannie and Freddie into a single entity. In the third
paragraph, you said you would prefer the latter, which is the
single utility. So what is the difference now? And, really, I
am not trying a ``gotcha'' moment. I am just trying to
understand----
Mr. Zandi. It is not ``gotcha.'' Here is----
Senator Cortez Masto.----because what we do today is so
important for what we have heard of the issues on affordable
housing.
Mr. Zandi. Senator, here is the most important thing: We
have got to have legislation. We have to get this done. And in
my view, my estimation, if I were king, I would go down the
single-guarantor path.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK.
Mr. Zandi. But I am not king, and we are not going to get
that through legislation. So we have to think about what is
second best that works.
Senator Cortez Masto. We are not going to get it through
legislation because of what you are hearing here now or you----
Mr. Zandi. I have heard this for 10 years. I know.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK.
Mr. Zandi. I have been involved with this for 10 years. I
have followed this very carefully. I have been down every
single path, and I know what is going to work and what is not
going to work, because I have been here before. And if you
insist on going down that path, it will not get done.
So then you say to yourself, well, what am I going to get--
how am I going to get----
Senator Cortez Masto. No, and I appreciate that, and so I
have only got a few minutes left. So I am curious, from Mr.
Ugalde and Ms. Ansel, what I would love from you is specifics
on this outline for reform. Obviously, there are concerns that
you have about it. What are those specific concerns? Because I
will tell you, at the end of the day, the affordable housing
roundtables I have had all over my State, including in rural
areas, my goal is to ensure what we do here helps what you do
pencil out so we have more affordable housing. So what is it
that we should be doing with this? How can we--I will not say
``improve upon it,'' but what should we be doing that benefits
what we are trying to achieve here, specifically?
Mr. Ugalde. So, in our opinion, this is a great starting
spot. So if you look at the Chairman's outline and start there
and we are ready to get down into the----
Senator Cortez Masto. I know. I have heard that. What are
the specifics?
Mr. Ugalde. So the specifics would be in areas of
multifamily, for example, to make sure the question that was
just asked, making sure that smaller lenders, community banks,
can service our membership, to make sure that our end buyers of
the single-family homes around the country are treated as
equally as possible with the same rates and that we can get to
a closing table effectively and efficiently and close on loans.
So the predictability in the sure--the fact that the
confidence that our buyers can take into the future, that is
all key to us, and that is where I think we have to all work
with the Committee to make sure that that happens.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK. Ms. Ansel? And I know my time is
up, Mr. Chairman. If you can in a few seconds.
Ms. Ansel. I will answer quickly. The details are to be
worked out, but the key is access to capital, to all markets,
to all apartment types, at all times.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK.
Ms. Ansel. And that is key.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Menendez.
Senator Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding
these hearings, and to all of our witnesses today.
I want to spend a bit of time focusing on the GSEs' current
multifamily programs which serve a critical market role,
certainly in a State like New Jersey--I understand that very
clearly--but other States across the country, ensuring that
multifamily financing is widely available throughout the
economic cycle. So from my perspective, a private capital loan
is insufficient to meet the demand for multifamily financing
because during the crisis we saw more private market players
exit the market entirely.
So, Ms. Ansel, is it your sense that private capital
sources have the capacity or the business interests to fill the
market need for financing affordable and middle-income
multifamily properties?
Ms. Ansel. So private capital is an important part of the
competition, but as you said, especially during the economic
crisis, those private capitals retracted and were not
available. And today they are not able to serve at full
capacity for our capital needs. The GSEs perform a very
important role. Most of the private capital is not--is more
interested in serving the top-tier markets. The GSEs provide
capital for secondary and tertiary markets that private capital
is not interested in, whether it be Twin Falls, Idaho, or many
small towns.
Also, if you look at the details, the GSEs today, 80
percent of their capital goes to serve residents that are less
than 100 percent of AMI. So a good bit of that capital goes to
the middle market and affordable housing. So GSEs are critical
to that.
Senator Menendez. So if the GSEs were to sell and privatize
their multifamily businesses, what impact would this have on
the availability and affordability of multifamily housing?
Ms. Ansel. Again, it depends on the formation of that
privatization. I think the key in whatever reform happens, as I
mentioned before, is that we need the explicit paid-for
Government guarantee for mortgage-backed securities. That can
happen as privatized, but that is critical. We need to
recognize the inherent differences in the multifamily business
model. That needs to be important in any reform that goes
forward.
There are successful components. The GSEs performed very
well over the last 11 years and during the economic crisis, so
maintaining those instruments that have been so successful is
critical in
reform. And, most importantly, we need a very transparent and
defined timeline for any period of transition. So privatization
works, but the details need to be worked out.
Senator Menendez. But from what we have seen alone in the
private market, as it exists now, that has not sufficed to meet
the challenge.
Ms. Ansel. That is correct.
Senator Menendez. OK. Let me say my colleagues covered duty
to serve pretty well, but let me just say in response to a
comment Mr. DeMarco made to a question on the duty-to-serve
rule not being implemented until recently. Mr. DeMarco, you
were in charge of the FHFA, and you had 5 years to get this
done, and it was not. So, you know, saying that we have only a
short window in my mind does not undercut the responsibility of
the duty to serve. I think it is a critical element.
Let me go to Mr. Ugalde. As you outline in your testimony,
one of the barriers addressing our affordable housing crisis is
the availability of capital to create additional housing
supply, and the lack of supply drives up prices and ultimately
impacts affordability, particularly for entry-level and first-
time home buyers. In the past, I have led efforts to increase
the availability of financing for real estate construction
loans.
In your view, how should we address the supply issue as
part of our larger conversation on reforms to the system?
Mr. Ugalde. So, first, Senator, thank you for all your help
in the past. Very much appreciate it.
The big issue, we have talked about single-family,
multifamily renters and buyers at the end, but we also have a
piece that affects our members directly at the beginning of the
process: acquisition, development, and construction. I
mentioned that. AD&C financing is key, and the more robust we
can get that system to react to the needs of our members and
builders and developers across the country, the better off we
will be.
The key to housing affordability is going to be the ability
to get land at a fair price, and that usually means everything
from density to purchasing at the most affordable rate
possible, with the utilities and everything brought in. Tougher
in rural areas, but we have many builders that are up for the
task and looking to do it. They just need access to proper
financing. So in a nutshell, if we could have--again, if I were
king for a day, I would do everything that he was referring to,
but I would also look to helping builders and developers in the
initial process as well.
Senator Menendez. OK. I appreciate that. We have no kings
in this country, so that is not going to happen, at least not
as of yet.
[Laughter.]
Senator Menendez. Mr. Chairman, may I have one final brief
question? Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your courtesy.
GSEs can receive duty-to-serve credit for purchasing loans
on small multifamily rental properties of 5 to 50 units. Ms.
Ansel, what impact would eliminating the duty-to-serve rule
have on the affordability of that segment of affordable rental
options?
Ms. Ansel. We support the duty-to-serve standards. We think
that anything that brings additional access to capital across
the rural markets or the markets that are less served is
critically important. I think Chairman Crapo's access ideas may
also fill those needs, but we think that anything that we can
do to provide additional capital to the rural and underserved
markets is critically important.
Senator Menendez. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Senator Menendez.
That concludes the questioning for today's hearing. I would
just like to say before I wrap it up that, again, I appreciate
the testimony that all of you have provided here today.
Frankly, all of you have been engaged on this. I think it was
Dr. Zandi who said he had been down every path in the political
world here over the last 10 years. I think I have been down
every rabbit hole. And there are things that are doable, and
there are things that are not.
I believe, however, very strongly that, fortunately, the
doable is something that is very robust and comprehensive, and
that we can find a bipartisan pathway to resolve these issues.
And I think your testimony here today has helped us to identify
where we need to build that stronger consensus as to how to
address some of the critical issues that you have each
addressed here today and also some good ideas.
There will be additional questions that you will receive
from Senators in writing, and I tell my Senators who wish to
submit those questions that those questions are due by Tuesday,
April 2nd. And we ask each of the witnesses to respond as soon
as possible to those questions. And I think that is really
critical here because the discussions that have taken place
today have shown that there is a lot of wisdom and a lot of
experience among you that can help us find these solutions.
I truly believe that the testimony and the questions and
answers that were given today have shown that it is doable, and
I look forward to working with each of you as we move forward
to get it done.
With that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:56 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[Prepared statements, responses to written questions, and
additional material supplied for the record follow:]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MIKE CRAPO
Chairman of the U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban
Affairs, delivered the following remarks at the first of two hearings
on his housing finance reform outline. The text of Chairman Crapo's
remarks, as prepared, is below.
Today, the Committee returns its focus to the state of our housing
finance system.
It has now been a full decade since the Government asserted control
of the Government-Sponsored Enterprises, or GSEs, Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac.
After 10 years of market recovery, these mortgage giants remain
stuck in conservatorship, with taxpayers still on the hook in the event
of a housing market downturn.
It appears that the old, failed status quo is slowly beginning to
take hold again, with the Government in some ways expanding its reach
even further, entering new markets where it has never been before.
Today, Fannie and Freddie, along with Government-insured mortgages,
dominate the mortgage market.
Approximately 70 percent of all mortgages originated in this
country are in some way touched by the Federal Government.
I have long said that the status quo is not a viable option, and I
consider it a top priority this Congress to find a comprehensive,
legislative solution.
During the 113th Congress, this Committee made progress by
favorably reporting the bipartisan Housing Finance Reform and Taxpayer
Protection Act.
Since that time, the Committee has continued to study the issue,
learn from previous iterations, and analyze a variety of proposals that
have been put forward by stakeholders and policymakers.
Last month I introduced an outline for potential housing reform
legislation.
This outline sets out a blueprint for a permanent, sustainable new
housing finance system that: protects taxpayers by reducing the
systemic, too-big-to-fail risk posed by the current duopoly of mortgage
guarantors; preserves existing infrastructure in the housing finance
system that works well, while significantly increasing the role of
private risk-bearing capital; establishes several new layers of
protection between mortgage credit risk and taxpayers; ensures a level
playing field for originators of all sizes and types, while also
locking in uniform, responsible underwriting standards; and promotes
broad accessibility to mortgage credit, including in underserved
markets.
This outline is the byproduct of over a dozen hearings conducted by
this Committee over the past decade.
It also incorporates key elements of several housing finance reform
plans that have been advanced by thought leaders.
Many of those thought leaders have joined us today, and will join
us tomorrow.
We will hear from 12 witnesses over the next 2 days on my housing
finance reform outline.
Thank you for your willingness to appear here, and for your
continued participation in this important conversation.
Today, I am interested in discussing the viability of our
framework, the impact it will have on various market participants, and
to highlight the areas where work remains to be done.
We are dedicated to getting this done, to bring to a close the
conservatorship era, and to establish a durable, sustainable new
housing finance system that works for all Americans.
The time is now to resolve this issue and I look forward to working
with my colleagues to that end.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR SHERROD BROWN
Thank you, Chairman Crapo, and thank you to all of the witnesses
for being here today.
I have long said that the ``housing'' part of this Committee's name
doesn't get enough attention, and I look forward to the next 2 days of
discussions and to working with the Chairman to address our Nation's
housing needs.
Whether you rent it or own it, a house isn't just where you live.
One of the best books about housing is Matthew Desmond's book Evicted,
and couple of years ago, he wrote in the front cover of my book, ``home
= life.''
Home equals life. That's how we should all approach this.
A house is where you go after a long day at work. It's where you
make memories with your children, maybe marking time with a growth
chart on the bedroom wall. It determines what neighborhood you live in,
where you worship, and where your kids go to school.
But too many Americans can't afford that home.
Nearly one-third of households are paying more than 30 percent of
their income for housing, including almost 21 million renters and more
than one in five rural homeowners.
And in the fallout from the financial crisis, millions of people of
color lost vast amounts of housing wealth they had finally been able to
build after a century of redlining and discrimination.
Today, home ownership among African American households has fallen
under 43 percent--more than 30 percentage points below the white home-
ownership rate.
When work has dignity, everyone can afford housing and can choose
to build wealth through home ownership and to pass that on to their
children and grandchildren.
That's simply not the reality we live in today, and any changes we
make to our housing finance system should be to help working people--
not Wall Street.
In 2008, when Congress last passed substantial, bipartisan housing
finance legislation, we strengthened oversight of our housing system
and took important steps toward serving Americans who are too often
left behind.
We maintained the GSEs' responsibility to facilitate national
access to mortgage credit.
This broad, national market means that interest rates for borrowers
in Idaho look a lot like those in Ohio and Arizona.
We further targeted affordable housing goals, and we established a
duty to serve underserved rural areas, manufactured housing, and
affordable housing preservation markets, all monitored by a new
regulator.
We also created the Housing Trust Fund and Capital Magnet Fund to
allocate dedicated resources each year to the development of affordable
housing opportunities for the lowest-income households.
We know markets don't always work perfectly, and the market isn't
serving these Americans on its own.
These funds are far from enough to solve our affordable housing
crisis, but they are part of the solution.
Since 2008, FHFA has been an independent regulator that has worked
to serve underserved markets, closely monitored the GSEs' business, and
built up the capability to collect the housing data we need to help us
help families.
Unfortunately, not all of the 2008 changes have been consistently
implemented.
Even though they are funded outside the appropriations process, the
Housing Trust Fund and Capital Magnet Fund have not been safe from
attempts to eliminate them. For the last 3 years, this Administration
has proposed cutting these funds.
And this year, nearly 3 months after the close-out of the GSEs'
books and a month and a half after Fannie and Freddie told investors
that they had set aside funds for the Housing Trust Fund and Capital
Magnet Fund, the acting FHFA director still has not disbursed these
affordable housing dollars.
Clearly, there is more work to be done to make sure every family
can access the home-ownership opportunities and rental housing that
meets their needs.
As we begin these 2 days of discussions, we should start by asking:
what housing options do families have today, and what housing
opportunities we will make available for families in the future?
Failure to put working people first in this process will only make
it harder for families to afford rent or to buy a home; put the
viability of the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage at risk; and hit lower
income communities, communities of color, and rural Americans
particularly hard.
I look forward to hearing from each of our witnesses today about
how the housing market is working for homeowners and renters. Any
changes we consider must strengthen, not weaken, our ability to address
the housing challenges facing our Nation and make the housing market
work better for families.
PREPARED STATEMENT OF EDWARD J. DeMARCO
President, Housing Policy Council
March 26, 2019
Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and Members of the Committee:
Thank you for inviting me to testify on the Chairman's outline for
housing finance reform. My name is Edward DeMarco and I am the
President of the Housing Policy Council (HPC), a trade association
comprised of the Nation's leading firms in housing finance and
dedicated to advancing responsible and sustainable home-ownership
opportunities.
In 2012, in my capacity as the Acting Director of the Federal
Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), and conservator for Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac, I issued a strategic plan for the conservatorships titled
``The Next Chapter in a Story that Needs an Ending.'' At that time, I
noted that ``no clear legislative consensus has emerged [on GSE reform]
from the Administration or Congress.'' That is no longer the case.
Since 2012, the debate over housing finance reform has coalesced around
a set of key elements. Those elements are: an explicit Government
guarantee for mortgage securities backed by conventional mortgage
loans, the placement of private capital in a first-loss position on
those securities before the Government guarantee, assurance for fair
and equitable access to credit, funding to support affordable housing,
and a competitive, transparent marketplace that ensures a level playing
field for all sizes and types of industry participants.
The Chairman's outline for housing finance reform reflects this
progression in our collective thinking. It is a practical, workable
proposal that builds on all previous proposals, and the members of HPC
stand ready to work with the Committee to put it in a legislative form
that can be enacted into law.
My testimony will address the components of the outline--the
elements that we support, the open-ended questions that the outline
identifies, and some areas where additional specificity is needed. In
addition, I will highlight actions that FHFA and the Administration
could take to ensure a smooth transition for new guarantors to enter
the housing finance system with no competitive disadvantage relative to
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Finally, I will emphasize the opportunity
to improve upon the current mechanisms to support affordable housing.
HPC Understanding of Proposed Framework in the Chairman's Outline
A Multi-Issuer, Single-Security
A useful first step in defining housing finance reform is to
stipulate what kind of mortgage-backed security (MBS) will be produced.
The brevity of the Chairman's outline does not explicitly identify the
MBS structure, but the overall framework suggests that it would be a
multi-issuer, single-security. This structure is not new. The Ginnie
Mae II security is a multi-issuer, single-security. Just last month,
Ginnie Mae backed the issuance of over $23 billion in Ginnie Mae II
securities.
A multi-issuer security enables more than one lender to contribute
loans to the security. Mortgage lenders licensed by Ginnie Mae to put
loans into the security are deemed ``issuers.'' In the Chairman's
outline, ``issuers'' may be the reconstituted Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac, new entrants that perform the same functions as the new Fannie and
new Freddie, or individual mortgage lenders.
A single-security means that all the various loan pools formed by
the multiple issuers go into the same mortgage-backed security, wrapped
with a Government (Ginnie Mae) guarantee. By bundling loans from
various issuers into a single Ginnie Mae security, investors are able
to buy a security that is backed by a pool of loans from a variety of
issuers. In turn, each of the issuers achieves equal access to the
capital markets; there is no benefit for large mortgage lenders over
small mortgage lenders or banks over nonbanks. This makes the market
for securities deeper and more liquid, which results in lower mortgage
rates for families.
Historically, the Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac MBS have worked
differently. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have each been the sole
``issuer'' of their mortgage-backed securities, and their respective
securities were not interchangeable. This June, under the guidance and
direction of the FHFA, the GSEs are replacing their separate MBS with a
single MBS, the ``Uniform MBS,'' which is designed to make their MBS
interchangeable. This is an important step toward the security
structure envisioned in the Chairman's outline and other reform
proposals.
Having a multi-issuer, single-security, wrapped by a Federal
agency, creates an opportunity to better distribute, rather than
concentrate, both mortgage risk-taking and the operational processes
involved in mortgage securitization. This will strengthen the housing
finance system while preserving and improving access to sustainable
mortgage credit for consumers.
Issuers and Guarantors: The Chairman's Outline Allows for Both
One of the challenges to housing finance reform has been how to
reconcile two competing approaches for securitizing mortgage loans. One
approach, which may be called a ``bundled'' arrangement, is based upon
a guarantor that is responsible for several key functions, including
loan aggregation, the issuance of the mortgage securities, the master
servicing of assets in those securities, and the placement of the
credit guarantee on the mortgage loans. That is the approach embodied
by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
The other approach, which may be called an ``unbundled'' or
``stand-alone'' approach, is based upon the separation of the credit
guarantee function from the issuance of the mortgage securities. This
alternative approach is employed by Ginnie Mae, which places a Federal
guarantee on mortgage securities backed by the Federal Housing
Administration (FHA), the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and other
Government-guaranteed mortgage loans, but Ginnie Mae does not issue the
securities or operate as a master servicer of the assets in the
securities.
We read the Chairman's outline to permit both approaches to be
applied to the securitization of conventional mortgage loans. Under the
Chairman's outline, mortgage originators--all mortgage lenders from
community banks and independent mortgage banks to large depositories
and nonbank lenders--that have established relationships with Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac, would be able to continue to sell their loans to
the reconstituted Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. They also could continue
to rely upon those reconstituted companies to issue and master service
the mortgage securities, to place a private sector guarantee on the
loans, and to acquire an explicit Federal guarantee on the mortgage
securities from Ginnie Mae.
Alternatively, as we read the outline, both small and large
originators would be able to create and issue mortgage securities
themselves if they purchase credit protection from an FHFA-approved
guarantor.
At HPC, we call the combination of these two approaches in the
Chairman's framework ``the hybrid model.'' It is a hybrid model because
it allows for guarantors that perform multiple functions, similar to
the existing Fannie Mae and Freddie Mae structure, as well as
guarantors that specialize in a focused, stand-alone activity of
holding and distributing credit risk.
Under a hybrid model, the reconstituted Fannie Mae and Freddie Mae
and other FHFA-approved guarantors could serve as whole loan
aggregators, acquiring mortgage loans from lenders through ``cash
windows.'' These multifunction or ``bundled'' guarantors would issue
mortgage-backed securities formed from the aggregated pools of loans,
delivering them into the Ginnie Mae securities. Such guarantors also
would be responsible for the master servicing of those loans, relying
on and overseeing the work of independent servicers. Finally, these
guarantors would guarantee the loans. In support of these guarantees,
guarantors typically would perform some level of due diligence to
ensure compliance with FHFA and their own underwriting and eligibility
standards and receive a commitment from the loan seller called
representations and warranties of compliance with applicable rules and
standards.
In short, the Chairman's outline preserves the current Fannie and
Freddie structure, which also was the structure used in previous
Committee reform proposals.
In addition, as we read the outline, it also permits the
development of ``stand-alone'' guarantors that would be responsible for
only the credit guarantee function. These FHFA-supervised guarantors
would offer the guarantee coverage on loans that meet the credit and
eligibility terms set by FHFA and would have contractual agreements
with private issuers who request and pay for the guarantee. In other
words, the ``stand-alone'' guarantors would be accountable for, and
would manage the credit risk associated with the mortgages while the
other functions I have described--loan aggregation, security issuance,
and master servicing--would be the responsibility of a separate issuer.
Such guarantors would have a direct business interest in both the
quality of the loans they guarantee as well as in the efficiency and
effectiveness of the loan servicing. This stand-alone credit management
exists in the private market today; for example, private mortgage
insurers and participants in credit-risk transfer arrangements engage
in this activity.
In addition to the guarantor role in providing credit-risk
protections to the system, HPC recognizes and agrees with the outline's
preservation of loan-level credit enhancement in the form of private
mortgage insurance on low-downpayment mortgages. Requiring first-loss
coverage at the loan level via mortgage insurance or other loan-level
credit enhancement on low-downpayment loans has been part of the GSE
model for years. HPC supports continuing to require this additional
level of private capital and credit-risk protection.
In the proposed framework, FHFA would be the regulator of all the
guarantors, whether they provide bundled or stand-alone services. FHFA
also would be required to establish standards for the acceptance of
credit-risk transfer structures. Thus, FHFA would be the regulator of
the credit risk. FHFA would set standards for
approving guarantors, including capital and liquidity requirements, as
well as the underwriting and eligibility terms for the mortgages that
may be pooled in the securities backed by Ginnie Mae. Guarantors would
pay a fee into a Ginnie Mae-managed Mortgage Insurance Fund (MIF) to
cover losses in the event of the failure of a guarantor. Ginnie Mae
also would regulate the business requirements and terms of the
securities agreements.
HPC Supports Key Features of the Chairman's Outline
HPC believes that this hybrid model is not only feasible, but also
that it reduces the systemic risk associated with the current Fannie
Mae/Freddie Mac duopoly by facilitating participation of new market
entrants that enhance competition and innovation, while introducing
market discipline and ending too-big-to-fail. With the addition of
stand-alone guarantors and credit-risk transfers, there will be more
channels for private capital to be accessed and deployed in a manner
that improves the overall liquidity of the system as well as the
distribution of risk across various private market participants--all in
front of the Government guarantee.
Moreover, by allowing for stand-alone guarantors, the Chairman's
framework permits new entrant guarantors that specialize in risk
management--including risk evaluation, risk retention, risk mitigation,
and risk distribution. With greater focus on core capabilities and the
need to compete for business, these companies would strive for
innovative ways to increase their effectiveness, continuously improving
the means by which risk is assessed and controlled. This would be a
benefit for the system. In sum, HPC believes that the permitted
separation and specialization of the functions involved in the
securitization process--aggregation, issuance, master servicing, and
guarantee--is a primary benefit of the Chairman's framework.
Of equal importance, this arrangement preserves and cultivates the
historically private-sector role of financial institutions in loan
aggregation and issuance. Some smaller and mid-sized lenders like the
simplicity of the existing GSE ``bundled'' model--with ``cash window''
whole loan aggregation services included. The Chairman's outline
retains that option, making it available to lenders of all sizes.
However, by allowing the option to separate credit-risk management from
the other functions, the outline realizes the benefit of dispersing
these activities more broadly, attracting additional private capital
and stimulating the flow of that capital across various market
participants. In other words, more rather than fewer credit-risk
guarantors, and more rather than fewer aggregators and issuers,
amplifies liquidity and expands the universe of private risk-holders
that perform critical risk management functions and moderate risk
across the system.
A second benefit of the hybrid model is that it simplifies the
transition from the existing GSE-centric framework to one with multiple
private stakeholders engaged in specific market activities. In the
hybrid model, companies seeking to become guarantors would not need to
invest in the substantial infrastructure required to become ``bundled''
guarantors, which would require personnel, technology, and policies and
procedures to accept delivery of whole loans; fund, hold, and issue
these loans into securities; and master service the loans to track
payments and monitor loan performance. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
perform all of these functions. For new entrants to execute all these
functions would require more capital and a much longer transition
period.
The Chairman's framework facilitates the transition by permitting
guarantors to engage in the full range of functions or only provide the
guarantee service. For example, private mortgage insurers already
provide credit guarantees by pricing and managing mortgage credit risk
and thus would face low barriers to entry in the guarantee function.
Other credit-risk managers similarly could find an opportunity to
compete in this space, thereby distributing risk and creating more
channels for private capital to enter and compete. There are several
benefits of such competition, including less concentration of mortgage
credit risk, lower costs to home buyers, and greatly diminished risk of
future foreclosure crises and taxpayer-financed bailouts.
HPC members also support the Chairman's proposal to rely on Ginnie
Mae as the vehicle to place a Federal guarantee on the securities. The
Ginnie Mae guarantee is recognized worldwide. Ginnie Mae MBS are
treated as a permissible and preferred investment option by foreign
investors, including foreign central banks and sovereign wealth funds.
These overseas investors represent a stable, substantial, and reliable
component of the demand for Ginnie Mae MBS, which supports the
continuous flow of global capital into the US housing market.
Therefore, the Ginnie Mae wrap on these securities offers an efficient
strategy to effect a systemwide conversion.
HPC is in favor of the Ginnie Mae wrap but recognizes that
resources will be needed to expand and enhance Ginnie's infrastructure,
regardless of how much can be drawn from the existing GSE and Ginnie
Mae operations to create new, possibly combined technology systems. For
example, although the Common Securitization Platform (CSP) represents
state-of-the-art technology and could be migrated to Ginnie Mae, it
needs upgrades to enable additional issuers (beyond Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac) to connect and conduct business on the platform. The CSP
also needs expanded functionality beyond the limited set of bond
administration and disclosure features available today. In contrast,
Ginnie Mae's platform already is set up to handle multiple issuers and
additional securitization tasks, but today cannot support a fully
digital securitization environment.
In addition to the technology upgrades required, Ginnie Mae will
need more personnel, which have been requested for years by Ginnie
Mae's leadership, to fulfill the larger role for Ginnie Mae. That said,
the core functions of Ginnie Mae are scalable, as evidenced by the
significant growth in Ginnie Mae's business over the last decade. This
clearly indicates that Ginnie Mae can take on more responsibility,
provided it is given the necessary resources to do so.
In summary, the Chairman's framework, with enhanced guarantor
options, credit-risk transfers, and Ginnie Mae multi-issuer securities,
would give lenders, both large and small, choices. A lender could rely
on the aggregation and issuance services of a ``bundled'' guarantor,
just as they do today with the GSE cash windows. Alternatively, a
lender could choose to issue securities using their own loans, after
obtaining the guarantee from a ``bundled'' or ``stand-alone'' guarantor
by simply delivering those loans into the multi-issuer Ginnie Mae
security. Still a third option would be for lenders to sell their loans
to another issuer, whether that be another lender or an entity such as
a Federal Home Loan Bank. Such options give lenders, big and small, the
ability to retain or sell the servicing on their loans.
Again, HPC believes that it is the array of options and
opportunities presented by the Chairman's framework that provide for
stronger, more distributed risk management and liquidity across the
marketplace. Improved competition also should lower mortgage rates for
consumers and maintain the ability of lenders of all sizes and charters
to serve their mortgage customers.
Identified Issues for Stakeholder Input
The Chairman's outline includes a few topics that need additional
input. These topics are: market share limitations for all guarantors;
capital standards for the guarantors; and downpayment requirements for
eligible loans. In each case, HPC recommends that Congress authorize
the regulator, FHFA, to establish appropriate requirements and
standards.
A market share cap is intended to prevent significant concentration
of risk in any guarantor. This is an appropriate goal, especially given
the systemic risk posed by the GSE duopoly. However, rather than an
arbitrary and fixed market cap, we recommend that the Committee
consider market-based incentives to drive the distribution of risk and
volume of business across guarantors. For example, the guarantee fee
paid by guarantors could be scaled to increase along with the market
share of a guarantor. This would place some risk-based check on the
size of guarantors. Similarly, the affordable housing fee could be
scaled to increase along with the market share of a guarantor. This
would produce a pricing differential that would account for the
systemic risk inherent in excessive risk concentration in a single
guarantor, thereby reducing the likelihood of that outcome.
As for the capital standard for guarantors, we believe that
Congress should follow the approach taken in Federal banking statutes
and give general direction to FHFA, but not fix specific capital
charges. The correct amount of capital will vary based upon the
business structures and eligible activities of the guarantors as well
as the relative systemic risks posed. For example, a ``bundled''
guarantor that is aggregating and issuing securities in addition to
providing the guarantee will need adequate capital and liquidity to
perform the first two functions, as well as capital to cover the risk
of credit loss. In contrast, a ``stand-alone'' guarantor will need
enough capital simply to cover the credit risk associated with its
guarantee business, based on the volume, composition, and profile of
loans guaranteed.
In either scenario, the guarantor will be able to lay off some
portion of the risk through a variety of risk-sharing arrangements that
take into account specific attributes of the structures and
counterparties involved, which also must be factored into the
applicable capital standards and related capital relief. In other
words, it would be inappropriate to create, by law, a single capital
standard for all guarantors. HPC recommends that the Committee direct
FHFA, as the regulator of guarantors, to establish an activities-based
standard that creates a level of comparability and consistency in the
capital treatment across the distinct and unique guarantor business
models. Congress also could require that such standards address
systemic risk and be counter-cyclical.
Moreover, there is another element of capital regulation that we
urge the Committee to include in housing finance reform legislation.
The capital standards that FHFA develops should not be divorced from
the capital standards applied to banks or mortgage insurance companies.
A critical weakness of the pre-crisis capital standards set for Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac was the materially lower capital requirements
imposed on the GSEs relative to the capital bank regulators required
for the same risk on the same loans. We recommend that Congress direct
that the various prudential regulators achieve some reasonable standard
of comparability in their capital regulations for mortgage credit risk.
Consistent capital standards will enable all lenders to make rational
decisions on whether to hold mortgages on their books, to sell and
securitize them, or to layoff some or substantially all of the
associated credit risk through various other credit-risk transfer
mechanisms.
Finally, the outline leaves open the appropriate downpayment
requirement for mortgage loans. Again, we believe that this is a
standard that should be left to the FHFA in order to allow for
appropriate variation by loan product, borrower profile, or other
relevant risk characteristic. Leaving this policy standard to the
regulator also would allow for future adjustments in response to
changing market conditions or performance trends. Avoiding statutory
limits also allows for future innovations that may make low
downpayments less risky, and more appropriate to help serve all
borrowers, than we can envision today.
HPC Recommends Additional Specificity and Clarity in Regulatory Roles
There are two key areas of the Chairman's outline where we believe
additional consideration is required: (1) FHFA's role in chartering,
regulating, and supervising the guarantors; and (2) Ginnie Mae's
responsibility for setting the terms of the securities agreements.
FHFA's regulatory responsibilities, as described in the outline,
are focused primarily on setting the financial strength requirements
for the guarantors, establishing standards for credit-risk transfer
structures, and the credit standards for the loans. We agree with these
responsibilities but recommend that the framework add an explicit
authority for FHFA oversight of the guarantors' operational risk. This
is important, given the dissimilarities in the business models and
activities of the distinct types of guarantors, with unique risks posed
by those performing multiple functions in-house versus those who rely
on legal agreements with independent vendors and counterparties.
For example, a regulator overseeing a ``bundled'' multifunction
guarantor needs to ensure a separation of duties that will permit risk
management to drive loan delivery and guarantee decisions. The GSE
model broke down in the years immediately preceding the crisis when
executives responsible for loan production and business volume
overruled the warnings raised by the credit-risk teams. Additionally,
when regulating ``stand-alone'' guarantors, FHFA must set clear
expectations for the guarantors to establish strong and well-balanced
commercial counterparty standards and agreements that take into
consideration the financial and operational capacity of issuer/master
servicers as well as the division of accountability and liability
between the guarantors and these counterparties.
This highlights the responsibility of FHFA in leveling the playing
field and in having robust, transparent standards applied comparably
for the same activity. Guarantors will not be equal in strength or
diversity of their capital base and institutional form. A system that
recognizes and accounts for those differences, while maintaining a
level playing field, is to the benefit of the overall housing finance
system.
All guarantors should compete on a level playing field and be held
to the same transparent standards, ensuring the ongoing safety and
soundness of the system and mitigating the risk of regulatory arbitrage
based on inconsistently applied standards. For example, today FHFA
holds private mortgage insurers to a transparent set of minimum
operational and financial standards through the Private Mortgage
Insurer Eligibility Requirements (PMIERs). While PMIERs may not be
completely transferable to other forms of credit enhancement, the
framework can serve as a starting point to ensure a common set of
standards for all credit enhancement vehicles.
In sum, the FHFA regulatory standards and oversight regime for each
distinct type of guarantor must be clear and consistent. This will
ensure that prudential regulation results in fair and comparable
regulatory treatment as well as the protection of the system's safety
and soundness.
With respect to Ginnie Mae, HPC believes that housing finance
reform legislation should explicitly list the core provisions and
stipulations of the securities agreement that sets forth the rights and
responsibilities of each party. More specifically, for Ginnie Mae's
protection, housing finance legislation should authorize Ginnie Mae to
set the terms of the securities, including, but not limited to:
rules for submission and/or sharing of data and/or
documents to validate loan attributes, pool composition, or the
profile of a counterparty;
rules for the custodial maintenance or recordation of any
mandatory asset- or pool-level data or information;
responsibility for protecting security performance from
lenders that churn loans or otherwise produce abnormal
prepayment speeds;
standards regarding the format and content of investor
disclosures;
requirements and performance measures for bond
administration functions, to ensure timely remittance of
payments;
standards for loan servicing, to include acceptable loss
mitigation procedures that replicate the existing Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac servicing standards; and
permissible remedial or enforcement actions that may be
pursued, as warranted.
Such standards are typical in existing Ginnie Mae and GSE agreements,
as well as private-label pooling and servicing agreements. The
Committee should stipulate that Ginnie Mae is responsible for
developing a new set of standardized terms and requirements that
reflect the very best of these various contract documents.
Seamless Transition_Practical Steps for the Conservator
A commonly cited rationale for retaining the status quo housing
finance system, however flawed, is that housing finance reform
legislation may disrupt an otherwise functioning housing market. Yet,
there are simple actions that the Conservator can, and should pursue,
that would set the stage for an expedient and smooth transition from
the current system. In other words, the Conservator can initiate
actions that would pave the path to legislative reform. The primary
goal of such actions is to build the foundation for new entrants to
compete with the GSEs.
The transition from the current housing finance system requires the
development of a level playing field that allows private companies the
opportunity to compete with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. There are at
least two areas where the GSEs enjoy an overwhelming competitive
advantage that should be addressed: (1) current mortgage-related
regulations, some of which are not within the sole purview of the FHFA;
and (2) the GSE's infrastructure in the form of data, models, and
tools.
Over the last few decades, GSE control and influence has grown
substantially, in part due to the special privileges and exemptions
afforded to the GSEs, including lower capital costs, appraisal
exceptions under the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and
Enforcement Act (FIRREA), and the Qualified Mortgage (QM) patch,
contained in the Ability to Repay/QM regulation. These and other
privileges have provided the resources and insulation from competition
that has allowed the GSEs to expand their operations and adopt
innovative approaches that other private companies cannot pursue under
the current regulatory regime.
The return of the private label securitization market has been
stymied, in part, by this imbalance. Investors are prepared to support
private market activity, but the differential regulatory treatment of
GSE mortgages creates a vast disparity in operational efficiency,
costs, and legal liability. Addressing some of these disparities will
require the cooperation of various Federal regulators.
Separately, the Conservator can take actions to disseminate some
components of the GSE infrastructure in a manner that leaves the
infrastructure intact for the existing GSEs yet shares elements with
new entrant competitors. For example, the GSEs have amassed millions of
residential property appraisals, records that capture information on
both the subject property and several comparable properties. Similarly,
the GSEs, representing approximately one-half of the 10 trillion-dollar
mortgage market, have millions of loan records, composed of
indispensable transaction and performance data. Some portion of this
data was released to support investor participation in the Credit Risk
Transfer (CRT) initiative, but a significant segment of this critical
information has not been published. This data should be shared with
other market participants.
Possession of this expansive set of data provides the GSEs with a
significant competitive market advantage. It permits the two companies
to monitor, evaluate,
analyze, and model risk in ways that are potentially more accurate,
reliable, and predictive. Other private companies have the capabilities
to develop competing technology and risk management tools. However, the
GSE data monopoly ensures that the GSEs are always better informed of
patterns and trends than any potential
competitors.
To foster a truly competitive and transparent marketplace that will
afford private companies the opportunity to evaluate becoming
guarantors, HPC recommends that the Conservator publicly release, or
``democratize,'' the GSE data. In addition to new guarantors, other
stakeholders and market participants could benefit from the publication
of this data. Broad market access to this data would permit wide-
ranging evaluation and understanding of risk from industry, Government,
academia, advocacy organizations, and think tanks.
The Conservator could also consider other components of the
extensive GSE infrastructure, including technology tools that were
built to manage, parse, and derive conclusions from the GSEs' massive
data sets, as well as the risk models that are embedded in these tools
and the various business systems of the GSEs. Most of these tools have
been built while the companies have been in conservatorship, meaning
they have been built using taxpayer funds. For example, HPC has
requested release of the models used in the GSE capital framework. We
continue to believe public release of this information would be
beneficial for private market risk analysis. The distribution of this
type of foundational information would facilitate enhancements in the
risk management capabilities of the entire marketplace, a benefit to
the overall health and soundness of the system.
Affordable Housing_New Approaches to Achieve Better Results
The various housing finance reform proposals put forward over the
last several years have all included a mechanism to generate funds to
stimulate the production and preservation of affordable rental housing
and to bolster targeted home-ownership assistance programs. HPC
supports this approach. Our members recognize that appropriations for
housing programs are not keeping pace with housing need in this
country. Therefore, given the benefits derived from the Government
guarantee envisioned in housing finance reform, it is reasonable for
legislation to establish an obligatory contribution of dollars through
transaction fees to expand the supply of desperately needed affordable
housing.
HPC also supports funding for specialized home-ownership programs.
However, it is the preference of HPC members to direct new funds for
home-ownership assistance to programs that contribute directly to the
households in need, reducing the barriers to entry and financial
challenges that these individuals and families face. HPC would prefer
that new funds not be used to simply subsidize higher-risk loans or to
compensate the industry to make loans that may not perform using more
lenient underwriting criteria.
We believe that funds used to address the areas of risk that drive
the increased pricing, rather than subsidizing that pricing, would
better serve the households in need. Examples of these types of
programs are downpayment assistance grants that enable households to
enter home ownership with some amount of equity in the property;
savings programs that offer matching funds to increase the downpayment
amount or, equally importantly, that create ``rainy-day'' reserves to
address future needs; and dedicated accounts that could be tapped by
homeowners in financial distress, to avoid missed payments and/or
foreclosure. The application of dollars to these types of programs, as
well as critical home-ownership counseling and education services,
would help families prepare for and sustain home ownership,
improve access, address the real barriers, and create a true financial
benefit and performance boost for low- and moderate-income (LMI)
households.
Along these same lines, HPC recognizes that there may be interest
by some in preserving the GSE Affordable Housing Goals and Duty-to-
Serve activities. The intent of these programs is to ensure the
secondary mortgage market makes credit available for more low- and
moderate-income households, and targeted market segments (affordable
housing preservation, rural markets, and manufactured housing) than the
private sector may serve on its own without Government support.
However, HPC believes that it is worthwhile to assess and revisit the
impact and outcomes of these programs and consider alternatives that
better achieve the intended objectives. Rather than repeat the use of
methods that have had, at best, mixed results, we should seek new types
of measurable targets and financing goals to ensure that traditionally
underserved segments are targeted for guarantor support. For example,
there may be high-impact ways to use additional funding, modeled on the
Federal Home Loan Bank System's Affordable Housing Program, which has
effectively served communities nationwide for decades now.
Comprehensive Housing Finance Reform Should Include FHA and PLS
Segments of Market
The recommendations from HPC in this testimony have been focused
almost
exclusively on the conventional conforming segment of the marketplace
(backed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac today and by guarantors/Ginnie
Mae in the
Chairman's outline). However, HPC members believe that true and
comprehensive reform should also take into consideration the
Government-backed (e.g., FHA and VA) and private label securities (PLS)
components of the market. We believe that legislative reform and the
marketplace will benefit from a secondary market framework that
supports the full continuum of mortgage products and the full range of
consumer needs and circumstances.
Therefore, we advocate for comprehensive reform that includes the
Federal Housing Administration (FHA), as the primary Government lending
vehicle, as well as PLS-related provisions, to establish market
standards, infrastructure, and/or practices to buttress the wholly
private PLS segment of the market. We believe that it is critical to
include these other important components of the mortgage market in
developing a complete legislative proposal.
Historically, FHA has operated the flagship program for serving
first-time, low- and moderate-income (LMI), and minority home buyers in
this country. The FHA offerings need to be appropriately calibrated and
aligned with conventional products to provide well-priced, safe, and
sustainable financing options to those borrowers who cannot access
conventional financing. Consumers who rely on these products must do so
with appreciation for lower-cost alternatives offered in the
conventional market and a full understanding of the steps they might
take to move from FHA to conventional products. In other words, FHA
must complement and supplement the conventional market, yet always be
available to fulfill the countercyclical role the Government plays as a
reliable backstop if and when the private market contracts, as it did
during the recent recession.
Because FHA augments and complements the conventional market to
ensure a broader, deeper mortgage market than the private market may
achieve on its own, it is critically important for housing finance
reform legislation to better align FHA's core underwriting,
eligibility, and servicing standards, as well as the capital
requirements that drive pricing, with those of the conventional market.
Further, it is no secret that resource constraints at FHA have hampered
the agency's capacity to fulfill its mission and perform its risk
management role as the largest mortgage insurance company in America.
HPC advocates for legislative reform that expands and enhances FHA's
capabilities to manage its important duties and serve home buyers.
HPC believes that the PLS segment of the marketplace should be
addressed in the housing finance reform dialogue as well. This portion
of the market could benefit from uniform standards and practices, an
approach that has facilitated the growth of the conventional conforming
segment of the market. Examples of the types of standards and practices
that could be addressed in legislation include: loan-level data
standards for borrower, property, and product characteristics;
disclosure rules, for both the content and format of securities
disclosures; due diligence practices; servicing and loss mitigation
requirements; representation and warranty/counterparty liability
agreements; and more. There has been some discussion regarding
migrating or sharing of some of the infrastructure that is used in the
conventional conforming market with the PLS market to achieve such
standardization and we would encourage the Committee to facilitate this
conversation to consider how housing finance reform can and should
bolster the PLS market.
Conclusion
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on this critically
important topic. HPC appreciates that the Chairman and the full
Committee intend to pursue legislative housing finance reform and we
are prepared to work with you. We think that the Chairman's outline
reflects a workable set of ideas, many of which have been circulated in
previous proposals, and we applaud you, Chairman Crapo for
reinvigorating this critical policy discussion.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF GREG UGALDE
Chairman of the Board, National Association of Home Builders
March 26, 2019
Introduction
Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown and Members of the Committee,
I am pleased to appear before you today on behalf of the National
Association of Home Builders (NAHB) to share our views on housing
finance reform. My name is Greg Ugalde and I am NAHB's 2019 Chairman of
the Board.
NAHB represents over 140,000 members who are involved in building
single-family and multifamily homes, remodeling, and other aspects of
residential and light commercial construction. NAHB's members construct
approximately 80 percent of all new housing in America each year. Our
builders rely on both Government and private programs and financing
sources to help provide decent, safe, and affordable single-family and
multifamily housing to our fellow citizens.
We believe an effective housing finance system must address
liquidity as well as affordability and that those two elements are very
closely related. Therefore, while it is important for the system to
provide housing credit at affordable terms as well as address specific
housing needs, it also is essential that credit is consistently
available on those terms regardless of domestic and international
economic and financial conditions.
Housing Affordability
Safe, decent, affordable housing provides fundamental benefits that
are essential to the well-being of families, communities and the
Nation. For these reasons, housing affordability is among NAHB's top
advocacy issues this year. We are working with Congress, the Trump
administration, and State and local officials to help hard-working
Americans purchase or rent affordable homes. Through these actions, we
also will create jobs and move the economy forward.
NAHB's research shows that housing affordability in the single-
family market remains at a 10-year low.\1\ Only 56.6 percent of new and
existing homes sold in the fourth quarter of 2018 (October through
December) were affordable to families earning the U.S. median income of
$71,900. Although the national median home price decreased from the
third quarter of 2018 to the fourth quarter, average mortgage rates
rose by 17 basis points over the same period. This was the fourth
straight quarterly rate hike and the highest rate level since the
second quarter of 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Rose Quint, ``Housing Affordability Holds Steady at a 10-Year
Low in the Fourth Quarter,'' NAHB Eye on Housing Blog, February 14,
2019. http://eyeonhousing.org/2019/02/housing-affordability-holds-
steady-at-a-10-year-low-in-the-fourth-quarter/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Several factors account for the affordability crisis. Ongoing job
creation and solid household formations are driving strong demand for
housing. Unfortunately, rising costs are constraining builders' ability
to construct new homes and apartments at affordable prices to meet the
demand. For example, excessive regulations at all levels of Government
now account for 24.3 percent of the final price of a new single-family
home built for sale \2\ and 32.1 percent of multifamily project
costs.\3\ Construction costs also are increasing due to a scarcity of
buildable lots, persistent skilled labor shortages, and tariffs on
lumber and other key building materials. These costs are having a
direct negative effect on housing affordability. NAHB's ``Priced Out''
Estimates for 2019 \4\ show that 127,560 households would be priced out
of the housing market if the median U.S. new home price rises by
$1,000. In other words, based on their incomes, 127,560 households
would be able to qualify for a mortgage to purchase the home before the
price increase, but not afterward. Similarly, a $1,000 increase in the
cost of building a new rental unit will price out almost 20,000 renters
for that apartment;\5\ the household would be rent-burdened after the
rent increase, but not before.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Paul Emrath, Ph.D. ``Government Regulation in the Price of a
New Home,'' NAHB Economics and Housing Policy Group Special Studies,
May 2, 2016. https://www.nahbclassic.org/
generic.aspx?sectionID=734&genericContentID=250611&channelID=311&_ga=2.3
8786983.52385
4983.1552510596-1923655094.1427310833.
\3\ Paul Emrath, Ph.D. and Caitlin Walter, Ph.D. ``Multifamily Cost
of Regulation 2018 Special Study,'' National Association of Home
Builders and National Multifamily Housing Council, June 12, 2018.
\4\ Na Zhao, Ph.D. ``NAHB Priced-Out Estimates for 2019,'' NAHB
Economics and Housing Policy Group Special Studies, January 2, 2019.
https://www.nahbclassic.org/generic.aspx?generic
ContentID=265844.
\5\ Based on the 2018 median rent of $2,189, a $1000 increase in
the cost of building a new apartment unit would price out 19,617
renters.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For these reasons, NAHB calls on Congress and the Trump
administration to make housing affordability a national priority. An
essential component of any strategy for housing affordability must be
advancing comprehensive housing finance reform, which will ensure the
capital and liquidity necessary for housing developers, builders,
lenders and consumers to access stable financing. In addition, NAHB
urges Federal policymakers to take appropriate actions to ease
regulatory burdens, adopt sensible workforce development and
immigration policy that will help our industry fill open jobs, and fund
Federal housing programs.
Need for Comprehensive Housing Finance System Reform
NAHB remains a staunch supporter of comprehensive housing finance
system reform. To NAHB this means effective reform of the conventional
mortgage finance market, including Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac (the
Enterprises), private capital sources and Federal mortgage finance
programs, in particular those of the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD), most involving the Federal Housing
Administration (FHA), the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Rural
Housing Service (RHS) and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA)
Home Loan Guaranty Program. Additionally, we support an enhanced role
for State and local housing finance agencies. These organizations play
an important role in meeting affordable housing needs and NAHB believes
they hold great potential to augment a
reformed housing finance system.
NAHB believes comprehensive reform must come through Congress and
focus on fixing the structural flaws that still persist 10 years after
the great recession. Comprehensive legislation, including a
determination of the future of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, is the only
way to ensure a stable housing finance system, preserve access to
credit and protect taxpayers.
In September 2018, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac completed their tenth
year in conservatorship under the control of their regulator, the
Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA). This was a stark reminder that
housing finance system reform, which seemed so urgent following the
mortgage market and financial crisis, is still unfinished business.
NAHB believes strongly that having the Enterprises continue in
conservatorship, with no end in sight, contributes to uncertainty
regarding mortgage availability and affordability and is therefore both
undesirable and unsustainable.
Administrative Housing Finance Reform
Last September, as the 10-year anniversary of conservatorship of
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac approached, and again earlier this year
after FHFA Director Watt's term ended, NAHB joined 28 other
organizations in sending letters to Congress and the Administration
urging policymakers to be cautious in making any administrative reforms
to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac before Congress has passed legislation to
resolve the conservatorships. Absent legislation to change the
structure of the Enterprises, administrative reforms to the Enterprises
should seek to maintain and enhance the stability and liquidity of the
housing finance system while considering the potential impact on
borrowers, taxpayers, and market structure dynamics such as an expanded
private market and a level playing field among market participant
seeking market access through the Enterprises. Legislation must
incorporate positive administrative changes already in place.
In January 2019, the term of FHFA Director Mel Watt ended and the
Comptroller of the Currency, Joseph Otting, was named by the
Administration as Acting Director. President Trump nominated Mark
Calabria, who is awaiting full Senate confirmation, to be the next FHFA
director. As conservator and regulator, the FHFA Director has the
authority to make reforms administratively. In the absence of
congressional action, NAHB is concerned that administrative reforms
could be more conservative than legislation that would require
bipartisan approval. However, NAHB enjoys a positive working
relationship with Dr. Calabria and we are confident we will have
opportunities to discuss any concerns going forward.
We believe it is particularly important for FHFA to provide notice
and comment opportunities on proposed administrative changes and to
provide adequate transition periods to allow market participants to
adjust to new guidelines and circumstances. It is critical to avoid
disruptions and dislocations in the mortgage credit market that would
increase prices or decrease availability of credit for homeowners and
home buyers.
Chairman Crapo's Housing Reform Outline
NAHB appreciates Chairman Crapo's effort to put forth a thoughtful
outline for housing finance reform that includes the essential elements
for a comprehensive reform bill, but leaves other significant details
open for discussion and bipartisan agreement. NAHB supports the broad
concepts of the Outline. In particular, we appreciate the Chairman's
continued support for an explicit Government backstop for a key portion
of the conventional mortgage market. We firmly believe this is critical
to ensuring the ongoing availability of the 30-year, fixed-rate
mortgage that is so essential to affordable home ownership.
NAHB is pleased that initial reform plans that called for winding
down Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have moderated to allow the Enterprises
to remain important participants in the proposed new system. The
Chairman's Outline calls for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to become
private guarantors, which essentially preserves the current secondary
market role of the Enterprises and allows the mortgage market to
continue to benefit from their comprehensive and well-tested
infrastructure. New, additional entities also would become private
guarantors. Private guarantors will guarantee the timely repayment of
principal and interest to investors of eligible mortgages that are
securitized.
The Outline would designate Ginnie Mae as the operator of the
securitization platform. It appears the Outline would require Ginnie
Mae to operate a securitization platform that securitizes mortgages
backed by eligible conventional mortgages, significantly expanding the
current role of Ginnie Mae whose securitization platform today
securitizes only mortgages collateralized by Government-insured and-
guaranteed mortgages. Ginnie Mae would provide the explicit Federal
Government guarantee for all these MBS. NAHB believes there are
advantages to using the existing Ginnie Mae securitization platform to
issue MBS collateralized with conventional mortgage loans although
statutory changes will be needed to allow Ginnie Mae to perform this
new function. NAHB cautions that with this considerable expansion to
Ginnie Mae's MBS issuance there must be assurances that it would be
able to scale up as quickly and effectively as needed in order to
maintain market liquidity.
The Outline allows that the technology and infrastructure developed
as part of the Enterprises' Common Securitization Platform (CSP) could
be sold or transferred to Ginnie Mae. NAHB appreciates this is noted as
a possibility. In addition to potentially increasing the bandwidth for
Ginnie Mae's securitization operations, knowing so many resources have
been invested and the enormous effort undertaken by many stakeholders
to develop the CSP, NAHB is pleased the Chairman recognizes the value
of this new infrastructure and acknowledges that it may benefit a
restructured housing finance system.
As included in the Outline, NAHB supports mortgage requirements
substantially similar to the qualified mortgage (QM) as a base for the
definition of a sustainable, conforming mortgage, but believes that the
new system should be given additional flexibility to establish
underwriting criteria beyond baseline QM. In addition, NAHB believes
the current, statutory requirements for determining conforming loan
limits and loan limits for federally insured and guaranteed mortgage
loans should remain intact. The authority to increase loan limits is
important for the conforming mortgage market to remain relevant when
house prices are increasing. This ensures conventional mortgage credit
remains affordable and accessible to consumers.
NAHB sees the value of mortgage market participation by lenders of
all sizes. However, we appreciate the Chairman has made a considerable
effort to show support for small lenders by prohibiting volume-based
discounts on guarantee fees and other terms. In a reformed housing
finance system, access to the secondary mortgage market and pricing
should not be based on the volume of business or size or geographic
location of the selling institution.
Since 2013, the Enterprises have used credit-risk transfers (CRTs)
to reduce the risk to taxpayers and encourage the return of private
investors to the mortgage market. The current use of innovative CRT
structures by the Enterprises has been very successful in attracting
private capital and NAHB believes allowing guarantors to continue to
lay off risk using approved CRT structures will continue to be positive
for the market. As new guarantors enter the market, it is prudent to
require that the FHFA approve CRT structures and allow only approved
structures to be used by guarantors. The CRT approach has been untested
in distressed markets so NAHB appreciates caution before relying on
this framework too much. Also, any such program should have the dual
purpose of lessening risk exposure and allowing for a reasonable
interest rate/borrowing cost for borrowers.
The Outline proposes to replace current affordable goals and duty-
to-serve requirements with a new Market Access Fund. The Market Access
Fund, and the current Housing Trust Fund (available to provide housing
for extremely low- and very low-income households, including homeless
families) and Capital Magnet Fund (used to finance community service
facilities and affordable housing activities and related economic
development activities) will be funded through an annual assessment of
10 basis points of the total annual loan volume guaranteed by each
guarantor.
NAHB has strongly and consistently urged Congress to ensure that
the Enterprises, or their successors, demonstrate leadership in
affordable housing by providing liquidity and supporting housing for
families at different income levels in various geographic markets and
in various market segments. NAHB supports an approach that would
require the entities providing resources for this purpose to be
accountable for the effectiveness of the programs to which such funds
are distributed. In addition, NAHB believes the definition of
affordable housing should be expanded from a focus on very low- and
low-income families to include workforce housing that serves the needs
of moderate-income families as well. Again, NAHB welcomes an
opportunity to work with this Committee and other stakeholders to
develop the details for this section of the bill.
The Outline includes a robust role for the regulation of
guarantors. As proposed in the Outline, NAHB believes the regulatory
agency should be governed by a bipartisan board of directors instead of
a single director. Board governance would mitigate the potential for
extreme and abrupt changes in policy that are possible under the
existing, single director regulatory regime. The significant oversight
of the guarantors, including the establishment of prudential standards
with regard to capital requirements, appears in-line with ensuring a
safe and sound mortgage finance system. However, as the regulator
contemplates the complex aspects of determining capital requirements,
the industry should be consulted through notice-and-comment rulemaking.
Elements of a smooth transition have been addressed in most housing
finance system reform plans. NAHB is pleased that the Chairman's
Outline is no exception. A careful transition is essential to ensure
the new system is workable and effective. Any changes to the housing
finance system should be undertaken with extreme care and with
sufficient time to ensure that U.S. home buyers, owners, and renters
are not placed in harm's way and that the mortgage funding and delivery
system operates efficiently and effectively as the old system is wound
down and a reformed system is put in place. Every effort should be made
to reassure borrowers and markets that credit will continue to flow to
creditworthy borrowers and that mortgage investors will not experience
adverse consequences as a result of changes in process.
We look forward to continuing to work with this Committee to
achieve comprehensive housing finance system reform that has bipartisan
support, addresses the flaws of the current and previous system and is
sustainable for the long term.
Preserve the Enterprises' Successful Multifamily Housing Finance
Framework
NAHB believes it is essential to have an efficient and stable
secondary market where conventional multifamily mortgages are
aggregated and placed into diversified pools for securitization and
sale to investors worldwide. Therefore, NAHB has consistently advocated
for preserving Fannie Mae's and Freddie Mac's successful multifamily
financing infrastructure. The Enterprises' multifamily programs have
consistently performed well, even in stressful market conditions. NAHB
is pleased that the Chairman's Outline proposes a continued role for
the multifamily financing infrastructure. Nevertheless, we believe
there are some aspects of this proposal that require further
consideration, and NAHB looks forward to working with the Committee to
address these concerns.
NAHB is pleased that the Outline recognizes the importance of
multifamily financing in providing options for affordable rental
housing, but we are concerned that the Outline appears to require the
Enterprises to divest their successful multifamily business. The
Outline envisions Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac as private guarantors, and
``The multifamily businesses of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac will be sold
and operated as independent guarantors.'' We are concerned that this
specific language may have the unintended consequence of precluding the
Enterprises from addressing critical secondary multifamily market
needs.
A delicate balancing act is necessary to facilitate entry to the
secondary multifamily market for new independent guarantors and to
preserve the successful multifamily business lines and infrastructure
from the status quo. As the Committee moves forward with housing
finance reform legislation, NAHB requests that Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac receive the capacity and flexibility to fill gaps in the
multifamily marketplace that others are not addressing. Legislation and
subsequent regulation should support strong and sustained liquidity in
the multifamily rental market.
To better appreciate the role that the Enterprises' multifamily
financing plays in the secondary multifamily market, it is important to
understand that not all private market sources of capital for
multifamily financing are available for all segments of the multifamily
market. Each source has strength in specific niches and markets and
also moves in and out of the market as economic conditions and
investment goals change. Life insurance companies typically target low-
leverage, high-quality deals in the strongest markets (usually urban)
and typically serve the highest income households. Once they meet their
own portfolio investment targets, life insurance companies retract
their lending. Banks do not provide long-term financing and are subject
to significant restrictions in terms of capital requirements. Banks
also have significant exposure to regulatory pressure that influences
their lending decisions, including obligations under the Community
Reinvestment Act (CRA). While the commercial mortgage-backed securities
(CMBS) market was significant at one time, it has not recovered from
the financial crisis and is not expected to resume its past levels of
volume.
These facts point to the need to maintain a viable, liquid and
efficient secondary market for multifamily rental financing where the
Federal Government continues to play a role. In addition, the secondary
market must be structured to ensure that the appropriate range of
products is available to provide the capital needed to
develop new and to preserve existing rental housing, as well as to
refinance and
acquire properties. An adequate flow of capital will ensure that demand
for rental housing is met and that affordable options are available for
a range of households and communities.
The critical consideration in a new system is broad and continued
liquidity during all economic cycles and for all geographic areas. For
these reasons, NAHB cautions against over-reaching in regard to
reforming the multifamily finance system. This component of the
Nation's housing finance system has performed, and continues to
perform, very well. Housing finance reform should preserve the
successful framework of the current system--including the Federal
backstop for conventional and federally insured multifamily mortgages.
Additional Considerations for a Reformed Housing Finance System
The elements below are not included in Chairman Crapo's Housing
Reform Outline, however, NAHB believes they all should be considered in
a comprehensive housing finance system reform proposal.
Appraisal System Reform
NAHB is a strong proponent of a sound and effective appraisal
system. The protocol for establishing appraisal standards and
guidelines should be reformed. Such provisions should not be left
exclusively to the system guarantors, as is currently the case. This
arrangement inappropriately restricts appraisers in their task of
achieving the most accurate estimates of value. The new system should
include a means for all mortgage market stakeholders to contribute to
the system's appraisal standards to allow appraisers greater latitude
in completing their assignments.
Currently, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac impose de facto appraisal
authority through the guidelines they have established for appraisals
on the mortgages they purchase and the forms they use to collect
appraisal information. These Enterprise appraisal rules tend to
restrict appraisers' ability to pursue approaches that could result in
more accurate valuation. In addition, confusion arises over how to
interpret the Enterprises' appraisal guidelines in relation to the
rules established by The Appraisal Foundation in the Uniform Standards
of Professional Appraisal Practice (USPAP) and the appraisal
regulations of the banking regulators. This has prompted industry
participants to impose overlays that further impede the ability of
appraisers to produce accurate valuations.
NAHB urges the establishment of a single, consistent set of rules
and guidelines for appraisers and appraisals, not controlled by the
Enterprises. NAHB recommends establishing a Collateral Valuation
Oversight Committee in the reformed housing finance system. This
oversight committee would consist of a broad group of housing market
stakeholders, including home builders, and, in consultation with
Federal regulatory agencies, would be responsible for establishing and
maintaining guidelines for the secondary mortgage market, appraisal
reporting formats, and a repository for valuation reports. This
committee could set standards to ensure the engagement of an appraiser
who has the training and experience necessary for the assignment and
has flexibility to conduct the analysis most effectively.
In addition, NAHB encourages the development of a timely and
workable process for appealing inaccurate or faulty appraisals that is
fair, balanced and appropriate to allow all parties of the transaction
to appeal appraisals that do not meet USPAP standards or are based on
inaccurate data or assumptions. NAHB has been a proponent of the VA's
``Tidewater Initiative'' which encourages open communications and the
sharing of information that assists appraisers in their analysis. NAHB
also is encouraged by The Appraisal Foundation's white paper on best
practices and guidelines for an efficient and effective Reconsideration
of Value process.
Support for Acquisition, Development and Construction Financing
Discussions of housing finance system reform should include how to
increase the availability of capital to meet the growing supply needs
of the Nation's housing market. NAHB believes one of the barriers to
increased housing supply and affordability is a lack of acquisition,
development and construction (AD&C) financing for home builders and
land developers. According to NAHB analysis of data from the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the stock of outstanding 1-4 unit
residential construction loans at FDIC-insured banking institutions
totaled $79 billion at the end of the final quarter of 2018. While this
is a significant improvement of the $40.7 billion total from the first
quarter of 2013, it is substantially smaller than the $203.8 billion
stock outstanding from early 2008. Without an adequate pipeline of
financing, developers and builders struggle to afford to buy lots which
are increasingly expensive due to low- or very-low lot supplies noted
in NAHB surveys. This lack of supply is driving up prices and impacting
housing affordability, especially for entry level and first-time home
buyers. NAHB believes the Enterprises should support community banks'
AD&C lending activities and Congress should authorize such support in
housing finance reform legislation.
A Carefully Regulated Fully Private Mortgage-Backed Securities System
The conventional MBS market should operate in tandem with a fully
private MBS system. A robust market for private label MBS will be
critical to the availability of mortgage products that do not meet the
conforming, conventional underwriting and credit guidelines or the
programs of FHA, USDA and VA. NAHB believes it is essential to have an
efficient and stable secondary market where conventional single-family
and multifamily mortgages are aggregated and placed into diversified
pools for securitization and sale to investors worldwide. This includes
considering provisions to support and encourage the return of the
private label mortgage securitization market. The Government guaranteed
and nonguaranteed market segments can and should complement each other
by specializing in distinct market niches while also competing on price
and product for overlapping market segments.
Investors in private label mortgage-backed securities (PLS)
suffered enormous losses in the financial downturn and have not
returned to the marketplace in any significant way. In fact, PLS
currently comprise only about 4 percent of MBS securitizations. NAHB
encourages policymakers to work with the investor community prior to
finalizing legislation in order to ensure that the private market is
able to gain enough momentum to support the housing market when housing
finance reform legislation is enacted. It is important to make sure the
legislation does not have unintended consequences that would prevent
private capital from returning.
Role for the Federal Home Loan Banks
NAHB always has viewed the Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBanks) as
having an important role in the housing finance system. NAHB's members
rely on commercial banks, and in particular, community banks for their
AD&C financing needs as well as for the mortgage credit needs of their
home buyers. The FHLBanks were a steadfast source of financing
throughout the most recent downturn. Their specific mission is to
provide liquidity to their members, primarily banking institutions, to
support housing finance and community investment. Their role should not
be overlooked in a restructured housing finance system. NAHB believes
there should be explicit acknowledgement of the significance of the
FHLBanks to the housing finance system in any proposed reform
legislation.
Affordable Credit
NAHB would like to emphasize that increased fees and interest rates
are ultimately paid by home buyers. Since financing costs have a
significant bearing on the ability of home buyers to purchase a home,
NAHB cautions that any fees contained in a legislative framework will
likely be added to the interest rate and may have a negative effect on
the market if the cumulative impact substantially raises the cost to
buyers.
Prospective home buyers are adversely affected when interest rates
rise. NAHB estimates that with a quarter-point increase in the rate on
a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage, as many as 1 million U.S. households
would be priced out of the market for a median-priced new home.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Na Zhao, Ph.D. ``NAHB Priced-Out Estimates for 2019,'' NAHB
Economics and Housing Policy Group Special Studies, January 2, 2019.
https://www.nahbclassic.org/generic.aspx?generic
ContentID=265844.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion
NAHB thanks Chairman Crapo for his focus on housing finance system
reform and for releasing his Housing Reform Outline. I appreciate the
opportunity to submit our perspectives on housing finance system
reform. We look forward to working with the Senate Committee on
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs and others to build on this effort
and develop legislation consistent with NAHB's recommendations and the
consensus elements that have emerged over the last several years.
NAHB believes many regulatory reforms undertaken at the Enterprises
under the direction of the FHFA have strengthened the safety and
soundness of the housing finance system, and ultimately need to be
codified in legislation.
Whether they rent or own, Americans want to choose where they live
and the type of home that best meets their needs. Given the significant
role that housing plays in the economy, we urge Congress to take a
long-term, holistic approach to housing finance system reform. NAHB
also urges Congress to carefully consider the differences between the
single-family and multifamily market and not apply solutions to one
piece of the market that are not appropriate for the other.
NAHB thanks this Committee for its leadership on this important
issue, and stands ready to work with you to achieve such reforms and
provide much-needed stability for this critical sector of the economy.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF MARK M. ZANDI, Ph.D.
Chief Economist, Moody's Analytics
March 26, 2019
Chairman Mike Crapo of the U.S. Senate Committee on Banking,
Housing, and Urban Affairs released an outline for housing finance
reform on February 1. As an outline it leaves much to be resolved, but
it does offer a promising framework from which to begin. How this
framework is filled in will be important, since a few critical
structural choices yet to be made will have a dramatic impact on how
the proposed system would work.
My testimony offers a summary of where Chairman Crapo's framework
starts, three of the most important design issues left to be decided,
and how these issues must be decided to ensure a viable path for the
legislative reform we so badly need.\1\ Before this, I consider the
critical criteria that must be met for housing finance reform to
succeed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ My testimony is largely based on ``How Chairman Crapo's Outline
of Housing Finance Reform Can Work,'' Jim Parrott, Dave Stevens and
Mark Zandi, white paper, February 1, 2019 (but the views expressed in
this testimony are my own). https://www.economy.com/mark-zandi/
documents/2019-02-27-Crapos-Housing-Finance-System.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Defining successful reform
The success of any housing finance reform depends on its ability to
satisfy six essential criteria, including ending too-big-to-fail, fully
protecting taxpayers, providing equal access to the system for
underserved communities and lenders of all sizes, maintaining
affordable mortgage rates for borrowers under all market conditions,
promoting competition, and easing the transition from the current
system to the future system.
The future housing finance system must end the reliance on too-big-
to-fail financial institutions. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were too big
to fail, and the cost to taxpayers of forestalling their failure during
the financial crisis was considerable. In the future system, no private
institutions should be indispensable to a healthy, well-functioning
secondary mortgage market, or be able to dominate the market by
controlling its infrastructure or taking a significant share of the
system's credit risk.
Taxpayers must be fully protected from suffering any losses in the
future system. This requires that there is substantial private capital
in the system, sufficient to withstand losses in all but the most
catastrophic economic scenarios. The Federal Government should stand
behind the system, backstopping it against these dark scenarios, but
mortgage borrowers should pay taxpayers for the cost of this backstop.
Taxpayers should also have the ability to claw back from borrowers any
costs they incur in backstopping the system.
Maintaining broad access to mortgage credit for those in a position
to become sustainable homeowners is one of the most important and
widely supported objectives of housing finance reform. For this to mean
anything, though, not only must borrowers be able to find a lender
willing to make them a loan, they must be able to find one willing to
make them a loan on terms that they can afford. Equal access for
lenders of all sizes is also necessary to ensure sufficient competition
in the future system.
The future system must not result in significantly higher mortgage
rates while still providing the necessary capital buffer to protect
taxpayers and the appropriate access for underserved borrowers. The
system must also be flexible enough to ease the impact on mortgage
rates and credit availability during tough economic times when private
sources of capital will either be unwilling to provide capital or
require such a high return that it would cause rates to spike. This
requires a catastrophic Government backstop.
Competition in the future system is necessary to ensure that
mortgage borrowers are offered innovative loan products with attractive
terms and interest rates. This includes promoting competition in the
primary lending market, the markets for taking credit risk, and the
secondary market. It is also critical that competition in the system is
not based on inappropriate underwriting standards, which will result in
unsustainable lending and an unstable system.
Finally, and arguably most important to successfully achieving
legislative reform, the transition from the current system to a future
one must occur with as little
disruption, uncertainty and risk as possible, building upon steps
already under way. This includes Fannie and Freddie's current work to
build a common securitization platform, or CSP, and the Government-
Sponsored Enterprises' current risk-transfer efforts. It is critical to
move in an incremental fashion because the deep structural reform
called for will require significant change to a complex and critically
important system. The process of transition should be approached with
an appropriate level of humility and flexibility in the face of the
difficulty and importance of the challenge.
Chairman Crapo's system laid out in the outline
Chairman Crapo's outline for housing reform goes a significant way
toward meeting these criteria for successful reform. In the proposed
system, mortgage lenders will have three options:
1.
Lenders can sell their loans to one of multiple chartered
guarantors, which would issue securities through Ginnie Mae.
2.
Lenders can purchase insurance from the guarantors to cover the
credit risk on their loans, and issue securities themselves
through Ginnie Mae, retaining master servicing.
3.
Lenders can sell their loans to a loan aggregator, which would
either sell them to one of the guarantors as per option 1 or
issue securities themselves as per option 2.
Lenders and aggregators must off-load all of the credit risk on
their loans to the chartered guarantors, whichever channel they use,
after the risk assumed by mortgage insurers on loans with a loan-to-
value of greater than 80 percent. Guarantors can then distribute some
or all of the risk they assume through credit-risk transfers, resulting
in a broad dispersion of credit risk throughout global markets. Ginnie
Mae will own and manage the securitization infrastructure and provide
the Government guarantee on the securities (see Chart).\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Ginnie will also presumably manage the securitization of loans
insured by the FHA, VA and USDA in the manner it does today. As we
mention below, clarifying how these channels relate to each other will
be an important next step in the development of the proposal.
To minimize market concentration, lenders cannot be guarantors and
no guarantor can guarantee more than a yet-to-be-specified percentage
of all outstanding mortgages guaranteed in the channel.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The outline actually says that depositories cannot be
guarantors, but we assume that the prohibition would apply to all
lenders given that the reasons for prohibiting depository lenders apply
in precisely the same way to nondepository lenders.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There is a good deal yet to be specified in this framework.
However, three critical design issues stand out in their importance:
how the lender-issuer channel will work (the second option for lenders
listed above); how the new system will attract a sufficient number of
new guarantors to ensure adequate competition in the secondary market;
and how the system will ensure broad access to affordable credit.
How the lender-issuer channel will work
What it means to allow lenders to issue securities in this system
depends on how a couple of questions are answered. The first is whether
the issuer is on the hook for the failure of a guarantor from which
they purchased insurance. Put differently, in the issuer channel, does
Ginnie Mae step in to pay mortgage-backed securities investors after a
guarantor has failed, or only after the issuer too has failed? If the
latter, issuers will have counterparty risk that may compromise the
issuers' ability to get true sale accounting on the loans delivered
through the channel, tying up so much capital that the channel would
likely be uneconomic for all lenders. Even if lenders do get true sale
accounting, they would still have to hold additional capital against
the risk, rendering the execution unappealing to all but big banks,
which are uniquely positioned to use their scale to cover the
incremental risk.
If instead Ginnie Mae steps in to cover payments to MBS investors
when the guarantor fails, then this problem disappears. Issuers will
not have to set aside capital to cover the counterparty risk, opening
the channel up to lenders of all sizes.
The second question is whether in the system lenders are able to
issue securities backed only by their own loans. If so, then some
lenders could set up vertically integrated channels to sell MBS backed
by loans valued most highly by investors, sending everything else
through the guarantor channel. The housing finance system would then
have two very different channels: one dominated by lenders selling
their own premium MBS at premium pricing and another through which
everyone else sells a broader mix of loans at worse pricing.
This would pose a host of challenges.
Larger lenders would be better positioned to vertically integrate
as issuers, given the complexity and capital involved, forcing smaller
lenders into a poorer execution that makes it harder for them to offer
competitive pricing to borrowers in the primary market.
Guarantors would find it difficult to compete with issuers given
the latter's better execution. Guarantors would be forced to operate
primarily in whatever segments of the market issuers do not want. This
would make it difficult to attract capital to fund guarantors,
compounding the challenge of attracting new entrants to compete with
Fannie and Freddie.
Finally, the fragmentation of the market would make it less liquid,
less stable, and more expensive for borrowers. It would also make it
difficult to ensure that all markets and communities are well served
through the economic cycle, as issuers will focus on the most lucrative
markets.
It is thus critical that securities issued through all three
channels be collateralized by the same multilender pools.\4\ By making
the issuance fungible in this way, it would level the playing field for
both lenders and guarantors, maintaining a single, deeply liquid and
broadly dispersed secondary market.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ It would function much as Ginnie II functions today.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If policymakers address these two open questions effectively, then
the lender-issuer channel proposed could be a net gain to the system,
allowing lenders to retain master servicing and thus spreading some of
the associated liquidity risk beyond the guarantors, without
compromising the system's competitiveness, stability or liquidity.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ An interesting question is whether guarantors will price loans
they purchase more favorably than those for which they only provide
insurance, as in the former they will maintain master servicing, making
it easier for them to manage the risk they have assumed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
How the system will attract new entrants
The next design issue that must be addressed is how the proposed
system will create competition among guarantors. To address the too-
big-to-fail problem, which is one of its central objectives, the system
must ensure that enough new guarantors enter the space that any one of
them can fail without bringing the entire market down.\6\ Although the
outline includes a limit on the overall market share of any one
guarantor, the system will need to make it feasible for other
institutions to enter the market to compete with Fannie and Freddie.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Allowing privately owned institutions to play a role so
critical to the system that they cannot be allowed to fail gives them
an incentive to take on excessive risk, knowing that taxpayers will
bail them out if these risks do not pay off. Policymakers can address
this problem in one of three ways: They can attempt to regulate the
behavior of the privately owned oligopoly, as has been recommended most
recently by the National Association of Realtors (https://
www.nar.realtor/sites/default/files/documents/2019-Working-Paper-A-
Vision-For-Enduring-Housing-Finance-Reform-02-07-2019.pdf;) they can
put these critical functions into a governmental or quasi-governmental
institution, as several of us have advocated (https://www.urban.org/
sites/default/files/publication/79771/2000746-A-More-Promising-Road-to-
GSE-Reform.pdf); or they can create a market in which enough privately
owned entities own and manage that infrastructure that anyone can be
allowed to fail, as is envisioned in the Crapo proposal. Simply re-
privatizing them with a few modest reforms, as some have advocated
(https://thehill.com/opinion/finance/420633-fannie-and-freddie-
investors-want-us-to-forget-about-the-housing-crisis), will leave the
too-big-to-fail problem firmly in place.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This will be no small task. Fannie and Freddie not only have long-
standing relationships with the mortgage industry that give them a
formidable head start, but they have built the securitization
infrastructure that the vast majority of market participants rely on to
access the secondary market. The way lenders interface with the
secondary market has been determined in large part by the systems that
Fannie and Freddie have put into place over decades, driving everything
from what information lenders collect from borrowers and how, to what
underwriting processes they run and what software programs they use.
Even if they are not relying on a Fannie or Freddie system for a given
process, a lender is often relying on a system that was built to handle
one of Fannie and Freddie's systems. The same is true for investors,
with a great many of the processes, standards and expectations for how
investing in MBS works arising from the systems put in place over the
years by the Government-Sponsored Enterprises.
If the only way that a new entrant can compete with Fannie and
Freddie is to attract lenders and investors away from this deep,
comprehensive and long-standing nexus of rules, systems and
technologies, then the odds of attracting a sufficient number of
guarantors for the kind of system imagined here are impossibly long.
For the system to work as intended, much of this infrastructure will
have to be moved into the common securitization platform, or created
anew there. By making what is in some ways the highway system of the
housing finance system accessible to all guarantors, it will serve to
lower barriers to entry rather than make them prohibitively high.
The most realistic way to do this is to build on the work that the
Federal Housing Finance Agency, Fannie, and Freddie are doing already
with the common securitization platform (https://www.urban.org/sites/
default/files/publication/988
72/single_security_0.pdf). Once the CSP is effectively supporting
issuance by both Fannie and Freddie, it should be well positioned to
handle additional issuers. Unlike the initial effort of synthesizing
two very different securitization systems in Fannie and Freddie, new
issuers will be able to join by designing their de novo systems to sync
up with the existing systems of the CSP, a much less daunting
undertaking.
However, the CSP is limited in which securitization processes it
supports since it focuses exclusively on the bond administration
functions. Here too it can and should be expanded (https://
www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/91976/
2017_07_18_the_common_securitization_platform_finalized_0.pdf). For
instance, it should take on more loan-level data (https://
assets1c.milkeninstitute.org/assets/Publication/Viewpoint/PDF/
Blueprint-Admin-Reform-HF-System-1.7.2019-v2.pdf), so that market
participants have access to the kinds of data that allow Fannie and
Freddie to automate appraisals and other critical processes. Most
useful here would be sharing the data and processes that drive Fannie
and Freddie's automated underwriting systems, which together form one
of their most formidable barriers to entry. By opening up their AUS to
the market, at least for some brief period, other guarantors would be
able to develop their own automated underwriting systems more readily,
helping them to begin on terms more level with Fannie and Freddie.
Policymakers could take this one step further by requiring the CSP
intermediate between lenders and the guarantors' automated underwriting
systems. Guarantors could be required to provide a portal to their AUS
on the platform, so that lenders would submit information on a given
loan for approval and pricing from all guarantors at once. This would
dramatically reduce the prohibitive advantage that Fannie and Freddie
would otherwise enjoy from the market's adoption of their AUS.
How the system will ensure broad, consistent access to affordable
lending
And finally, another critical design issue that must be addressed
is how the system will provide broad, consistent access to affordable
mortgage credit, particularly in areas that the market may be less
inclined to serve well when left on its own. Chairman Crapo's outline
states that the affordability goals and duty to serve will be replaced
by a market access fund, which will be funded by an annual 10-basis
point fee on all securities issued through the channel.\7\ While that
would generate more than $5 billion a year to lower housing costs for
low- and moderate-income borrowers, which is more than the current
system provides (https://www.urban.org/research/publication/access-and-
affordability-new-housing-finance-system), a great deal more about how
this will be allocated and how the system as a whole will work will
need to be developed in the right way to ensure that it provides
adequate support for communities that need it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ It is worth noting that the Crapo outline retains both the
Housing Trust Fund and Capital Magnet Fund, which are focused on
addressing the inadequate supply of affordable housing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
First, it will be important that all guarantors have a national
footprint, so that they cannot simply serve those markets that happen
to be most profitable. Allowing guarantors to cherry-pick markets could
lead to regional or demographic gaps in the secondary market, segments
in which lenders have few to no places to sell their loans. This, in
turn, would lead to gaps in the primary market that would be difficult
if not impossible for the market access fund to overcome. It would also
lead to volatility in liquidity as guarantors move from one market to
another depending on the inevitable variations in profitability that
will come with the economic cycle.
It will also be important to develop a means of allocating the fund
that cannot be captured by intermediaries. The current system does this
relatively well. By delivering its cross-subsidy through a simple,
largely level guarantee fee--whereby lower credit-risk borrowers are
overcharged so that higher credit-risk borrowers can be undercharged--
it avoids the expense of sorting out who is to receive which kinds of
benefit and paying others to deliver that benefit. Whatever means are
used to deliver the cross-subsidy in the new system, the benefits
should similarly flow to the beneficiaries in as automated and simple a
way as possible.
Last, it will be important to target the market access fund to
those borrowers who actually need the help and to provide the kind of
help they actually need. Here, the current system does not perform as
well. Although much of the cross-subsidy is driven by the duty to serve
and affordability goals to serve to low- and moderate-income borrowers,
a significant portion is not. As most of the cross-subsidy is provided
through the level guarantee fee paid by all Fannie and Freddie
borrowers, almost a quarter of the cross-subsidy goes to those who are
not low- or moderate-income borrowers, but benefit simply because they
have poorer credit. Moreover, not all borrowers need help in the form
of a modest reduction in their mortgage rate. Some desperately need it
in another form such as downpayment assistance. The future system could
thus do a better job channeling funding from those who can afford to
pay to those who need the help and in the form that they can actually
use.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Some have expressed concern that applying a conservative income
cap on who can receive the subsidy would leave out some families that
need and deserve help, particularly middle-class families of color
whose ability to get a mortgage has been impacted by a legacy of
discrimination. The answer, though, is more thoughtful targeting, not
giving up on targeting altogether. As challenging as targeting may be,
without it we are giving money to the wrong people and those who really
need it are getting less, or none at all, as a result.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion
There are, of course, other critical choices to be made, including
what capital and regulatory regime to impose on guarantors to ensure
that they are protecting the taxpayers standing behind the system
rather than arbitraging the Government's backstop; how to give whatever
institution owns and operates the securitization platform the
flexibility and autonomy it needs to be an effective market utility;
and how to integrate the Federal Housing Administration,
Veterans Affairs, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture into a
more seamless, coherent system of Government support for the mortgage
market.\9\ But if policymakers can effectively address the more
foundational issues discussed above, I think the remaining challenges
are manageable. Chairman Crapo's outline thus holds significant
promise, making it a worthy place to renew the much delayed, but still
badly needed, effort to overhaul the housing finance system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ The long list of issues to be addressed is a reminder of how
challenging legislative reform will ultimately be: how guarantee
pricing should be regulated; what the process for resolving a failing
guarantor will be; how to handle transition; how to handle multifamily,
and on and on.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF HILARY O. SHELTON
Director, Washington Bureau, and Senior Vice President for
Advocacy and Policy, NAACP
March 26, 2019
INTRODUCTION
Good morning, Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and esteemed
Members of this Committee. I would like to thank you for asking me here
today to discuss a topic that is crucial to the NAACP and all of the
individuals, families, neighborhoods, and communities we serve and
represent: home ownership.
While not perfect, I would counsel extreme caution when reforming
our Nation's housing policy. Housing currently represents approximately
20 percent of the national economy, so while no one would argue that
this is not a very important issue to our Nation and our economy, it is
my hope that when drafting this policy we do not forget the impact our
actions have on every American, especially those who, for a multitude
of reasons, may be most reliant on a strong mortgage and secondary
market: Americans of color and low- to moderate-income Americans.
My name is Hilary O. Shelton, and I am the Director of the NAACP
Washington Bureau and the Senior Vice President for Policy and
Advocacy. I have been with the NAACP Washington Bureau for over 21
years.
Founded in 1909, the NAACP is our Nation's oldest, largest, and
most widely recognized grassroots based civil right organization. We
currently have over 2200 membership units in every State in the Nation,
as well as on American military installations in Asia and Europe. Our
mission statement declares that our goal is `` . . . to ensure the
political, educational, social and economic equality of rights of all
persons and to eliminate racial hatred and racial discrimination.''
The desire to be a homeowner is not specific to NAACP members: home
ownership is ``The American Dream.'' It represents not only safety and
stability for an individual and his or her family, but it also leads to
a sense of community, and is one of the most important tools for
building and passing on wealth for most middle-class families. All
Americans deserve a safe and decent place to live.
Yet for too long, too many Americans have been denied the ability
to follow their basic dream of home ownership. In 1968, President
Lyndon B. Johnson signed the seminal Fair Housing Act into law. This
new law made it illegal to discriminate against a person when they are
renting or buying a home, getting a mortgage, seeking housing
assistance, or engaging in other housing-related activities due to the
race, color, national origin, religion, gender, or familial or
disability status. It also prohibited discrimination based on the
racial, ethnic, or income make-up of the neighborhood. At the time of
the enactment of the Fair Housing Act, over 50 years ago, home
ownership among African Americans was just over 40 percent. At the same
time, home ownership among white Americans was well over 60 percent.
In the first 40 years since the Fair Housing Act was signed into
law, home-ownership rates among all races and ethnicities slowly
increased, with home-ownership rates among African Americans nearing 50
percent in 2005. But in the last 10 years or so we have seen those
rates drop. Today, sadly, the home-ownership rate among African
Americans is approximately back to where it was when discrimination was
legal: just over 40 percent.
To what do we owe this troubling phenomenon? First, it should be
pointed out that while home ownership among communities of color in the
United States was never on par with that of our white counterparts, it
did increase prior to the recession of the late 2000s. Then, with the
economic downturn of 2008 and the related housing crisis, most home-
ownership gains, especially those made among low- and moderate-income
Americans and people of color of our country, were wiped out.
According to the seminal study by the St. Louis Federal Reserve
from the first quarter of 2017, between 2007 and 2010, mortgage
delinquency surged across all groups, reaching a peak in January 2010
of just under 10 percent and 8 percent for African Americans and
Hispanics, respectively, compared to less than 3 percent for white
Americans. Perhaps more important is the fact that just under 30
percent and more than 31 percent of mortgage loans for African American
and Hispanic borrowers, respectively, had entered foreclosure. That is
in sharp contrast to the less than 12 percentage shares for white
borrowers.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Garriga, Carlos, Ricketts, Lowell R. and Schlagenhauf, Don.
``The Homeownership Experience of Minorities During the Great
Recession,'' The Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, First
Quarter 2017, pp. 139-67. https://doi.org/10.20955/r.2017.139-67.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This loss of home ownership is one reason we have the stubborn,
completely unhealthy, racial wealth gap in the United States. The
typical white family
currently has over $14,000 in wealth, compared to just over $6,000 for
the average Latino family and not even $3,500 for the average African
American family.\2\ Moreover, 20 percent of African Americans currently
live in poverty, compared to just over 6 percent of white Americans.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Asante-Muhammed, Dedrick, et. al., (September, 2017). The Road
to Zero Wealth: How the Racial Wealth Divide is Hollowing Out America's
Middle Class. Prosperity Now and Institute for Policy Studies.
\3\ U.S. Census Bureau (2017). Table S1702.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In response to the economic downturn, Congress passed the 2008
Housing and Economic Recovery Act (HERA) and the 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.
Together these two laws put into place several important safety and
soundness regulations that the prior system lacked, and while they were
by no means perfect they did serve to protect the taxpayers as well as
groups that had heretofore been targeted by unscrupulous lenders with
unsustainable products.
Any changes to the current system must continue to incorporate and
to protect important market segments--namely people of color and low-
to-moderate income families--on which a well-functioning future system
depends and a just society demands. These changes must also continue to
protect taxpayers.
NAACP RECOMMENDATIONS
Successful reform of our current system would produce one that
adequately serves the full universe of credit worthy borrowers, takes
into account the unique needs and characteristics of communities of
color, and builds on the positive innovations that have emerged after
the financial crisis of the late 2000s. We should not and cannot return
to the days of a loosely regulated system which led to reckless,
unsustainable lending practices like those that caused the financial
crisis and led to a devastating loss of wealth for people of color and
cost taxpayers billions of dollars.
Any housing reform policy must remedy the historical
marginalization of communities of color and discriminatory practices
within the mortgage market which were sanctioned, and often encouraged,
by societal constraints, and in too many cases, Federal policies. The
historic role that the Federal Government played in emboldening, and at
times enforcing, mortgage discrimination and the targeting of unfair,
unsustainable loans to racial and ethnic minorities in America, thereby
limiting their choices and their ability to build wealth, cannot and
should not be
ignored. A secondary market structure that is too narrow increases the
risks of perpetuating the current two-tiered lending system in which
white, more affluent
buyers are channeled into one system with one set of fees and racial
and ethnic minorities, people of color, and low- to moderate-income
buyers are funneled into another.
Specifically, the NAACP calls on Congress to retain and strengthen
any and all ``Duty to Serve'' provisions by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac,
Ginnie Mae, and any other Government-Sponsored Entity (GSE) or any
relevant Government program. Without an enforceable, robust obligation
to serve all markets, history has proven that communities of color
within our Nation will find it extremely difficult to access the
mortgage market. In the absence of an explicit, aggressive Duty-to-
Serve mandate most, if not all, capital will go to the ``cream of the
crop'' mortgages, the more affluent home buyers with traditional
borrowing credits, thereby ignoring the lower-wealth and lower-income
home buyers who may nevertheless have proven themselves creditworthy.
We must preserve and enhance all Duty-to-Serve mandates so that
underserved markets, including but not limited to loans made to people
of color, low- and moderate-income Americans, as well as markets for
affordable rental housing and manufactured housing are covered.
We must retain if not strengthen any and all Federal mandates to
ensure broad access and affordability in our Nation's housing finance
system. While alternative methods of achieving access and affordability
may appeal to some, the NAACP is concerned that simply authorizing
money to alleviate a problem is not enough, and as we have seen in the
past year, even when money is appropriated it can easily be slated to
be taken away.
Any alteration to our current housing system must also preserve and
enhance fair housing and anti-discrimination laws. To wit, we must
ensure that there is a rigorous, consistent, effective, and well-
resourced structure to oversee and enforce fair lending rules and
regulations. We must be able to fully and adequately measure trends in
lending to make sure that fair and sustainable loans are being made to
all creditworthy borrowers, regardless of where they are looking to
purchase their homes.
Congress must preserve FHA insured lending, responsible low-
downpayment mortgage loans, and ensure access to existing downpayment
assistance programs as well as promote cost-effective loan
modifications for existing homeowners. This will help not only first
time home buyers but those who are already in their own home stay
there.
Congress must also formally recognize and boost the role of housing
counseling. This entails both pre- and post-purchase counseling to help
families understand what their obligations may be and how to best
manage them, especially in times of unexpected stress. All HUD-approved
housing counseling services must be able to reach low- and moderate-
income families as well as families of color, and they should be able
to address any unique, but not disqualifying, characteristics.
Any future housing reform proposal must also provide broad access
to capital for all borrowers as well as institutions of every size.
Small lenders, including community banks and credit unions, are often
are the only sources of mortgage credit in underserved communities
across the Nation. We must ensure that small lenders, credit unions,
community banks and minority-serving institutions all have fair, equal,
and affordable access to the housing finance system and that their
needs, sometimes unique, are met.
Any housing proposal must also protect and increase funding for the
National Housing Trust Fund (NHTF). In a just-published follow-up to
their in March 18 study \4\ the National Low Income Housing Coalition
announced that within the United States there is a shortage of 7
million affordable and available rental homes for households with
extremely low incomes at or below the poverty guideline or 30 percent
of the area median income (AMI), whichever is higher. Seventy-one
percent of extremely low-income households are severely housing cost-
burdened, spending more than half of their incomes on housing.
Extremely low-income renters are more likely to be severely housing
cost-burdened than any other income group, accounting for 73 percent of
all severely housing cost-burdened renters in the United States. The
NHTF is the first new housing resource exclusively targeted to
households with the lowest incomes, and its success must be protected,
celebrated, and preserved. There is sadly still a dire need for the
NHTF throughout the Nation, and until that need is met we must continue
to fund and promote it. The NAACP is a proud, long-time supporter of
the NHTF.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ National Low Income Housing Coalition, ``The Gap: A shortage of
Affordable Homes'' March, 2018. https://reports.nlihc.org/sites/
default/files/gap/Gap-Report_2018.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Last, but not of least importance, any housing reform policy must
protect taxpayers. Taxpayers cannot be disproportionately exposed to
risks; we must protect, and fully and rigorously implement the reforms
passed in 2008 and 2010 that require strong capital standards for all
parties in the housing finance system and set strong standards for
sustainable mortgages for all. It is a basic responsibility of Congress
to eliminate excessive and/or unfair risk to the taxpayers, their
constituents as well as all of the American people.
CONCLUSION
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac continue to provide critical mortgage
capital to underserved communities. Together, they purchased more than
two million home loans or refinance mortgages in 2015, including almost
half a million loans to low- and moderate-income borrowers, and nearly
400,000 loans to borrowers of color.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Center for Responsible Lending, Testimony of Ms. Nikitra
Bailey. September 6, 2018, before the U.S. House of Representatives
Committee on Financial Services hearing on A Failure to Act: How a
Decade without GSE Reform Has Once Again Put Taxpayers at Risk.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
More than 50 years after enactment of the 1968 Fair Housing Act,
Congress has an opportunity to put some teeth into the promises made by
that law. Although racial and ethnic minorities combined already
represent a significant segment of the housing market, they are
projected to be an even larger portion of the market over the next one
or two decades. These households will be younger than current
traditional borrowers, and therefore have less credit history and they
will likely have lower incomes. As family structures and the labor
market continue to evolve, these new ``nontraditional'' borrowers will
require more flexible underwriting systems and access to affordable
housing products in order to become homeowners.
I recognize the impact that any changes, or even no changes, to
housing policy will have on our national and even global economy, and I
do not envy you the task ahead. Yet I pledge to you that the NAACP
stands ready to work with you to ensure that we get it right, and that
we do not make changes that will create unintended and harmful
consequences which we will come to regret. As I indicated at the
beginning of my testimony, it is my hope that when drafting this policy
we do not forget the impact our actions have today on every American,
in a manner that will shape our Nation's economic future.
Thank you again for inviting me here today to speak to you about
housing and home ownership. I stand ready to answer any and all of your
questions.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF ADAM J. LEVITIN
Professor of Law, Georgetown University Law Center
March 26, 2019
Witness Background Statement
Adam J. Levitin is a Professor of Law at the Georgetown University
Law Center, in Washington, DC, where he teaches courses in structured
finance, financial regulation, bankruptcy, and commercial law. He is
the author of Consumer Finance: Markets and Regulation (Wolters Kluwer
2018), Business Bankruptcy: Financial Restructuring and Modern
Commercial Markets (2d ed. Wolters Kluwer 2018), and, with Susan M.
Wachter, The American Mortgage: the Rise, Fall, and Rebirth of the U.S.
Housing Finance System (Harvard University Press, forthcoming 2019).
Professor Levitin has previously served as the Bruce W. Nichols
Visiting Professor of Law at Harvard Law School, as the Robert Zinman
Scholar in Residence at the American Bankruptcy Institute, and as
Special Counsel to the congressional Oversight Panel supervising the
Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). Professor Levitin has also
previously served on Consumer Financial Protection Bureau's Consumer
Advisory Board.
Before joining the Georgetown faculty, Professor Levitin practiced
in the Business Finance & Restructuring Department of Weil, Gotshal &
Manges, LLP in New York, and served as law clerk to the Honorable Jane
R. Roth on the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit.
Professor Levitin holds a J.D. from Harvard Law School, an M.Phil
and an A.M. from Columbia University, and an A.B. from Harvard College.
In 2013 he was awarded the American Law Institute's Young Scholar's
Medal.
Professor Levitin has not received any Federal grants or any
compensation in connection with his testimony, and he is not testifying
on behalf of any organization. The views expressed in his testimony are
solely his own.
______
Mr. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, Members of the Committee:
Good morning. Thank you for inviting me to testify at this hearing.
My name is Adam Levitin. I am a Professor of Law at the Georgetown
University, where I teach courses in structured finance, consumer
finance, bankruptcy, and commercial law. I appear hear today as an
academic who studies housing finance, without any economic interest
other than as a homeowner.
I am deeply concerned about the basic direction of the Chairman's
housing finance reform proposal outline. Today's housing finance market
is functioning well. Most creditworthy Americans are today able to
obtain mortgage financing, no matter where they live--metropolitan
areas or rural communities. They can readily obtain a long-term fixed-
rate mortgage, the product that has built the American middle class.
They can lock in an interest rate prior to closing, so they can budget
a home bid with confidence. And they can choose to get their loan from
thousands of institutions, including their local community banks and
credit unions.
The multi-guarantor system proposed in the Chairman's outline would
place all of this in jeopardy. Specifically, a multi-guarantor system
as envisioned will result in:
(1)
rural consumers being unable to obtain credit on equal terms to
urban peers;
(2)
consumers being unable to get 30-year fixed-rate mortgages on
competitive terms;
(3)
consumers being unable to readily get pre-closing rate-locks;
(4)
small lenders being shut out of access to the secondary market;
and
(5)
an unstable, procyclical market that will put taxpayer funds at
risk.
While my prediction here is dire, it is hardly speculative. Much of
this is what happened during the 2002-2008 housing bubble period, as
well as in the pre-New Deal mortgage market.
For example, how did Countrywide Financial and Washington Mutual
and other private-label securitization sponsors grow their market
shares in the bubble years? By lowering their underwriting standards,
such that the risk-adjusted price of mortgage credit fell, even as the
supply expanded.\1\ Private-label securitization financed primarily
nontraditional mortgages, not 30-year fixed-rate loans, and private-
label MBS were insufficiently standardized to trade to-be-announced
(TBA) market that enables lenders to offer pre-closing rate locks. By
the end of the bubble, we started to see private-label MBS with
geographically concentrated pools, such that if the bubble had gone on
longer, a national market would have ceased to exist. And the massive
underpricing of risk in the private-label MBS market enabled borrowers
to bid up home prices to an unsustainable level, making a crash all but
inevitable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See, e.g., Adam J. Levitin, Desen Lin & Susan M. Wachter (2019)
Mortgage Risk Premiums During the Housing Bubble, 58 Journal of Real
Estate Finance and Economics (2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The lesson from the bubble is that secondary market competition for
credit risk can be deleterious. A multi-guarantor system produced
harmful competition among guarantors for credit risk because it will
result in market segmentation and procyclical pricing.
Fortunately, there's a ready fix to the problem based on one
essential change: ensure that guarantors are taking on market-wide
credit risk, rather than the credit risk on a segment of the market. If
guarantors assume market-wide credit risk, the market will not segment
and guarantors will not price procyclically. This is best achieved
through a single-guarantor structure combined with back-end synthetic
credit-risk transfers (CRTs). Such a structure would be a formalization
(with some important adjustments) of the current, well-functioning
system, which is a single-guarantor system in all but name.
I elaborate on these points in the remainder of my written
testimony.
I. First, Do No Harm
The prime directive in dealing with the housing market should be
``do no harm.'' The housing finance system we have today works quite
well. We should not overlook this fact. Most creditworthy Americans are
today able to obtain mortgage financing. Moreover, under the current
system, there is:
(1)
a national mortgage market with access to credit on
substantially equal terms everywhere in United States;
(2)
widespread availability of the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage;
(3)
a viable to-be-announced (TBA) market that enables consumers to
get pre-closing rate locks;\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The TBA market is a market that trades forward contracts for
mortgage-backed securities guaranteed by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, or
Ginnie Mae. The settlement dates for TBA trades are often months after
the trade, so lenders are able to hedge the interest rate risk on
mortgages that they have committed to, but not yet funded. This enables
lenders to offer borrowers a pre-closing rate lock on the mortgage.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(4)
systemic stability;
(5)
competitive small lender access to secondary markets; and
(6)
support for affordable mortgage credit for low-to-moderate
income households.
In other words, the current system is producing the outcomes that
should be sought in any housing finance system; these are the metrics
by which any housing finance system should be judged.
Yes, Fannie and Freddie are still in conservatorship, and that
requires figuring out their future, but we have already seen
considerable advances in housing finance reform. These reforms started
with the Housing and Economic Reform Act of 2008 and have continued
with the substantial operational changes Fannie and Freddie have
undertaken while in conservatorship, most notably their adoption of
various credit-risk transfer (CRT) transactions to shift credit risk on
mortgages to capital markets and other investors.
As a result of these reforms, Fannie and Freddie have been
substantially derisked. Moreover, the mortgage market as a whole has
been substantially derisked through the broader legislative reforms of
mortgage lending in title XIV of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act and the subsequent activity of the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau. The reformed housing finance system we
have today is working, and we should be very cautious before we
undertake a wholesale revision of the system, particularly when there
is not consensus about the right way to proceed.
Unfortunately, as explained below, the multi-guarantor system, as
envisioned by in the Chairman's outline, will fail at all of these
metrics because of the destructive nature of competition among
guarantors.
II. Competition Can Be a Bug, As Well As a Feature
The starting point for the multi-guarantor system envisioned in the
HRO is that there should be competition among guarantors for credit
risk. The conceit is that as long as there are enough guarantors in the
market, no guarantor would be ``too big to fail,'' and therefore market
discipline resulting from competition is not to be feared.
While competitive markets are generally a good thing, competition
can have deleterious effects in some circumstances. One needs look no
further than Wells Fargo's false account scandal; the intense
competitive pressures on Wells encouraged corner cutting and worse.
A similar concern exists in housing finance markets, where
competition for market share can result in a race-to-the-bottom for
credit risk. This was, in essence was happened during the housing
bubble. Historically, Fannie and Freddie never really competed with
each other on credit risk; their underwriting guidelines were always
closely aligned. The growth of private-label mortgage securitization
after 2002, however, created alternative secondary market executions
that competed on credit risk. The result was a classic underwriting
race-to-the-bottom (the equivalent of an insurance rate war), because
the way for the investment banks that engaged in private-label
securitization to gain market share was to lower underwriting standards
and/or underprice for risk. Multiple investment banks competed with
each other to securitize mortgages, and they pushed Fannie and Freddie
into competition for market share too. The resulting glut of
underpriced mortgage credit fueled the housing bubble.
The housing bubble was the product of competition for credit risk
in housing finance in order to generate profits. Pursuing a multi-
guarantor model simply takes us right back to a new iteration of the
disastrous private-label market. Specifically, two adverse consequences
will follow from secondary market competition for mortgage credit risk.
First, competition will segment the market. And second, competition for
credit risk will produce procyclical pricing that will result in
unsustainably inflated home prices.
A. Competition Will Segment the Market Geographically and Render the
30-Year Fixed Uncompetitive
As guarantors compete for market share, they will be under enormous
pressure to engage in risk-based pricing. Risk-based pricing makes
sense in some circumstances--a borrower with a 740 FICO should not be
paying the same rate as an otherwise identical borrower with a 520 FICO
score. Yet risk-based pricing also segments markets, and certain types
of market segmentation are undesirable, as discussed below.
In particular, risk-based pricing unwinds cross-subsidization, yet
certain types of cross-subsidization are desirable in the market,
namely when the behavior being subsidized has positive spillover
effects on the entire market. Thus, we should want to subsidize
mortgage products that promote financial stability, and risk-based
pricing prevents such subsidization.
The Chairman's outline envisions that FHFA will regulate the
guarantors' pricing, but it is hard to imagine that FHFA would not
permit risk-based pricing; if it does not, there is no way for the
guarantors to distinguish their offerings based on price, and at that
point what is the purpose of having multiple competing guarantors?
1. Competition Among Guarantors Will Destroy the National Market
Risk-based pricing may segment markets geographically, destroying
the national housing finance market and drying up credit for rural
America. Currently we have a single national market. Similar borrowers
can obtain credit on substantially similar terms no matter whether they
live in an urban market or a rural market. This is in part because of
cross-subsidization within the system. Currently rural mortgages are
subsidized by urban borrowers,\3\ just as free rural delivery of the
mail is subsidized by urban customers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ I am not referring to USDA rural development loans, but simply
to conventional mortgage loans made to borrowers to lower-population
density regions of the United States. Two key factors add to the
riskiness of rural loans. First, appraisals are less reliable because
of fewer comparables. Second, rural property values are often tied to
the state of the agricultural or extractive economy in a way that
metropolitan property values are not tied to a single industry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Just as all Americans benefit from rural consumers being able to
participate on equal terms in a national informational market through
free rural delivery, so too do all Americans benefit from subsidization
of rural mortgages. Smaller mortgage markets are inherently less
stable, just as a smaller insurance pool would be, because smaller
markets are less able to spread risk. For example, suppose that instead
of a national mortgage market, there was an Iowa mortgage market. If
there were a bad soybean harvest one year, the spike in defaults might
result in the collapse of the entire Iowa mortgage market. But because
Iowa is part of a national market, there is the ability to weather a
bad soybean harvest. National markets enable risk-spreading, which
benefits all consumers with greater market stability, but national
markets make some level of cross-subsidization inevitable.
Competition will spur guarantors to engage in risk-based pricing,
and if this is geographic risk-based pricing, there will quickly be a
metropolitan market and a rural market. In that metropolitan market,
there will also be an affluent (white) suburban market and a lower-
income (minority) urban market. In short, we will return to the pre-New
Deal world of localized mortgage credit markets, with significant
disparities in credit terms between markets, and greater instability in
all markets.
Once there is segmentation, there is also likely to be cream-
skimming, in which guarantors simply cease serving riskier markets.
Borrowers in ``riskier'' markets, such as rural America, will pay more
. . . if the market will continue to serve them at all. Rural
communities will be at risk of becoming second class citizens in the
mortgage market. At the same time, however, those borrowers in other
``safer'' markets will themselves be at greater risk because they are
now part of a shallower and less diversified market.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Geographic risk-based pricing may also raise fair lending
issues.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In short, geographic risk-based pricing destroys the positive
externality of systemic stability that comes from a broad national
market. And is it contrary to a fairness principle that every
creditworthy borrower--urban or rural--should have the same chance of
owning a home responsibly.
Yet it is hard to gainsay the likelihood of geographic risk-based
pricing in a multiguarantor system. There will be tremendous market
pressure for it and FHFA can hardly forbid it, given that FHFA
authorized already authorized it for Fannie and Freddie in the form of
the Adverse Market Delivery Charges that penalized States with more
robust consumer protection laws.
2. Competition Among Guarantors Will Render the 30-Year Fixed-Rate
Mortgage Uncompetitively Expensive
Competition will also spur guarantors to price adversely to
mortgage products that entail greater risk for lenders: including
longer-term mortgages (because amortization is slower) and fixed-rate
products (because these are likely to be refinanced and thus cease to
generate guaranty fees). This means that guarantors are likely to price
adversely to the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage, such that the 30-year
fixed will become uncompetitively expensive relative to other products.
While the 30-year fixed is not the right product for all borrowers,
it is the crown jewel of the American housing finance system. The 30-
year fixed is a uniquely American product, and it has been the bedrock
of U.S. housing finance markets since the 1950s for good reasons:
The long-term and free-prepayment ability has given
homeowners substantial financial freedom (``optionality''). The
homeowner can pay off the mortgage if she moves or keep it
while staying in the house without having to refinance or
payoff the loan;
The fixed rate enables households to budget around what is
typically its largest monthly expense;
The fixed rate shields households from interest rate risk,
which consumers are otherwise ill-prepared to address;
The long term also keeps down monthly payments, which gives
households' economic flexibility and increases housing
affordability;
Full amortization means that households are constantly
building equity and avoid balloon payments; and
The 30-year term lets households telescope 30 years of
future earning power (roughly the time from household formation
to retirement) into current purchasing power.
No other mortgage product has so many benefits for both households and
financial market stability. The 30-year fixed is the financial product
that built the American middle class and made America a Nation of
homeowners.
Competition among guarantors for credit risk will make the 30-year
fixed as more expensive and disfavored product. This is not idle
speculation. The last time we saw vigorous competition for mortgage
credit risk--the housing bubble years of 2002-2008--were also marked by
the abandonment of the 30-year fixed in favor of nonsustainable,
nontraditional mortgage products financed through private-label
securitization.
The 30-year fixed is not a naturally occurring product--it exists
only because of extensive Government intervention in the mortgage
market. The 30-year fixed has a positive stability externality on the
entire mortgage market. But that externality cannot be captured by any
individual lender, so lenders do not account for it. That is why, left
to their own devices, lenders worldwide eschew long-term, fixed-rate
mortgages. The 30-year fixed is an example of Government intervention
to create and then preserve an important positive systemic stability
externality.
3. Competition Among Guarantors Will Undermine the TBA Market and
Prevent Consumers from Getting Pre-Closing Rate Locks
The Ginnie Mae wrap envisioned in the Chairman's outline would
standardize credit risk on all MBS across guarantors, but it would not
standardize interest rate risk. Rate risk relates in part to the
product characteristic and borrower characteristics; prepayment speeds
are different for different products and based on different borrower
characteristics. To the extent that guarantors differentiate themselves
with specialization, there will be different prepayment speeds
associated with different guarantors. For example, one guarantor might
specialize in 3/1 hybrid ARMs and another in 7/1 hybrid ARMs and
another in 15-year fixed-rate mortgages, each associated with a
different prepayment speed.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ 3/1 hybrid ARMs (a 3-year fixed-rate period followed by annual
readjustments of the interest rate) will generally have a faster
prepayment speed than 7/1 hybrid ARMs (a 7-year fixed-rate period
followed by annual readjustments of the interest rate) because of the
self-selection of borrowers into a loan with a shorter fixed-rate
period indicates an intention to move before the fixed-rate period
expires.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If different guarantors are associated with different prepayment
speeds, then Guarantor X's MBS will not be good delivery for Guarantor
Y's MBS or Guarantor Z's.\6\ As a result, there will not be one
national TBA market, but a separate TBA market for each guarantor, and
that might result in no TBA market whatsoever. The TBA market exists
because it is a deep and liquid market. If the TBA market were
splintered into a dozen smaller markets, none of them would have the
liquidity to support a reliable forward contract trade. As a result,
lenders would not be able to hedge out their rate risk between the time
a consumer is approved for a loan and closing. Lenders would likely
stop offering rate locks for consumers, leaving consumers exposed to
rate risk and potentially causing home sales to fail because of a
financing contingency.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ A Ginnie II structure would mitigate some of this as Ginnie II
MBS are blends of different seller/servicer MBS, but the particular
blends will still vary. If there is enough variation, the MBS will not
be good delivery for each other.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
B. Competition Will Result in Procyclical, Unstable Housing Finance
Markets
Housing is an inherently incomplete and inefficient market with
enormous externalities. Because of these differences, housing finance
markets cannot be expected to function like other, normal markets.
First, housing markets are incomplete markets because housing
cannot be shorted directly. A complete market should allow investors to
express both long and short positions; if only long positions are
available, prices will be skewed upwards. Housing markets cannot be
shorted directly because the short seller cannot meet its delivery
obligation because it cannot acquire the house even if the house price
falls. This means that there is only long pressure on home prices;
there are no direct shorts in the residential real estate market.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ One can take a short position on housing derivatively through a
credit default swap (CDS) that references a mortgage-backed security
(MBS) or index of MBS, but it is not a short position on a particular
mortgage or market, but rather on the set of mortgages that back a
particular MBS or the MBS represented in the index.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, and relatedly, housing is not a liquid asset. Part of this
is that housing is not standardized, and part is that there are high
transaction costs in the sale and purchase of housing. But part is
simply that homeowners are not looking to buy and sell all the time
because houses are not just a financial asset, but a consumable source
of shelter. This means that home prices are slow to adjust up or down
compared to the stock market.
Third, home prices are correlated geographically and serially. The
value of my house affects the value of neighboring houses and vice-
versa. This is geographic correlation. For example, if I leave a
rusting car up on cinderblocks on the front lawn, it will diminish the
value of my neighbor's house, whereas if I plant a beautiful garden, it
will increase the value of my neighbor's home. Similarly, if my house
goes into foreclosure, it will push down the value of neighboring
homes. In contrast, the value of my car generally does not affect the
value of yours. If I don't wash my car, it has no impact on the value
of your car, and if I trick out my ride with a sweet new stereo system
and fancy rims, the value of your car won't budge.
Likewise, home pricing is correlated serially. Most homes are
purchased on credit, and the amount of credit lenders will make
available depends on the lender's valuation of the house, the loan-to-
value (LTV) ratio. Valuations are based on appraisals, and appraisals
are generally based on the sale prices of comparable properties. So if
housing prices have been rising for a type of property--say split-
levels in the neighborhood--then appraisals will also go up and lenders
will make more credit available while holding the LTV constant. The
result is that the prospective buyer will bid up the house price, thus
making home prices serially correlated.
Finally, housing is different because the value of my house (and
hence yours given the geographic correlation) depends in part on the
credit terms I receive, the constraints to borrowing or the lack
thereof. Because most homes are purchased on credit, credit terms are
major determinants of home pricing.
If credit terms are tightened due to an exogenous shock, housing
prices will fall. Guarantors will respond to a falling market by
tightening credit terms, further destabilizing the market. Guarantor X
does not care what effect its risk premia have on the value of a home
that is collateral for lender Y. Lender X is simply concerned that it
price in the risk of the falling market for itself, without regard that
its pricing will have a procyclical effect that will harm guarantor Y.
More generally, neither lender X nor lender Y cares about the systemic
risk externality that results from overly risky lending practices. The
only way that the systemic externality will be priced is when a party
bears the risk of the entire mortgage market. Any segmentation of the
market will fail to price for the risk.
Unstable markets also undermine the basic conceit of the multi-
guarantor system: that no guarantor will be ``too big to fail.'' Yet
the instability a multi-guarantor system will generate will affect all
guarantors, and the fact that they will be monolines will ensure that
they are all equally exposed. Thus, a multi-guarantor system raises the
possibility of correlated failure, such that it will not matter that no
entity is ``too big to fail'' if the entire system goes down.
C. Competition Among Guarantors Will Cut Off Secondary Market Access
for Small Lenders
A multi-guarantor system would also disadvantage small lenders--
community banks, credit unions, and small mortgage banks. The Senate
Banking Committee often expresses bipartisan concern about the
disappearance of community banks, but it is hard to think of a reform
that would be more devastating to community banks, credit unions, and
small mortgage banks.
Under the current system, small lenders are able to sell their
mortgages directly to Fannie and Freddie at a ``cash window,'' meaning
that they can be paid in cash, rather than in the form of Fannie/
Freddie MBS, which they would then have to sell. Many small lenders are
not set up for selling MBS themselves.
A multi-guarantor system would not necessarily have any ``cash
window.'' Instead, small lenders that want cash might have to either
sell to an aggregator--which would take a middleman's cut, thereby
reducing the profitability of mortgage lending for small lenders--or
sell to a guarantor.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Nothing in the Chairman's outline would prevent aggregators or
guarantors from being affiliates of megabanks, which would mean that
the megabank could then leverage its mortgage purchase to attempt to
cross-sell the consumer and take business away from the community bank.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There is little reason, however, to expect guarantors to want to
serve small lenders. Guarantors assume credit risk on lenders because
the lender makes various representations and warranties about the
mortgages that it sells or gets guarantied. If the loans fail to
conform to the representations and warranties, then the guarantor must
look to the lender to recover any resulting damages. As a result,
guarantors have an interest in the financial strength of the lenders
with which they do business. Ten-million dollars in representation and
warranty claims is immaterial to a megabank like Chase or Wells Fargo,
but it might be catastrophic for a community bank. As a result,
guarantors will prefer to do business with large lenders. Moreover, the
cost of conducting diligence on a lender is roughly the same
irrespective of lender size, so guarantors are incentivized to prefer
dealing with large-volume lenders.
The Chairman's outline would prohibit guarantors from offering
volume discounts, but it does not undo the fact that guarantors have
reasons to prefer dealing with larger lenders. Guarantors can readily
find other ways to prefer larger lenders, however. For example,
guarantors could have different lender approval standards for large and
small lenders. Guarantors could offer lower rates for larger lenders
(based on the lender's size, rather than sale volume). Guarantors could
demand fewer representations and warranties from larger lenders.
Guarantors could have sufficiently complex servicing requirements that
small lenders could not retain servicing. Guarantors could charge more
for a ``cash window'' execution than a swap execution. Merely
prohibiting volume discounts is insufficient to ensure equal treatment
of small lenders when guarantors have reason to prefer dealing with
larger lenders.
As a result, small lenders are unlikely to receive the same sort of
equal access as they have today in the Fannie/Freddie system. Without
this equal access, small lenders will be uncompetitive in the mortgage
market. The irony, then, of a multi-guarantor system is that it pushes
the market toward bigness on the mortgage origination front, even as it
encourages competition among guarantors. In other words, robust
guarantor competition would have the perverse outcome of hurting small
lenders and concentrating the mortgage market in the hands of
megabanks.
D. Competition Will Harm Affordability
Normally, we think of competition as resulting in lower prices for
consumers. In housing finance competition in the secondary market works
differently, however. Because of secondary market competition's
negative externality on systemic
stability, secondary market competition may actually increase mortgage
costs as guarantors try to play catchup to price for the risk created
by segmented, unstable markets. For example, suppose guarantor X has
tried to gain market share in the California market by reducing its
risk premia. The result will be home prices in California being bid up
because of easier credit, and that in turn will boost appraisals and
encourage greater lending volume from other lenders, enabling a further
bidding up of home prices. So while credit might be cheaper, it will be
offset by higher home prices.
Taking this scenario a step further, however, the increased home
prices here are divorced from fundamentals and are thus unsustainable.
Given that guarantors are aware that any other guarantor's reduction in
risk premia can set off a bubble, guarantors will start pricing for the
instability created by the competition. The result in the end should be
higher costs of credit because lenders have to try to price in the risk
of market instability.
I appreciate that the Chairman's outline recognizes a need for
support of affordable housing for low-to-moderate income households.
Broadening housing finance markets benefits everyone. It not only
benefits low-to-moderate income (LTMI) households, but it benefits more
affluent households by fostering a cohort of homeowners who can
eventually move up into more expensive housing, helping to address in
part the liquidity challenges referenced above. Moreover, to the extent
the market is broader, it will be more stable, just as the vast number
of cars has helped the stability of our auto insurance markets.
The Chairman's outline envisions support for affordable housing
through a tax-and-transfer system. Such a system is not in any way
inherent to a multi-guarantor structure. While the key question is what
level of support would exist, I would urge the Committee to support
affordable housing through cross-subsidization, rather than tax-and-
transfer, as part of any approach to housing finance reform.
Both approaches can achieve the same ends. Cross-subsidization,
however, allows for a nimbler, market-based approach. If market
entities are tasked with ensuring a certain level of LTMI lending, they
will figure out how to allocate the cost of doing so among customers.
This means that if there are shifts within housing markets, such as a
rapid rise in home prices in a region, that market entities can adjust
in real time to ensure a supply of credit to LTMI households in that
region. In contrast, a tax-and-transfer system will inherently lag the
market, just as conforming loan limits have. It gets updated only when
Congress or a regulator gets around to it. All of this counsels for
preferring a system of mandated levels of LTMI lending with cross-
subsidization as the funding mechanism, rather than tax-and-transfer,
all else being equal.
III. A Simpler, Stabler Alternative: a Single-Guarantor System
The multi-guarantor system, as envisioned in the Chairman's
outline, will result in a procyclical and unstable housing market that
will fail to provide widespread availability of the 30-year fixed or
pre-closing rate locks, and will fail to provide
access to mortgage credit nationwide, particularly in rural
communities. This is because competition among guarantors will result
in segmentation of the market and procyclical risk-pricing.
A better approach is a single-guarantor system that features back-
end synthetic credit-risk transfers. Such a system would involve a
single entity guarantying MBS.\9\ This entity could be part of the
Federal Government or have a credit line with the Federal Government.
The MBS investors would assume the interest rate risk, while the
guarantor entity would assume the rate risk. Because there would be
only a single guarantor, there could not be market segmentation.\10\
Moreover, because the single-guarantor would be holding credit risk for
the entire system, so it would be incentivized not to price
procyclically because such procyclical pricing would only drive up
defaults.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ A single-guarantor structure could be run through Ginnie Mae,
through a public utility, or through Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac (as in
our current bifurcated single-guarantor system). I do not express an
opinion here on this level of design detail.
\10\ An alternative way to achieve market-wide risk exposure would
be to require the guarantors in a multi-guarantor system to cross-
guaranty each other. That is the first-loss risk would still remain on
individual guarantors, but if a guarantor failed, all of the other
guarantors would be jointly liable for the failed guarantor's guaranty
obligations. If, and only if all guarantors failed--that is a
catastrophic failure of the entire mortgage market--would Ginnie Mae
step in with its backstop. This sort of mutualization of risk is hardly
novel. It is the system that has existed successfully for the Federal
Home Loan Banks since 1932. It is also the basic design of
clearinghouses that are used across financial markets. And it is the
design of the FDIC--a private mutual insurance fund with an implicit
Government backstop.
Mutualization produces an enormous moral hazard--every guarantor is
incentivized to engage in excessively risky behavior because part of
the tab is born by the other guarantors. But because the guarantors all
recognize the moral hazard, they will respond by regulating each other,
thereby keeping the risk in check. Individual guarantors might end up
focusing on different market segments in terms of products, borrower
profiles, or geography, but through the cross-guaranties, they would
all be bearing market-wide risk, which would incentivize for them to
price in the externalities of correlation risk.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Because there would be only a single guarantor, the MBS would all
be good delivery for each other and would support a robust TBA market.
The guarantor entity would then swap out the noncatastrophic credit
risk on the back-end through the issuance of credit-linked notes.\11\
These credit-linked notes would transfer the credit risk to capital
market investors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\A credit-linked note is a securitization of credit default
swaps. It provides a way for capital market investors to assume credit
risk on a targeted asset pool without having to own that asset pool.
The way this would work here is that Ginnie Mae would enter into a
credit default swap or swaps on a reference pool of mortgages with a
special purpose entity that it has created. The special purpose entity
would fund itself by selling notes to capital market investors
(presumably all institutional investors) and, as long as the swap
remained outstanding, the special purpose entity would invest the funds
in Treasury securities. Ginnie would take the short (protection buyer)
position and the special purpose entity would take the long (protection
seller) position, such that as long as the mortgages performed, Ginnie
would make payments to the special purpose entity, which would use the
payments to pay on the notes to the investors. If the mortgages failed
to perform to some specified level, the special purpose entity would
make a payment to Ginnie, using the funds it accumulated from selling
the notes to the investors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If adverse market conditions obtained and these credit-risk
transfers were not possible, the guarantor would continue guarantying
mortgages, thereby ensuring a stable housing finance system, relying on
the strength of the Federal balance sheet.\12\ Once the adverse market
conditions passed, the guarantor could engage in credit-risk transfers
once again, including on the whole book of mortgages it had guaranteed
while the market was in turmoil.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Critically, there is no greater Federal Government exposure in
a single-guarantor system than in a multi-guarantor system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There are several additional benefits from using back-end CRTs
using credit-linked notes rather than multiple front-end guarantors:
(1)
The use of credit-linked notes eliminates the risk of guarantor
failure that exists in a multi-guarantor system. Credit-linked
notes are, by definition, pre-funded by investors, so there is
no risk of the single guarantor ever getting left holding the
bag except to the extent that it cannot place the credit-linked
notes, which would be an indication of a full-blown market
collapse.
(2)
The market for credit-linked note investors would be much deeper
than the market for specialist mortgage guarantor entities.
Instead of perhaps a dozen entities competing in the market,
the credit-linked note market would be open to all manner of
institutional investors and perhaps also the general public.
Such a deeper market would be much more liquid and more
efficient, which would help reduce the costs of mortgage
financing to all consumers.
(3)
There would be substantial operational efficiencies in having a
single credit-linked note issuance program housed in a single
guarantor versus a dozen different guarantors each replicating
mortgage underwriting and securities issuance activities.
(4)
There would be no question about small institution access to the
system. Small lenders could deal with the single guarantor
through a cash window, just as they can with Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac or through the Federal Home Loan Banks that serve
as Ginnie issuers.
A single-guarantor approach is not novel. It is what we have today
in all but name. Most of the mortgage market today is guaranteed by
Fannie and Freddie, which as a single guarantor, even though they are
separate entities: they are both under common control through the
conservatorship, they both have capital support agreements with
Treasury, their underwriting guidelines are substantially the same; and
come this summer, they will be issuing a single security. Indeed, with
their capital support agreements, there is effectively only one
guarantor, the U.S. Government.
Fannie and Freddie have also been engaged in back-end CRT
transactions (Connecticut Avenue Securities and STACR, respectively)
for the past 6 years. The Fannie and Freddie CRTs have been on
geographically undifferentiated pools of 30-year fixed-rate mortgages.
While the Fannie and Freddie CRTs have not been tested in a down
market, Fannie and Freddie maintain the flexibility to keep supporting
the market by assuming credit risk without CRTs when adverse conditions
prevail.
The fact that we currently have what is a single-guarantor system
in all but name has a tremendously important implication: we know that
a single-guarantor system works. We have a national housing market that
ensures credit availability on substantially similar terms to similar
creditworthy borrowers nationwide. There is a robust TBA market, and
competitive access for small lenders to secondary markets. The 30-year
fixed is widely available creating broad systemic stability benefits,
and the limited competition between Fannie and Freddie on the front-end
of the guaranty market adds to systemic stability. More could be done
to support affordable mortgage credit, but the current system has both
a cross-subsidy mechanism and a tax-and-transfer mechanism in place for
providing such support. A single-guarantor system is tried and true; a
multi-guarantor system is not in the conventional market.
While we have a single-guarantor system in all but name, there are
a pair of important reforms that should be undertaken before
formalizing such a system. First, any mandate for a single-guarantor
entity to use CRTs should have an adverse market condition exception
that allows it to expand its own book of business countercyclically
when necessary, with the expectation that they will eventually transfer
the risk when market conditions settle.
Second, the single-guarantor entity should be prohibited from
engaging in geographic segmentation on its CRTs. At present, Fannie and
Freddie CRTs transfer risk on national mortgage pools because Fannie
and Freddie each serve a national market. But nothing currently
prevents Fannie and Freddie from having CRTs on more harmful, finely
segmented pools, including geographically segmented pools. Indeed,
Fannie and Freddie already have segmented their CRT pools into high-
and low-LTV pools. A single-guarantor entity should be required to
engage CRTs (subject to an adverse market exception) on the basis of
its entire book of business, rather than on a segmented basis.
Conclusion
The multi-guarantor proposal envisioned in the Chairman's outline
is fundamentally flawed because it would generate destructive
competition for credit risk in the secondary market that would result
in an unstable, procyclical housing finance system that would fail to
ensure the widespread availability of the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage,
fail to provide preclosing rate locks to consumers, disadvantage small
lenders, and leave rural America without adequate mortgage financing. A
better approach would be a single-guarantor structure with back-end
credit-risk transfers that taps into a broader pool of investors and
ensures that competition for credit risk does not segment the mortgage
market or produce procyclical pricing.
2019, Adam J. Levitin
RESPONSE TO WRITTEN QUESTION OF SENATOR BROWN FROM SUE ANSEL
Q.1. There was extensive conversation about the need for all
guarantors to serve a national market. Do you believe than
Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and any other guarantor serving the
multifamily market and providing a catastrophic Government
backstop should also be required to serve a national market?
A.1. Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and other guarantors with access
to a Government guarantee should be required to serve a
national market. Capital must be consistently available across
all markets. Further, one way the GSEs have been able to
produce such a stellar performance record in multifamily is by
being able to build a balanced book of business, diversified by
product type, sponsor and geography. Geographic
diversification, combined with the variety of property types
served by the Enterprises (including higher-end properties,
traditional workforce/middle income multifamily rental
housing), as well as targeted affordable housing properties
(such as Section 8 and Low-Income Housing Tax Credit
properties) are an important feature of their design, allowing
them to operate safely and soundly through market cycles.
It is important to note that the broad market presence in
place today for both Enterprises allows them to provide capital
for apartments located in smaller secondary and tertiary
markets that might not otherwise attract sufficient capital
from other private capital debt providers. The national
footprint of both Enterprises today helps the GSEs manage risk
with a broad market perspective, while ensuring that there is a
sufficient supply of liquidity in severe market downturns for
all markets. It is a reasonable concern, based on private
capital behavior during the 2008 financial crisis, that some
geographies would be disadvantaged and experience harmful
impacts on housing affordability absent a national mandate for
guarantors--requiring them to facilitate capital in all markets
throughout the business cycle. Any failure to ensure sufficient
liquidity for all types of apartments will have a spillover
effect that could be disastrous for America's renters.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM SUE
ANSEL
Q.1. In its current form, do you think Ginnie Mae could play
the role the Chairman's proposal envisions?
A.1. First, it is important to note that the outline is not
specific regarding the role that GNMA would play relative to
the multifamily business. However, if GNMA were to provide a
Government guarantee for multifamily as outlined for single-
family, an extensive review would be required of the overall
significant economic, technical, personnel, servicing,
counterparty issues and capital market impacts that this
decision would create. In its current form, NMHC and NAA are
concerned that GNMA does not have the capacity to play the role
the Chairman envisions as the agency is constituted.
Q.1.a. Do you have any concerns on the proposed sale or
transfer of the Common Securitization Platform (CSP) to Ginnie
Mae? How would such a sale work best in your view?
A.1.a. The original design and present implementation of the
CSP is solely to serve the single-family market, and today it
does not have the capability to be used by the multifamily
market. Each Enterprise has developed distinct multifamily
platforms: Fannie Mae's program (known as the Delegated
Underwriting and Servicing program or DUS) delegates
underwriting to approved seller/services, while Freddie Mac
issues senior/subordinated notes to finance most of its
multifamily originations, primarily through its K-deal
structure. If the CSP were enhanced to handle multifamily
business, it would require significant modifications. Further,
if the decision is made to enhance CSP for multifamily, it
would be important to ensure that it does not favor a single
execution and, at minimum, could accommodate the existing two
unique platforms of the GSE multifamily businesses that safely
and successfully serve the marketplace. Without significant
further design and development changes, the use of the CSP will
solely benefit the single-family market.
Q.1.b. Is Ginnie Mae's staff adequately trained and compensated
to take on a large new market?
A.1.b. At the end of 2018, the combined GSE multifamily
portfolio stood at $557 billion, whereas the Ginnie Mae
multifamily portfolio was $118 billion or approximately \1/5\
the size of the GSEs. NMHC and NAA have serious concerns on
whether Ginnie Mae has the
expertise or infrastructure necessary to take on this
significant expansion of serving a much larger multifamily
Government-guaranteed securities portfolio. As an example of
our concerns, we note that Ginnie Mae has not received an
opinion on its audited statements for the past 5 years and
continues to have material deficiencies identified by its
auditors. The duration and magnitude of the deficiencies raise
concerns about dramatically expanding Ginnie Mae's role. We
believe thorough examination of potential risks posed to the
housing finance system is required to determine whether a
single entity that is currently comprised of 150 personnel--
with most of the key functional process steps outsourced to
third parties--can adequately handle this responsibility and
its associated process and risk management components.
Q.2. Do you support or oppose creating a single utility to take
on the catastrophic risk? Please elaborate on your response.
A.2. Housing finance reform can take a multitude of forms,
including a single utility model. Many see the utility model as
a way to manage the returns and market presence of guarantors.
This seeks to address the conflict between serving a public
role while managing private shareholder returns. NMHC and NAA
believe that the utility model could be an option if structured
in a way that meets our stated principles of reform, which are
to:
LMaintain an explicit, appropriately priced, and
paid-for Federal guarantee for multifamily backed
mortgage securities available in all markets at all
times;
LRecognize the inherent differences of the
multifamily business from the single-family business;
LPromote private market competition;
LProtect taxpayers by keeping the concept of the
Enterprises' multifamily first-loss risk sharing
models;
LRetain the successful components of the existing
multifamily programs in whatever succeeds them; and
LAvoid market disruptions during the transition to a
new finance system.
Q.2.a. If you oppose a single utility model and prefer a single
guarantor platform or a multiple guarantor platform, please
explain what changes should be instituted to ensure that
community banks and credit unions are able to access the
secondary market easily?
A.2.a. NMHC and NAA have not recommended a specific structure
to be used for housing finance reform. Instead, we have
continued to stress the importance of doing no harm when it
comes to the multifamily sector. The bursting of the housing
bubble exposed serious flaws in our Nation's housing finance
system. However, the very successful multifamily programs of
the GSEs were not part of the meltdown and have generated over
$37 billion in net profits to the Treasury since the two parent
companies were placed in conservatorship. Preservation of the
liquidity provided by the GSEs is critical in all markets
during all economic cycles. For this reason, as Congress works
to reform the housing finance system, we urge lawmakers to
recognize the unique needs of the apartment industry. We
believe that the goals of a reformed multifamily housing
finance system should build-on and retain the successful
components of the existing multifamily programs in whatever
succeeds them and must: 1) Maintain an explicit Federal
guarantee for multifamily backed mortgage securities available
in all markets at all times and paid for by all users; 2)
Recognize unique multifamily risk-management characteristics
when crafting reform legislation; and 3) Retain the successful
components of the existing multifamily programs in whatever
succeeds them.
With that said, there are a variety of structures that
could be adapted for the multifamily sector. Each structure,
however, presents its own unique set of challenges for the
industry. For example, today, the Enterprises' respective
multifamily businesses have developed distinct multifamily
platforms: Fannie Mae's program (known as the Delegated
Underwriting and Servicing program or DUS) and Freddie Mac
issues senior/subordinated notes to finance most of its
multifamily originations, primarily through its K-deal
structure. A single guarantor platform would perhaps envision a
consolidation of the two platforms, which could serve to be
extremely disruptive to the market.
Today, the GSE multifamily market totals $557 billion, with
Fannie's share 21 percent and Freddie's 19 percent. The
regulator of a reformed system should be empowered to analyze
and decide on the number of new guarantors allowed to enter the
market, if any. At minimum, the analysis should examine how
many guarantors the market can support.
Q.2.b. How will small institutions' business practices and
compliance costs change under a single utility vs. a single
guarantor vs. multiple guarantors?
A.2.b. There are a variety of structures that could be adapted
to the multifamily sector. Each structure, however, presents
its own unique set of challenges for the sector and would have
to be evaluated on its own merits to determine impacts to not
only small institutions' business and compliance costs but to
the broader market as well.
Q.3. Do you support or oppose Fannie and Freddie selling their
multifamily housing businesses?
A.3. The Chairman's outline proposes that the multifamily
businesses be sold and operated as independent guarantors. The
meaningful differences between the single family and
multifamily sectors, both in how they operate and how they have
performed,
require different solutions to avoid putting at risk the 39
million Americans who rely on the apartment industry for their
housing. We appreciate the distinct and separate treatment that
the outline suggests relative to the multifamily business. The
sale of the multifamily businesses is certainly an option that
deserves consideration, but we believe there are critical
details such as how to minimize market disruption, what is the
appropriate transition period, appropriate capitalization of
the new independent guarantors and preservation of the
enterprises distinct multifamily executions--just to name a few
that must be considered as the Committee works to craft the
specifics surrounding such as sale.
Q.3.a. If the multifamily housing guarantee businesses were
sold, who would buy them?
A.3.a. Until the structure and specifics of a reformed system
are identified, it is difficult to determine who might be
interested in purchasing the multifamily housing guarantee
businesses. There are a number of issues that will be important
to clarify for market participants prior to the sale (or
purchase) of the multifamily businesses; such as how the
businesses will operate, limits on who can buy or own the new
businesses, capitalization, allowable business and products
lines, limits or constraints on their existing business,
conditions and requirements for access to the Government
guarantee, transition time, access to the existing
infrastructure and resolution of the legacy portfolio.
Q.3.b. How would the new guarantee structure affect the
multifamily housing market? Please be specific.
A.3.b. The guarantee structure for multifamily is not specified
in the Chairman's HRO. However, there are a variety of
structures that could be adapted for the multifamily sector.
Each structure, however, presents its own unique set of
challenges for the sector and would have to be evaluated on its
own merits to determine impacts to the broader multifamily
market.
Q.4. What would you recommend Congress do to ensure that a
housing finance law would provide more wealth-building,
sustainable home-ownership opportunities for Latinos, African
Americans, Asian Pacific Americans and Native Americans?
A.4. Congress should support a balanced housing policy that
respects the rights of individuals to choose the housing option
that best meets their financial and lifestyle needs. Housing
finance reform should promote wealth-building for all
households. People choose to live in apartments for many
reasons, and their choice should not limit their ability to
enjoy financial security. We need to promote policies that give
people flexibility to build wealth whether they rent or own
their home. Apartment owners and operators have long called for
policymakers to better enable our Nation's renters' ability to
build a financial profile that allows them to attain the many
benefits that come with it. For example, credit reporting
agencies have not captured a complete picture of the financial
performance of renters. Existing credit scoring models that
drive approvals, interest rates and other terms of apartment
leases, car loans, insurance products, home mortgages and other
financial products often do not accurately reflect the
creditworthiness of renters. Apartment living now attracts a
wide variety of Americans and will continue to do so, making it
all the more important that credit reports and scoring models
are modernized and adopted to prevent our nations renters from
being put at a financial disadvantage.
Q.5. Do you think Chair Crapo's housing finance reform proposal
would shrink the home-ownership gap between white and minority
households in this country? If not, what would?
A.5. NMHC and NAA are primarily focused on the rental industry
and do not have specific knowledge or information on this
specific question.
Q.6. Do you have concerns regarding the proposal to create a
bipartisan board of directors to govern FHFA? If such a board
was
enacted, would it be able to function without a quorum if
appointments were delayed?
A.6. NMHC and NAA do not have concerns about the creation of a
bipartisan board of directors to govern FHFA. Creating a
bipartisan board of directors is similar to how other financial
regulators operate, such as the Securities and Exchange
Commission and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
(FDIC).
Q.7. Are there any particular reforms that have stemmed from
HERA and the creation of FHFA that you feel should be preserved
or expanded as part of any housing finance reform?
A.7. The Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 (HERA)
established the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), as
regulator of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, with responsibility
for the effective supervision, regulation and housing mission
oversight of both Enterprises. NMHC and NAA have consistently
advocated for a strong and independent regulator with
considerable expertise in multifamily lending--and we believe
the establishment of FHFA was an important step in that
respect. Further, we have previously recommended that any
regulator of the Enterprises be provided sufficient financial
resources and have reasonable independence from political
influence, which were both improvements made in HERA. In order
to best monitor and manage market risk and respond to capital
needs in the market, we have also encouraged any Enterprise
regulator to have established channels for collaboration with
other prudential regulators, associations and other
institutions that oversee and represent banks, insurance
companies, the private securities markets (CMBS) and pension
funds. As designed under HERA, FHFA reflects many of these
goals.
Importantly, HERA requires FHFA to ensure the Enterprises
operate in a safe and sound manner and foster liquid,
efficient, competitive and resilient national housing finance
markets. The mandate to promote safety and soundness, while
also ensuring broadly available access to capital for housing
finance, is critical to promoting taxpayer protection and
meeting the housing needs of all communities. These principles
from HERA are valuable and worth preserving as part of any
housing finance reform effort.
Q.8. Do you have concerns with the Chair's proposal? If so,
please explain why and what amendment you would suggest to
remedy these concerns.
A.8. We commend the Chairman for putting forth an outline to
start the debate on crafting a housing finance reform proposal.
However, the Chairman's outline does not include any
significant detail relative to multifamily. While the outline
suggests that the multifamily businesses will be sold and
operated as independent guarantors, there is very little detail
on several important issues. Should the Chairman's proposal
proceed, we would seek clarification on how the businesses will
operate; limits on new market entrants; how much and what form
of capital will be required; what type of business and product
will be allowed to conduct; if there will be limits or
constraints on their existing business; what conditions and
requirements will be required for access to the Government
guarantee; and details on the transition to the new status.
While the outline includes an explicit, Federal Government
guaranty on eligible single-family MBS, it does not specify
whether this guaranty would be available to multifamily
mortgages. In addition, in contrast to the previous so-called
Johnson-Crapo proposal, the outline proposes that the explicit
guaranty would be provided and managed by Ginnie Mae. Using
GNMA as a guarantor would take major investment in
infrastructure, personnel, technology and require major charter
changes. Ginnie Mae, today, does not have the capacity nor
expertise to handle this task.
Addressing the unique needs of the multifamily business
will require separate consideration. We urge the Committee to
build on, and retain, the successful components of the existing
multifamily programs in whatever succeeds them. Single-family
and multifamily follow different processes for origination,
financing, management and operations, have divergent
performance records and
require distinct reform solutions. Failure to consider the
unique characteristics inherent in the multifamily business
could result in capital market dislocations that could disrupt
housing for millions of renters. NMHC and NAA look forward to
working closely with the Chairman, Ranking Member and Members
of the Committee to identify specific provisions that will
address the unique needs of the multifamily industry.
Q.9. Are there any proposed changes in the Chairman's proposal
you think make our housing finance system better? Please define
those.
A.9. Our country is experiencing a housing affordability crisis
with current and future implications for families, communities
and overall nationwide economic growth and prosperity. The
Chairman's proposal reflects an acknowledgment of this housing
affordability challenge, with the establishment of dedicated
funding streams for programs to address the home-ownership and
rental housing needs in underserved and low-income communities.
We believe additional resources are necessary as private-sector
stakeholders and policymakers continue to confront the housing
affordability challenge. We encourage the Committee to remain
focused on this issue as the legislative process moves forward.
For all programs funded through a dedicated fee akin to the
Chairman's outline, we believe participation eligibility and
access to capital should be as broadly available to as many
market participants as possible, in order to best leverage
private sector expertise and maximize the impact of those
resources.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR BROWN FROM EDWARD J.
DeMARCO
Q.1. You stated that small lenders would have more options
under the Chairman's outline because there would be a cash
window at each guarantor. But the Chairman's outline permits,
but does not require, each guarantor to have a cash window.
Q.1.a. Do you believe each guarantor of Government-backed
securities should be required to have a cash window in any
housing finance system?
A.1.a. No. The Chairman's model would provide small lenders
more options for selling their loans than they have under the
current system. The outline envisions that a reformed Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac could continue to operate their cash
windows. Additionally, the outline provides for the
organization of new guarantors and new aggregators, which could
purchase loans from smaller banks. Finally, lenders of any size
or business model that prefer not to use a cash window may have
the option to issue mortgages directly into the Ginnie Mae
securities.
Q.1.b. Do you believe that pricing should be equitable across
all guarantee structures (including the cash window, lender
swap, or any other transactions)?
A.1.b. The Chairman's outline would prohibit volume-based
discounts on the guarantee fee or other terms. We believe that
competition from new entrants would also contribute to
equitable pricing for all participants.
Q.2.a. The Housing Policy Council represents organizations that
would be eligible to be guarantors under the Chairman's
outline.
Would any type of institution in the market today (outside of
existing guarantors Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac) be well-suited
to being a guarantor?
A.2.a. Mortgage Insurance companies have the capital,
analytical capability, and the mortgage credit-risk expertise
to become guarantors in a new system. We believe that other
sources of private capital would also step forward to enter the
system as guarantors. Any new entrant would have to meet the
standards set by the Federal regulators of the new system.
Q.2.b. Do you believe any of your members would be interested
in becoming guarantors?
A.2.b. Perhaps. I believe any potential new entrant would want
to be assured that the housing finance reform legislation
actually creates a competitive landscape rather than continues
the Federal advantages bestowed just on the existing GSE
guarantors. If a competitive landscape with a level playing
field were achieved, then I think that some mortgage insurance
companies would consider becoming guarantors. The Chairman's
outline would prohibit banks from becoming guarantors.
Q.2.c. What is it about the mortgage guarantee business that
appeals or does not appeal to your members?
A.2.c. Our members believe that private capital is ready to
take on more of the mortgage credit risk in a new system and
homeowners and the system would benefit from well-regulated
competition with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. More competition
should benefit the customers of HPC members--home buyers--by
expanding the channels of capital seeking to back residential
mortgage loans. It should benefit taxpayers by relieving them
of their concentrated exposure to the decisions of Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac. It should benefit the global financial system
by reducing or eliminating the enormous systemic risk at Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac, which we witnessed in 2008. And it should
benefit the market support for affordable housing by
encouraging new entrants willing and able to develop new
approaches to expanding home ownership opportunities.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM
EDWARD J. DeMARCO
Q.1. In its current form, do you think Ginnie Mae could play
the role the Chairman's proposal envisions?
A.1. Ginnie Mae can play the role envisioned in the Chairman's
proposal. The significant growth in Ginnie Mae's business over
the last decade demonstrates that its core functions are
scalable. Nonetheless, in the system envisioned in the
Chairman's outline, Ginnie Mae would need additional resources
and staffing. Of course, the same could be said for any
alternative to Ginnie Mae even before accounting for all the
capabilities Ginnie Mae has today that any alternative would
need to create.
Q.1.a. Do you have any concerns on the proposed sale or
transfer of the Common Securitization Platform (CSP) to Ginnie
Mae? How would such a sale work best in your view?
A.1.a. The sale or transfer of the CSP to Ginnie Mae would be
appropriate in the context of the Crapo outline. Upgrades in
the CSP would be needed to enable additional issuers (beyond
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac) to connect and conduct business on
the platform. The CSP would also need expanded functionality
beyond the
limited set of bond administration and disclosure features
available today. In contrast, Ginnie Mae's platform is set up
to handle multiple issuers and additional securitization tasks,
but today cannot support a fully digital securitization
environment. FHFA has the authority to provide for the sale or
transfer of the CSP.
Q.1.b. Is Ginnie Mae's staff adequately trained and compensated
to take on a large new market?
A.1.b. Ginnie Mae has the core expertise and can be the
foundation for the organization to play the role envisioned.
However, additional staffing and a revision of the pay scale
would be appropriate given the scale and scope of its proposed
new responsibilities.
Q.2. Do you support or oppose creating a single utility to take
on the catastrophic risk? Please elaborate on your response.
A.2. HPC supports a single Government entity, preferably a
Government-managed mortgage insurance fund, to manage the
catastrophic credit risk associated with a full faith and
credit Government guarantee.
Q.2.a. If you oppose a single utility model and prefer a single
guarantor platform or a multiple guarantor platform, please
explain what changes should be instituted to ensure that
community banks and credit unions are able to access the
secondary market easily?
A.2.a. Under the Chairman's proposed outline, small lenders
would have more options to sell their loans than under the
current GSE duopoly. If they prefer, they can continue to
follow the same process they currently have and sell to the
full-service guarantors that succeed Fannie and Freddie or to
the new guarantors entering the system. They could also choose
to sell their loans to a loan aggregator. Their options to
access the secondary market will increase.
Q.2.b. How will small institutions' business practices and
compliance costs change under a single utility vs. a single
guarantor vs. multiple guarantors?
A.2.b. Their business practices and compliance costs will not
have to change if they choose to continue with a guarantor that
provides ``bundled'' services. Their costs could decline as a
result of competition among new guarantor participants.
Q.3. Do you support or oppose Fannie and Freddie selling their
multifamily housing businesses?
A.3. HPC's members are primarily single-family mortgage
lenders, servicers and mortgage insurers. However, we believe
that the GSE multifamily businesses could become successful
stand-alone entities providing the multifamily guarantees they
do today.
Q.3.a. If the multifamily housing guarantee businesses were
sold, who would buy them?
A.3.a. We believe there are investors who would be interested
in purchasing the businesses.
Q.3.b. How would the new guarantee structure affect the
multifamily housing market? Please be specific.
A.3.b. The new structure should continue to provide for a sound
multifamily market by placing private capital in a first-loss
position, as is done today with the GSEs' multifamily business,
backstopped by a catastrophic Government guarantee.
Q.4. What would you recommend Congress do to ensure that a
housing finance law would provide more wealth-building,
sustainable home-ownership opportunities for Latinos, African
Americans, Asian Pacific Americans and Native Americans?
A.4. Move away from the Government-backed, GSE duopoly that
represents the current system--and its shortfalls in serving
these market segments--and promote a market structure that
fosters competition, innovation, and a level playing field.
Where the new system provides subsidies, say through an
affordability fee on securitized mortgages, ensure those funds
flow directly through to borrowers who satisfy prescribed
eligibility criteria and that those funds are used to solve the
actual impediments eligible households may face in becoming
homeowners. Those impediments may include downpayments, cash
reserves, and financial education.
Q.5. Do you think Chair Crapo's housing finance reform proposal
would shrink the home-ownership gap between white and minority
households in this country? If not, what would?
A.5. A new housing finance system with more secondary market
participants can help shrink the home-ownership gap by having
more participants seeking to provide liquidity to the market.
However, it is not the only solution. The FHA program should be
modernized to more effectively serve first-time, moderate and
lower-income home buyers and Congress, regulators, industry and
all stakeholders should work cooperatively on initiatives that
help educate potential home buyers, create programs that help
match savings for downpayments and other creative, responsible
steps to help increase sustainable home ownership in minority
communities.
Q.6. Do you have concerns regarding the proposal to create a
bipartisan board of directors to govern FHFA? If such a board
was enacted, would it be able to function without a quorum if
appointments were delayed?
A.6. There are several Federal financial regulatory agencies
that operate effectively with bipartisan boards and they have
procedures to deal with quorum issues. A bipartisan board could
effectively function to govern FHFA. An effective single
Director is also an alternative.
Q.7. Are there any particular reforms that have stemmed from
HERA and the creation of FHFA that you feel should be preserved
or expanded as part of any housing finance reform?
A.7. FHFA has most of the tools needed to be an effective
regulator of the GSES and their guarantor successors in a new
system. The key is to ensure that FHFA has complete and clear
authority to charter, regulate and supervise guarantors in a
new system. There should be explicit authority for FHFA to
oversee the guarantors' operational risk.
Q.8. Do you have concerns with the Chair's proposal? If so,
please explain why and what amendment you would suggest to
remedy these concerns.
A.8. The Chairman's proposal is an outline, not full
legislative text, but it does provide the key elements of a
stronger system: an explicit Government guarantee, fair and
equitable access to credit, support for affordable housing and
a competitive, transparent marketplace that would ensure a
level playing field for mortgage market participants of all
sizes and types.
Q.9. Are there any proposed changes in the Chairman's proposal
you think make our housing finance system better? Please define
those.
A.9. There are two key areas of the Chairman's outline where we
believe additional consideration is required: (1) FHFA's role
in chartering, regulating, and supervising the guarantors; and
(2) Ginnie Mae's responsibility for setting the terms of the
securities agreements. Also, the Chairman's outline includes a
few topics that need additional input and refinement. These
topics are: market share limitations for all guarantors;
capital standards for the guarantors; and downpayment
requirements for eligible loans. In each case, HPC recommends
that Congress authorize the regulator, FHFA, to establish
appropriate requirements and standards.
------
RESPONSE TO WRITTEN QUESTION OF SENATOR MORAN FROM EDWARD J.
DeMARCO
Q.1. In a highly liquid, very efficient market, investors and
traders are sensitive to any small change in information or
performance. They are also highly sensitive to less-than-
perfect transparency and information. In the past they knew
exactly what they were bidding on: either Fannie mortgages or
Freddie mortgages.
If the Common Securitization Platform commences, and
investors and traders are not quite sure what is in the
security (in part due to the ``to be determined'' nature of the
security), will they not assume the worst, and thus pay less
for the assets in order to protect themselves? And could this
harm, and not help, market pricing to consumers taking out
mortgages?
A.1. In fact, under the pre-conservatorship system, virtually
all investors knew about the mortgage pools they invested in is
that they were guaranteed by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac (and
implicitly by the taxpayers). They had little real insight into
the loans, their features, or their performance. That has begun
to change under conservatorship with the introduction of
credit-risk transfer and that process should be completed. For
private capital to evaluate, price, and manage mortgage credit
risk, reliable, standardized disclosures are essential. HPC
understands that all leading reform proposals, and the Crapo
outline, envision such a disclosure regime, which should
actually lower costs to consumers because of the improved,
standardized disclosures that would give investors greater
confidence in understanding the risks in any given pool. The
SEC could take the next step in this reform process, revising
Reg AB II in a manner that envisions and reflects a fully
aligned, uniformly enforced set of disclosure rules and
practices.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR SINEMA FROM EDWARD J.
DeMARCO
Q.1. Last September, you testified before the House Financial
Services Committee and said that sustainable home ownership,
that is accessible for people of moderate means, ``requires
greater attention to saving both for downpayments and for cash
reserves once in the home, greater financial literacy, home
buyer education and home ownership counseling, and more effort
to repair credit histories.''
Q.1.a. In your experience--and recognizing that not all
problems require a Government solution--what Federal programs
have proven effective at accomplishing these goals?
A.1.a. The Federal Home Loan Banks' Affordable Housing Program
has worked well.
Q.1.b. What more can Congress do, as a complement to housing
finance reform, to improve financial literacy and home buyer
education?
A.1.b. Congress and Federal regulators should work with
industry and other stakeholders to identify and promote the
voluntary financial literacy and home buyer education programs
that consumers respond to. Encourage the States to expand
financial literacy programs in secondary school curricula.
------
RESPONSE TO WRITTEN QUESTION OF SENATOR BROWN FROM GREG UGALDE
Q.1. There was extensive conversation about the need for all
guarantors to serve a national market. Do you believe than
Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and any other guarantor serving the
multifamily market and providing a catastrophic Government
backstop should also be required to serve a national market?
A.1. Yes. If an entity benefits from support of the Federal
Government, that entity should be required to serve a national
market and make credit available for all geographic areas
throughout all economic cycles. NAHB believes this principle
should apply to the single family and multifamily markets.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM
GREG UGALDE
Q.1. In its current form, do you think Ginnie Mae could play
the role the Chairman's proposal envisions?
A.1. In its current form, Ginnie Mae is a tremendously
successful and profitable entity. Ginnie Mae's Federal
Government guarantee on its mortgage-backed securities (MBS)
creates an MBS that is highly regarded by investors in the
United States and internationally. However, per the National
Housing Act, Ginnie Mae's Federal Government guarantee is
limited to MBS collateralized by mortgages insured or
guaranteed by the Federal Housing Administration, the U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs, the U.S. Department of
Agriculture Rural Development and the Office of Public and
Indian Housing. In order to provide a guarantee on MBS col-
lateralized by conventional loans, as proposed in the
Chairman's Housing Reform Outline, the National Housing Act
would need to be amended. In addition, Ginnie Mae would require
significant increases in staffing and support resources in
order to successfully undertake the expanded role envisioned in
the Chairman's proposal.
Q.1.a. Do you have any concerns on the proposed sale or
transfer of the Common Securitization Platform (CSP) to Ginnie
Mae? How would such a sale work best in your view?
A.1.a. We believe it makes sense to consider the sale or
transfer of the CSP to Ginnie Mae within the parameters of the
Chairman's Housing Reform Outline. This could potentially
expand Ginnie Mae's securitization bandwidth and utilize an
upgraded system on which significant industry time and
resources have been invested.
Q.1.b. Is Ginnie Mae's staff adequately trained and compensated
to take on a large new market?
A.1.b. Ginnie Mae's staff has managed a significant increase in
its MBS issuance volume since 2007. By the end of November
2018, Ginnie Mae had almost 400 issuers and its portfolio had
reached $2 trillion in outstanding MBS, an increase from less
than $427.6 billion in 2007. However, were Congress to enact
housing finance system reform that requires Ginnie Mae to take
on the securitization function of the conventional mortgage
market, Congress should ensure Ginnie Mae has adequate staff
and resources.
Q.2. Do you support or oppose creating a single utility to take
on the catastrophic risk? Please elaborate on your response.
A.2. NAHB believes there are different housing finance system
models that can work depending on the details of the model.
However, we support significant private capital taking risk
ahead of the Federal Government with the Federal Government
providing an explicit guarantee in the case of catastrophic
circumstances.
Q.2.a. If you oppose a single utility model and prefer a single
guarantor platform or a multiple guarantor platform, please
explain what changes should be instituted to ensure that
community banks and credit unions are able to access the
secondary market easily?
A.2.a. N/A.
Q.2.b. How will small institutions' business practices and
compliance costs change under a single utility vs. a single
guarantor vs. multiple guarantors?
A.2.b. NAHB believes this question is better answered by the
lending community.
Q.3. Do you support or oppose Fannie and Freddie selling their
multifamily housing businesses?
A.3. NAHB looks forward to working with the Committee to ensure
that the successful multifamily financing infrastructures are
preserved. This component of the Nation's housing finance
system has consistently performed successfully, even in
stressful market conditions.
Q.3.a. If the multifamily housing guarantee businesses were
sold, who would buy them?
A.3.a. Without additional details regarding such a sale, NAHB
is not comfortable speculating.
Q.3.b. How would the new guarantee structure affect the
multifamily housing market? Please be specific.
A.3.b. Once again, additional details need to be in place to
understand the effect of the new guarantee structure on the
multifamily housing market. NAHB will be pleased to work with
the Chairman and the Committee to consider what details should
be addressed to ensure the new guarantee structure would not
have a negative impact on the multifamily housing market.
Q.4. What would you recommend Congress do to ensure that a
housing finance law would provide more wealth-building,
sustainable home-ownership opportunities for Latinos, African
Americans, Asian Pacific Americans and Native Americans?
A.4. NAHB believes the U.S. housing finance system should
support all creditworthy borrowers in an equal manner.
Comprehensive reform legislation will help to ensure a stable
housing finance system and preserve access to credit for all.
Q.5. Do you think Chair Crapo's housing finance reform proposal
would shrink the home-ownership gap between white and minority
households in this country? If not, what would?
A.5. NAHB believes a successful outcome for housing finance
system reform will be to preserve a system that provides equal
access to affordable mortgages for all creditworthy households.
Q.6. Do you have concerns regarding the proposal to create a
bipartisan board of directors to govern FHFA? If such a board
was enacted, would it be able to function without a quorum if
appointments were delayed?
A.6. NAHB believes the regulatory agency that will oversee a
reformed housing finance system should be governed by a
bipartisan board of directors instead of a single director.
Board governance would mitigate the potential for extreme and
abrupt changes in policy that are possible under the existing,
single director regulatory regime.
Q.7. Are there any particular reforms that have stemmed from
HERA and the creation of FHFA that you feel should be preserved
or expanded as part of any housing finance reform?
A.7. The Housing and Economic Recovery Act (HERA) was enacted
in 2008 and included numerous and significant measures. NAHB is
focused on moving forward to the next step which is
comprehensive housing finance reform legislation.
Q.8. Do you have concerns with the Chair's proposal? If so,
please explain why and what amendment you would suggest to
remedy these concerns.
A.8. No. NAHB is comfortable with the direction the Chairman's
proposal appears to be heading. We look forward to the
opportunity to work with the Chairman and the Committee to
flesh out the many details that remain to be determined.
Q.9. Are there any proposed changes in the Chairman's proposal
you think make our housing finance system better? Please define
those.
A.9. NAHB believes the explicit Federal Government guarantee on
the conforming, conventional mortgage market is critical.
America's housing finance system needs Congress to pass
bipartisan reform legislation that will provide certainty to
the housing and housing finance markets. With additional
details determined, the Chairman's Housing Reform Outline has
considerable potential to transition the current, unsustainable
system to a reformed, sustainable one.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR BROWN FROM MARK M.
ZANDI, Ph.D.
Q.1. During your testimony, you stated that the single security
would bring down mortgage rates and that there ``had become
this bifurcation in mortgage rates offered by Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac because of a range of differences that are now
going away because of the [Common Securitization Platform].''
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac share similar business
structures, have the same regulatory structures, and offer very
similar products. For more than 10 years, they have also both
had a line of credit with the U.S. Treasury.
Q.1.a. What factors do you believe led to the bifurcation in
mortgage rates offered by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac?
A.1.a. Historically, mortgage-backed securities issued by
Freddie Mac traded at a lower price than those issued by Fannie
Mae. To ensure this didn't impact mortgage rates, Freddie Mac
needed to charge a lower guarantee fee than Fannie Mae,
reducing Freddie's profitability (approximately $500 million
per annum) and thus its payments to the Treasury. Freddie's
securities traded at a lower price than Fannie's due to higher
prepayment speeds and less liquidity in the market for Freddie
securities. Not only are there fewer Freddie securities, but
also a greater proportion of Freddie than Fannie securities are
locked up in collateralized mortgage obligations. This makes
them much less liquid than Fannie securities. A single security
issued by the common securitization platform will ensure that
this will no longer be an issue.
Q.1.b. What documents, policies, and procedures had to be
harmonized to facilitate the transition to a single security?
Would these same documents, policies, and procedures need to be
aligned among all guarantors to maintain the benefits of a
broad, liquid to-be-announced (TBA) market?
A.1.b. For a single security to be collateralized by the
securities of either or both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,
investors must view them as fungible. If investors do not, they
will value each issuance of the single security according to
which enterprise's securities back them, leading to a breakdown
of the new security. To ensure fungibility, and thus the
benefits of a broad liquid TB market, Fannie and Freddie must
follow the same policies, procedures and documentation
requirements, as will all future guarantors. The FHFA will also
need to monitor the prepayment speeds of the guarantors, and
work the guarantors to eliminate any meaningful differences.
This is much like Ginnie Mae currently does for FHA, VA and
USDA-backed Ginnie securities.
Q.1.c. How might variations in prepayment speeds on Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac securities impact pricing and ultimately the
success of a single security?
A.1.c. If prepayment speeds are meaningfully different across
the guarantors, the single security will not function well. The
FHFA will thus need to monitor and address significant
differences in prepayment speeds as they plan to with Fannie
and Freddie once the single security is launched this summer.
FHFA has indicated it would investigate any prepayment speed
differential exceeding 2 percentage points for any coupon,
maturity, or issuance year cohort in a single month. Thus, for
example, if the prepayment differential between Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac in the 2015-issued 30-year 4.0 coupon exceeded 2
percentage points in June, it would be investigated. Some
market participants are pushing for more and stronger
assurances, including rules for which policies have to be
identical and commitments on what the FHFA will do if
divergences arise. See Christopher B. Killian, ``Single
Security-Priority Issues to Be Resolved before Launch,'' letter
to acting deputy director of the Federal Housing Finance
Agency's Division of Conservatorship Robert Ryan, July 10,
2018, https://www.sifma.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Single-
Security-%E2%80%93-Priority-Issues-to-be-resolved-before-
launch.pdf.
Q.2. In your testimony, you suggested that Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac should be required to share historical data to
facilitate the entry of new guarantors into the market.
Q.2.a. If we had a system that allowed for new, private
guarantors to enter at any time, should all private guarantors
be required to share data with any current or future guarantors
on an ongoing basis?
A.2.a. Full data disclosure by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac is
necessary to facilitate entry by new guarantors into the
housing finance system. Without such disclosure, Fannie and
Freddie's data advantage would be a significant entry barrier
to new guarantors. However, once the number of operating
guarantors is sufficient to ensure a well-functioning
competitive market, it will no longer be necessary for Fannie,
Freddie or the other newer guarantors to fully share their
data. The future guarantor system will likely operate much like
the current private mortgage insurance, which has six national
MI companies. These companies do not share data with each
other, and the market is competitive and functions well.
Q.3. In your testimony, you suggested that Congress or
regulators could raise the guarantee fees Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac charge to borrowers to make new market entrants
more competitive.
Q.3.a. What would the impact of increasing Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac's guarantee fees be on individual borrowers?
A.3.a. To facilitate entry by new guarantors, Congress could
temporarily maintain the current 10 basis point fee paid by
Fannie and Freddie to pay for the Temporary Payroll Tax Cut
Continuation Act beyond its current expiration in 2022, but
exempt new guarantors from this fee. The new guarantors would
be able to charge a lower guarantee fee than Fannie and
Freddie, allowing them to take market share from Fannie and
Freddie and also reducing mortgage rates to borrowers. Once the
guarantor market is deemed to be competitive, Fannie and
Freddie would also be permitted to terminate the 10 bps fee.
Q.3.b. Would you expect some borrowers to pay more for their
loan if Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's guarantee fees were
uniformly increased by some number of basis points to
facilitate the entrance of new guarantors?
A.3.b. No, borrowers would not pay more as Fannie and Freddie's
guarantee fee will remain unchanged. Some borrowers would pay
less as their loans would be purchased by the new guarantors
whose guarantee fee will be lower as they will not pay the 10
bps fee to fund the 2012 payroll tax cut.
Q.4. The Trump administration's FY 2020 budget proposed to
increase Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's guarantee fees by an
additional 10 basis points and to maintain the 10 basis point
increase imposed by the Temporary Payroll Tax Cut Continuation
Act through the full 10-year budget window (for a total
increase of 20 basis points for the next 10 years), with the
goal of generating ``an additional $32 billion'' and helping
``to level the playing field for private lenders seeking to
compete with the GSEs.''\1\ In 2012, following the passage of
the Temporary Payroll Tax Cut Continuation Act, you said that
it ``sets a very bad precedent for G-fees to pay for anything
other than Fannie and Freddie providing insurance on
loans.''\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See ``A Budget for a Better America: Major Savings and Reforms,
Fiscal Year 2020,'' pg. 171, available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/
wp-content/uploads/2019/03/msar-fy2020.pdf.
\2\ ``Fannie, Freddie easy prey for cash-hungry Congress,'' David
Lawder and Margaret Chadbourn, Reuters, May 30, 2012, available at
https://www.reuters.com/article/usa-mortgages-congress-
idUSL1E8GHFJV20120530.
Q.4.a. Do you still agree with the statement you made in 2012
that it is a bad precedent for guarantee fees to go toward
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
anything other than insurance for loans?
A.4.a. Yes, guarantee fees should not go toward anything other
than insurance for mortgage loans.
Q.4.b. What impact would the Trump administration's proposal to
increase guarantee fees have on the cost to borrowers looking
to take out a mortgage?
A.4.b. The Trump administration's budget proposal would
increase mortgage rates by 10 basis points from current rates,
and 20 basis points from rates that would prevail beginning in
2022 under current law.
Q.5. You stated that you believe the Chairman's outline would
lower mortgage rates.
Q.5.a. Please provide all relevant assumptions, including
volume, borrower profiles, and guarantor capital levels and
types, that you used to determine that costs for borrowers
would decrease. Please also indicate whether you would expect
different pricing outcomes for different borrowers.
A.5.a. The impact on mortgage rates of the Chairman's outline,
and the underlying assumptions, are shown in the attached excel
workbook. Under the most likely set of assumptions, mortgage
rates for the typical borrower on average through the business
cycle will be approximately 16 bps lower than in the current
system. For low- and moderate-income borrowers, mortgage rates
would be an estimated 29 basis points lower than in the current
system through the business cycle.
Q.5.b. Please provide the pricing outcomes you would expect if
the Trump administration's proposal to increase guarantee fees
by an additional 10 basis points and maintain the 10 basis
point increase imposed by the Temporary Payroll Tax Cut
Continuation Act through the full 10-year budget window (for a
total increase of 20 basis points) were put in place.
A.5.b. The Trump's administration proposal would effectively
eliminate any reduction in mortgage rates under the Chairman's
outline.
Q.6. In your testimony you stated that the 10 basis point
assessment proposed in Chairman Crapo's outline would generate
about $5 billion per year under your assumptions to fund the
Housing Trust Fund (HTF), Capital Magnet Fund (CMF), and Market
Access Fund (MAF). As you know, Congress created and currently
funds the HTF and CMF with a 4.2 basis point assessment on
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac business. To date, the largest
amount of affordable housing funding generated in any given
year by this 4.2 basis point assessment has been $408.9
million.
Please explain what assumptions you use to estimate that a
10 basis point assessment will generate $5 billion in
affordable housing funds.
A.6. Fannie and Freddie currently ensure approximately $5
trillion in mortgage debt outstanding. A 10-bps assessment on
$5 trillion is equal to $5 billion in affordable housing funds
per annum.
Q.7. In your testimony, you compared the $5 billion generated
by a 10 basis point fee to the dollar value of the current
cross-subsidization within the single-family mortgage system,
which you have written is about $4.1 billion.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ ``Access and Affordability in the New Housing Finance System,''
Jim Parrott, Michael Stegman, Phillip Swagel, Mark Zandi, February
2018, available at https://www.economy.com/getlocal?q=dfbce7de-80b3-
4d64-88fb-9b33d00c9ac9&app=eccafile.
Q.7.a. How much of the $4.1 billion subsidy that you calculated
is a subsidy within the single-family home-ownership lines of
business? How much of that subsidy is targeted to the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
multifamily lines of business?
A.7.a. The $4.1 billion in estimated annual cross-subsidy is
only on Fannie and Freddie's single family mortgages. See
``Access and Affordability in the New Housing Finance System,''
Parrott, Stegman, Swagel and Zandi, Urban Institute white
paper, February 2018, for a detailed discussion of a potential
access and affordability regime under the Chairman's outline.
Q.7.b. What proportion of any subsidy provided through the 10
basis point assessment should be allocated to multifamily or
rental housing, and what proportion should be allocated to home
ownership?
A.7.b. This should be determined by the FHFA.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM
MARK M. ZANDI, Ph.D.
Q.1. In its current form, do you think Ginnie Mae could play
the role the Chairman's proposal envisions?
Q.1.a. Do you have any concerns on the proposed sale or
transfer of the Common Securitization Platform (CSP) to Ginnie
Mae? How would such a sale work best in your view?
A.1.a. I would not sell or transfer the CSP to Ginnie Mae.
Instead, I would turn the CSP into a separate utility owned by
the guarantors, similar to the current ownership structure. The
CSP as current structured is operating well and there is no
reason to change it.
Q.1.b. Is Ginnie Mae's staff adequately trained and compensated
to take on a large new market?
A.1.b. No, Ginnie Mae would likely need to become a Government
corporation in the future housing finance system. It should
also be able to charge a small fee for the services it provides
the system and use this funding to support its activities,
including hiring adequately trained staff.
Q.2. Do you support or oppose creating a single utility to take
on the catastrophic risk? Please elaborate on your response.
Q.2.a. If you oppose a single utility model and prefer a single
guarantor platform or a multiple guarantor platform, please
explain what changes should be instituted to ensure that
community banks and credit unions are able to access the
secondary market easily?
A.2.a. My preference is a system in which Fannie and Freddie
are turned into Government corporations or a single Government
corporation. In this system, there would be no changes in the
way community banks and credit unions access the secondary
market. A multiple guarantor system is also a viable option for
the future system, and to ensure access for small lenders, each
guarantor will need to be required to provide a cash window and
be prohibited from pricing differently across lenders.
Q.2.b. How will small institutions' business practices and
compliance costs change under a single utility vs. a single
guarantor vs. multiple guarantors?
A.2.b. Any future system should be (and can be) designed so
there are no changes in business practices and compliance costs
for small lenders. This would be clear in a system in which
Fannie and Freddie become Government corporations or a single
Government corporation, as there would be no change in how
small lenders access the system. In a multiple guarantor
system, small lenders may have some added complexity in working
with more guarantors, but they would only do this if it meant
lower costs or other benefits.
Q.3. Do you support or oppose Fannie and Freddie selling their
multifamily housing businesses?
LIf the multifamily housing guarantee businesses
were sold, who would buy them?
LHow would the new guarantee structure affect the
multifamily housing market? Please be specific.
A.3. No, I would not require Fannie and Freddie to sell their
multifamily housing businesses as part of any housing finance
reform legislation. This could be disruptive to the housing
market, and as such would make any reform much less likely to
become law.
Q.4. What would you recommend Congress do to ensure that a
housing finance law would provide more wealth-building,
sustainable home-ownership opportunities for Latinos, African
Americans, Asian Pacific Americans and Native Americans?
A.4. Under the Chairman's outline, this could be done by
increasing the market access fee from its currently proposed 10
basis points. This would increase the funds that could be used
to increase the cross-subsidy in the housing finance system
and/or fund other efforts to support greater home ownership
among underserved groups. See ``Access and Affordability in the
New Housing Finance System,'' Parrott, Stegman, Swagel and
Zandi, Urban Institute white paper, February 2018, for a
detailed discussion of a potential access and affordability
regime under the Chairman's outline.
Q.5. Do you think Chair Crapo's housing finance reform proposal
would shrink the home-ownership gap between white and minority
households in this country? If not, what would?
A.5. Yes, if designed properly the Chairman's outline could
result in increased home ownership for underserved groups with
currently low home ownership. The Chairman's outline states
that the affordability goals and duty to serve will be replaced
by a market access fund, which will be funded by an annual 10-
basis point fee on all securities issued through the channel.
While that would generate more than $5 billion a year to lower
housing costs for low- and moderate-income borrowers, which is
more than the current system provides, a great deal more about
how this will be allocated and how the system as a whole will
work will need to be developed in the right way to ensure that
it provides adequate support for communities that need it.
First, it will be important that all guarantors have a
national footprint, so that they cannot simply serve those
markets that happen to be most profitable. Allowing guarantors
to cherry-pick markets could lead to regional or demographic
gaps in the secondary market, segments in which lenders have
little to no places to sell their loans. This, in turn, would
lead to gaps in the primary market that would be difficult if
not impossible for the market access fund to overcome. It would
also lead to volatility in liquidity as guarantors move from
one market to another depending on the inevitable variations in
profitability that will come with the economic cycle.
It will also be important to develop a means of allocating
the fund that cannot be captured by intermediaries. The current
system does this relatively well. By delivering its cross-
subsidy through a simple, largely level guarantee fee--whereby
lower credit-risk borrowers are overcharged so that higher
credit-risk borrowers can be undercharged--it avoids the
expense of sorting
out who is to receive which kinds of benefit and paying others
to
deliver that benefit. Whatever means are used to deliver the
cross-subsidy in the new system, the benefits should similarly
flow to the beneficiaries in as automated and simple a way as
possible.
Last, it will be important to target the market access fund
to those borrowers who actually need the help and to provide
the kind of help they actually need. Here, the current system
does not perform as well. Although much of the cross-subsidy is
driven by the duty to serve and affordability goals to serve to
low- and moderate-income borrowers, a significant portion is
not. As most of the cross-subsidy is provided through the level
guarantee fee paid by all Fannie and Freddie borrowers, almost
a quarter of the cross-subsidy goes to those who are not low-
or moderate-income borrowers, but benefit simply because they
have poorer credit. Moreover, not all borrowers need help in
the form of a modest reduction in their mortgage rate. Some
desperately need it in another form, such as downpayment
assistance. The future system could thus do a better job
channeling funding from those who can afford to pay to those
who need the help and in the form that they can actually use.
Q.6. Do you have concerns regarding the proposal to create a
bipartisan board of directors to govern FHFA? If such a board
was enacted, would it be able to function without a quorum if
appointments were delayed?
A.6. This is a reasonable governance structure for the FHFA.
What should happen if there is no quorum due to delayed
appointments or any other contingency should be (and can be)
addressed in legislation.
Q.7. Are there any particular reforms that have stemmed from
HERA and the creation of FHFA that you feel should be preserved
or expanded as part of any housing finance reform?
A.7. FHFA's oversight authority should be expanded in the
housing finance system envisaged in the Chairman's outline. It
should be able to regulate all guarantors and their
counterparties in the future system with regard to safety and
soundness. The FHFA should also be responsible for ensuring
broad access and affordability to the secondary market for all
lenders and underserved communities. It should manage a
catastrophic mortgage insurance fund that is funded by a fee
paid for by borrowers.
Q.8. Do you have concerns with the Chair's proposal? If so,
please explain why and what amendment you would suggest to
remedy these concerns.
A.8. The Chairman's outline for housing finance reform offers a
promising framework from which to begin, but as an outline it
leaves much to be resolved. How this framework is filled in
will be important, since a few critical structural choices yet
to be made will have a dramatic impact on how the proposed
system would work. See ``How Chairman Crapo's Outline of
Housing Finance Reform Can Work,'' Jim Parrott, Dave Stevens
and Mark Zandi, white paper, February 1, 2019, for a detailed
discussion of how to address these choices.
Q.9. Are there any proposed changes in the Chairman's proposal
you think make our housing finance system better? Please define
those.
A.9. The Chairman's outline provides a viable way forward to
reform the housing finance system. It satisfies all of the key
objectives of reform, including ending too big to fail, fully
protecting taxpayers, providing equal access to the system for
underserved communities and lenders of all sizes, maintaining
affordable mortgage rates for borrowers under all market
conditions, promoting competition, and easing the transition
from the current system to the future system. If the Chairman's
proposal becomes law, with the adjustments that I outlined in
my testimony to the Committee, it would be a significant
achievement.
------
RESPONSE TO WRITTEN QUESTION OF SENATOR MORAN FROM MARK M.
ZANDI, Ph.D.
Q.1. In a highly liquid, very efficient market, investors and
traders are sensitive to any small change in information or
performance. They are also highly sensitive to less-than-
perfect transparency and information. In the past they knew
exactly what they were bidding on: either Fannie mortgages or
Freddie mortgages.
If the Common Securitization Platform commences, and
investors and traders are not quite sure what is in the
security (in part due to the ``to be determined'' nature of the
security), will they not assume the worst, and thus pay less
for the assets in order to protect themselves? And could this
harm, and not help, market pricing to consumers taking out
mortgages?
A.1. No, the single security issued by the Common Security
Platform will be a larger ($3.5 trillion) and more liquid
market, resulting in more stable and potentially lower mortgage
rates for borrowers. This is already evident in the better
pricing of Freddie's mortgage securities which are being issued
by the CSP. FHFA will need to monitor and address any material
differences in the prepayment speeds of Fannie and Freddie
mortgages, but this is similar to what Ginnie Mae already does
for FHA, VA and USDA loans in Ginnie securities to great
success.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM HILARY
O. SHELTON
Q.1. It is clearly not in our public policy interest to allow a
future housing finance system to break into distinct pieces,
with one guarantor serving real estate markets in New York and
DC, another serving California, and no one making loans to
underserved borrowers in Newark or Paterson, New Jersey.
Is it necessary to have a mandate on guarantors to serve a
national market to promote affordable and sustainable home-
ownership opportunities for creditworthy borrowers, including
those in urban and rural underserved areas of the country?
A.1. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.2. Without a mandate to serve a national market, is there a
risk guarantors will cherry pick regions, borrowers, and
products, inevitably leaving some borrowers without any options
for mortgage credit?
A.2. Response not received in time for publication.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM ADAM J.
LEVITIN
Q.1. It is clearly not in our public policy interest to allow a
future housing finance system to break into distinct pieces,
with one guarantor serving real estate markets in New York and
DC, another serving California, and no one making loans to
underserved borrowers in Newark or Paterson, New Jersey.
Is it necessary to have a mandate on guarantors to serve a
national market to promote affordable and sustainable home-
ownership opportunities for creditworthy borrowers, including
those in urban and rural underserved areas of the country?
A.1. Yes, such a guaranty is necessary. Without such a mandate
to serve nationally, guarantors will engage in ``cream
skimming''--that is they will serve the most profitable
submarkets, but will fail to compete for the business of less
profitable and harder-to-price markets, particularly rural
markets.
Q.2. Without a mandate to serve a national market, is there a
risk guarantors will cherry pick regions, borrowers, and
products, inevitably leaving some borrowers without any options
for mortgage credit?
A.2. This is absolutely what will happen. Without a mandate to
serve a national market some parts of the United States will be
served by one or no guarantors.
One needs look no further than the state of insurer
participation in Affordable Care Act health insurance
marketplaces to see how such a situation might play out. The
Affordable Care Act lacks a national duty to serve for
insurers, and as a result, insurers have engaged in geographic
cherry-picking, leaving numerous counties (and every county in
five States) with only one ACA insurance option and the real
risk of having no options.
Q.3. Too many communities around the country, including in my
home State of New Jersey, are still recovering from the
foreclosure crisis. Part of the problem is that our current
system still does not incentivize servicers to do everything
they can to keep borrowers in their homes. In consideration of
any housing finance reform proposals, should Congress consider
a requirement for servicers to offer struggling homeowners
affordable loan modifications that are in the best interests of
borrowers, investors, and taxpayers?
A.3. While I support such a requirement conceptually, I am
unsure how readily it could be applied in practice and also
concerned that it might be unconstitutional if applied
retroactively. Prudent servicing standards arguably require
such loan modification offers, but there is little enforcement
of prudent servicing standards. A bright line public law
requirement, separate and apart from any contractual
requirements, would help remove any doubt that prudent
servicing requires loan modifications if doing so would
maximize the
return on the loan to investors. Applying such a requirement
retroactively could be challenged under the 5th Amendment on
the grounds that it is an uncompensated taking. To the extent
that prudent servicing standards already require such
modifications, it would not be, but I do want to flag the
potential legal issue.
Q.4. While the CFPB has made marginal progress on dual tracking
issues, we continue to hear from struggling homeowners that
they can't get their mortgage companies to pause foreclosure
proceedings while they are being evaluated for loan
modifications.
Do you believe that this is another area where we should
consider stronger standards?
A.4. Regulation X under the Real Estate Settlement Procedures
Act prohibits most dual tracking if the borrower has submitted
a complete loss mitigation application. 12 C.F.R.  1024.41(g).
Many borrowers, however, still have trouble producing
sufficient documentation so as to have a complete loss
mitigation application, and until such application is complete,
the servicer is allowed to dual track. It is not clear to me
whether clearer or stronger prohibitions on dual tracking are
necessary or whether this is an issue that the CFPB could best
address through the supervision and enforcement processes.
Q.5. What, if any, other mortgage servicing standards or
requirements should Congress consider as it contemplates
reforming the housing finance system?
A.5. Congress should consider restrictions on the post-default
fees that servicers can charge borrowers. Additionally, some
servicers have outsourced services, such as property
valuations, to affiliated firms that charge supra-competitive
prices. These inflated fees come out of the pockets of
investors to the extent the homeowner is underwater. Congress
should address affiliate-transactions of servicers so that only
market-rate, competitive fees are charged and no unnecessary
fees are levied.
Q.6. Many of the housing finance reform proposals put forward
call for a system with multiple guarantors--something which has
the potential to spark a race to the bottom where guarantors
chase volume by eroding underwriting standards or pricing,
ultimately harming both borrowers and the market.
How can we create a system where guarantors can compete in
a healthy and productive manner, but where we eliminate or
mitigate the risk of any potential race to the bottom?
A.6. I do not believe that it is possible to have guarantors
competing for front-end credit risk in a healthy and productive
manner. Such direct competition for credit risk on mortgages on
the front-end of the secondary market will inevitably result in
risk-based pricing that segments the mortgage market and
ultimately makes the entire market less stable.
A better approach is to concentrate all credit risk in the
first instance in a single Federal Government entity (basically
a combined Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac), which would then transfer
risk to capital market investors through synthetic credit-risk
transfers, much like Fannie and Freddie's STACR and Connecticut
Avenue Securities programs. These back-end synthetic credit-
risk transfers could be restricted by law to being on the
Government entity's entire book of business, such that there
would not be risk-based pricing to segment the market. The
result would be the benefits of private risk capital, without
the downsides from it.
Additional Material Supplied for the Record
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]