- THE PRESIDENT'S BUDGET REQUEST FOR THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
[Senate Hearing 115-510]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-510
THE PRESIDENT'S BUDGET REQUEST FOR
THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MARCH 20, 2018
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
29-771
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska, Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
RON WYDEN, Oregon
MIKE LEE, Utah
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
STEVE DAINES, Montana
JOE MANCHIN III, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
Brian Hughes, Staff Director
Patrick J. McCormick III, Chief Counsel
Brianne Miller, Senior Professional Staff Member and Energy Policy
Advisor
Mary Louise Wagner, Democratic Staff Director
Sam E. Fowler, Democratic Chief Counsel
Scott McKee, Democratic Professional Staff Member
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa, Chairman and a U.S. Senator from Alaska....
1
Cantwell, Hon. Maria, Ranking Member and a U.S. Senator from
Washington.....................................................
2
WITNESS
Perry, Hon. Rick, Secretary of Energy............................
4
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
Cantwell, Hon. Maria:
Opening Statement............................................
2
Cortez Masto, Hon. Catherine:
Letter dated March 19, 2018, addressed to Secretary Rick
Perry......................................................
30
Heller, Hon. Dean:
Letter for the Record........................................
22
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa:
Opening Statement............................................
1
Perry, Hon. Rick:
Opening Statement............................................
4
Written Testimony............................................
7
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
51
THE PRESIDENT'S BUDGET REQUEST FOR
THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
----------
TUESDAY, MARCH 20, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m. in
Room SD-366, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lisa
Murkowski, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
The Chairman. Good morning, everyone. The Committee will
come to order.
We are here today to discuss the President's budget request
for the Department of Energy for Fiscal Year 2019.
We welcome to the Committee, Secretary Rick Perry. It is
good to have you back in front of us, and we look forward to
your comments this morning.
Like last year, the request emphasizes funding for the
National Nuclear Security Administration, which falls outside
of our jurisdiction. In addition, the President's budget
requests additional funding for the environmental management
program to clean up our nation's nuclear sites.
I appreciate these proposals, but the request offsets them
with cuts to a number of energy and science programs that enjoy
strong bipartisan support. It also seeks to eliminate all
funding for ARPA-E, which is a program that undertakes
innovative, pioneering work.
While we should always be looking for places to cut the
budget, we should also recognize that innovation is critical to
our nation's energy future. It creates jobs, it boosts growth,
it adds to our security and it increases our competitiveness.
We need to focus on maintaining our global leadership in
science, research and development. And central to that mission
are the hardworking scientists and engineers at our national
laboratories and our universities.
Now although I do not support all of the proposals in this
request, I believe that we will find many areas of interest and
agreement. I believe it is time to look at reforms that can
reduce the stovepipes at the Department and make better use of
taxpayer dollars. I am intrigued by the Department's decision
to create a new cybersecurity office, and I look forward to
seeing the remainder of the Department's budget justifications,
which will need to be released as soon as possible.
So again, Secretary Perry, I want to welcome you back
before our Committee.
I will note as all members have previously been alerted,
that the Secretary has a hard stop at 11:30 so you can head to
the White House. I understand that you will be taking up some,
hopefully, nuclear-related discussions.
We appreciate your time, so out of respect for our limited
time with the Committee this morning, I will end my opening
remarks here and simply note that I look forward to hosting
you, Mr. Secretary, in Alaska in the near future.
Senator Cantwell, good morning.
STATEMENT OF HON. MARIA CANTWELL,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WASHINGTON
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Department of Energy is a global leader in science and
technology with an unrivaled network of national laboratories.
It is also key to our national security.
An important priority for DOE is energy infrastructure
security. Our energy infrastructure is under attack. It is
under cyberattack, and we need to do much more to protect it as
a national critical asset.
Russia has proven its ability to disrupt the grid and last
week the Trump Administration announced new sanctions on Russia
for attacks on the U.S. infrastructure. The Department of
Homeland Security and the Federal Bureau of Investigation
characterized the activities as, ``a multi-staged intrusion
campaign by Russian government cyber actors who gained remote
access into the energy sector networks.''
The FBI and Department of Homeland Security state that
since at least March 2016, Russia has targeted government
entities in multiple U.S. critical infrastructure sectors,
including our energy and nuclear sectors.
A year ago, I called for a comprehensive assessment of
cyberattacks to our grid by Russians, and I repeatedly asked
the Trump Administration to tackle this urgent task and make
sure that we have an assessment. If the FBI and Department of
Homeland Security's recent admission is not a siren, then I
don't know what is. I hope that the belated response is the
first step in turning that around to being a robust response to
protect our critical infrastructure.
At a hearing last week, Mr. Secretary, you appeared with
your colleagues in the Commerce Committee and said that you are
not confident that the Federal Government has a broad strategy
in place. Maybe we can elaborate and talk a little bit about
that in the Q and A.
But as we discussed at a hearing earlier this month,
establishing a new DOE cyber office with marginal increases is
not a substitute for the serious investment and meaningful
action that we need. You told this Committee earlier this year
that cyber is one of your key priorities, so I hope that we
will see meaningful action from this Administration. We don't
need rhetoric at this point, we need action.
I want DOE and the Administration to be more aggressive,
and I hope that we will get this assessment of where we are
with our grid as a milestone to what we need to do moving
forward. We do want to defend against what could be widespread
blackouts and devastation to our economy and the other harmful
security risks.
You and I spent many hours at our national laboratory in
the Northwest, at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
(PNNL), discussing many of these issues, so I know you know
this very well.
On other budget issues, obviously the Department of Energy
is a science and technology powerhouse. Yet, the President's
proposed budget slashes many of DOE's essential programs,
which, I think, would be devastating to our clean energy
economy. It would kill science, innovation and DOE jobs by
eliminating ARPA-E and making drastic cuts to energy
efficiency, renewable energy and electricity and the budget
would raise electricity rates in the Pacific Northwest by
auctioning off federal utility assets. So I think these are,
obviously, mistakes and I will ask questions about them.
The budget would also undermine U.S. energy leadership and
kill jobs. As the Chair noted at our Thursday hearing, for the
first time, China is expected to surpass the U.S. in total R&D
expenditures. And according to the International Energy Agency,
more than $30 trillion will be invested globally in new,
renewable energy facilities in energy efficiency between now
and 2040.
The cost of clean energy and energy efficiencies, like
solar, LEDs and storage, have dropped between 41 percent and 94
percent since 2008 and much of that was driven by the R&D of
the Department of Energy. This is why we think this is so
important to continue the science mission.
The decreases in those technologies have helped consumers
save money and have created jobs. Just in the energy efficiency
and clean sector they have supported over three million U.S.
jobs.
So the success story is built on lots of DOE work through
our national labs, like the Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory in Richland, Washington, and through many other
laboratories across the country.
President Trump's budget also, I think, besides eliminating
ARPA-E, the weatherization program, the state energy program
which provide highly-leveraged, state-controlled funding to
about 50 state projects, eliminates loan programs which
leverage billions of dollars in energy infrastructure,
Draconian cuts to the energy research, 65 percent for the
energy efficiency and 59 percent for the electricity delivery
system.
I could go on, but I have to get to Hanford, Mr. Secretary.
I am disappointed by the Administration's approach to the
Hanford cleanup. The Trump Administration's proposal for FY'19
cuts Hanford by $230 million from FY'17 enacted levels. Instead
of the cut, Hanford needs an increase of $200 million in order
to keep workers safe and meet milestones. And those budget cuts
have been justified by saying, ``the decrease from 2017 enacted
levels reflect the demolition of Plutonium Finishing Plant
(PFP) to slab on grade.'' PFP is still standing and there is
not even a date to resume demolition work at PFP, and rightly
so. DOE and the contractors have to be able to protect the
workers. As you and I saw firsthand when we visited again, we
need to provide a safe work environment at Hanford. What are
the technologies that we need to do that?
I think the Administration's proposal comes up short. Under
this budget, the Department would only be able to maintain
status quo without making progress. As you well know, there is
an agreement, milestones that have to be met. We will look
forward to asking you questions about this in our Q and A.
It is very important that we continue to make progress on
the largest nuclear waste cleanup project in the world. It is
thorny, it is challenging, but we need consistent investment.
I trust you are not going over to Veteran's Affairs. I hope
that you are staying right here and making sure that Hanford is
cleaned up.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cantwell.
Mr. Secretary, again, welcome.
If you would like to provide your comments to the
Committee, and then we will have an opportunity for our
questions and your responses.
Welcome.
STATEMENT OF HON. RICK PERRY, SECRETARY OF ENERGY
Secretary Perry. Chairman Murkowski, thank you for your
hospitality, and Ranking Member Cantwell, it's an honor to get
to be in front of this Committee and each of the members, thank
you for your hospitality, your commitment to service to this
country, today to discuss the President's Fiscal 2019 budget
request for the Department of Energy.
If I could, let me just say a quick thank you, Chairman and
Ranking Member, for allowing me to be able to depart at 11:30
today. I'll try to be brief and allow you the opportunity to
ask the questions so that we can be productive today.
Obviously, it is a great privilege for me. And Senator
Cantwell, just FYI, I'll be here. I'm not going anywhere. It is
an honor to serve as the 14th Secretary of Energy.
Senator Cantwell. Well, you know my suggestion is that the
Energy Secretary should be for life or until Hanford is cleaned
up.
[Laughter.]
So I am happy to apply that to you. I have asked that of
every other Secretary of Energy.
Secretary Perry. Yes, ma'am. We'll take that under
advisement.
[Laughter.]
Running this Department requires a significant expertise
and that's one of the other things I wanted to thank you for is
being able to get the nominees through this process in a very
timely way, get them on the ground, and we've done that. I
think we have, now, nine Presidential appointments with Senate
confirmation that are on the ground and working and thank you
for that assistance.
This budget request underscores the DOE's commitment to
stewardship, to accountability and to service that is
respectful to the American taxpayer. I hope that our
interactions with you and the other Congressional committees
over the past year have underscored the commitment to service
and to transparency.
In total, the DOE leadership team appeared before
Congressional committees 23 times in 2017, and we're proud of
the strong relationship we built with Congress which brings me
to a topic that I want to address before getting any into
specifics.
I am fully aware, and I'm very displeased, that some of
this year's budget request documents were not released in a
timely fashion. It's not how I operate and nor my staff for
that matter. So let me just tell you that you all may be
assured that we're going to continue to refine those processes
and improve the transfer of information to you all.
When I first appeared before this Committee last year, I
committed DOE to advancing several key objectives. I know that
we needed to modernize our nuclear weapons arsenal, continue to
address the environmental legacy that the Cold War programs
left us, further advance our domestic energy production, better
protect our energy infrastructure and accelerate our exascale
computing capacity. The FY2019 $30.6 billion budget request for
the Department seeks to move us forward on these and other
goals.
Our greatest duty is to protect our citizens and nuclear
deterrence is a core part of the DOE mission. This year we
requested an 8.3 percent increase for that purpose to align
ourselves with the President's nuclear posture review and the
national security strategy.
We're also focusing on addressing the environmental legacy
left at Department sites which produce the materials that help
us win a World War and to secure the peace. Last year we
promised to focus on that obligation, and this year we're
requesting additional funds to do so. I know the Department's
Environmental Management Program is a high priority for this
Committee, especially for those of you, like Ranking Member
Cantwell, with a major project in her state. My visit to
Hanford last year helped shape my commitment to that just
cause.
We also have a duty to advance a fundamental mission of our
Department, and that's America energy independence. And thanks
to U.S. ingenuity and innovation, we're on the cusp of
realizing this mission objective for the first time since the
1970s. In the coming years, we will produce enough energy from
all of our abundant fuels, not only to meet our own needs, but
our friends, our allies and our partners as well as we export
to them. Just last year we became a net exporter of natural
gas. Today we are exporting LNG to 27 nations on five
continents. And because technology is also making our energy
cleaner, we can pursue an all-of-the-above policy that will
efficiently develop and use all of America's energy resources.
Innovation can grow our economy and protect our environment.
We drive further energy innovations, or I should say, to
drive those energy innovations, we're requesting continued
funding of our energy program offices, as well as funding for
research in fossil fuels and nuclear power, including advanced
modular reactors.
Now, if we have a duty to advance domestic energy
production, we also have a duty to ensure that our energy is
delivered without interruption. That's why last year I promised
to step up our efforts to protect and maintain America's energy
infrastructure in the face of all hazards. The devastation
caused by the 2017 hurricanes and the impact to the electricity
sector highlighted the importance of improving grid reliability
and resilience. This Committee has significant interest in our
hurricane relief and restoration efforts and I thank you for
your continued support there, but we also need to protect from
manmade attacks, including cyberattacks.
So this year we've requested funding increases to
strengthen cybersecurity as well as the agency's cyber
defenses. We're establishing a new Office of Cybersecurity,
Energy Security, and Emergency Response. It's called CESER.
It's going to be led by a new Assistant Secretary.
Since much of our nation's greatest technology
breakthroughs affecting energy have come through the work of
our great national laboratories, we need to ensure their
funding as well. I could speak extensively about some of the
great work that they're doing, but today, I'll only mention
two.
Our effort to accelerate exascale computing systems in
order to keep the U.S. at the forefront of super computing is
extremely important; therefore, a 31 percent increase in that
line item. This will have positive implications on everything
from artificial intelligence to some of the great work we're
doing to improve the health of our veterans.
Chair Murkowski, in my first year I visited nine national
labs with four more coming up the end of this month. I've also
visited WIPP, the Nevada National Security Site, Pantex, Y-12,
the Kansas City National Security Complex, McNary Dam and
Hanford. And in a few weeks, I am looking forward to being in
your home state and joining you there in Alaska.
Wherever I go there's one thing that is made abundantly
clear to me, those who work for the Department of Energy are
dedicated, they're patriotic and they're committed to serving
the American people. In the end, it is you, the people's
elected representatives, who will decide how to best allocate
the resources of our hard-working taxpayers.
My commitment to each of you on this Committee is that we
will do our best to use these resources wisely in the pursuit
of the vital goals that I've outlined.
I thank you and will do my best to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Perry follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Very good.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Before I begin my questions, Senator Heller has asked that
a letter that he has provided to the Committee, be included as
part of the record. We will include that and you will see a
copy of it as well, Mr. Secretary.
[Senator Heller's letter follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Senator Cantwell has mentioned in some detail
here the cybersecurity issue and the joint alert from
Department of Homeland Security and the FBI regarding Russian
government cyber actors and how they have targeted critical
infrastructure here in this country, including our electric and
generation sources.
Know that I share Senator Cantwell's concern on this. I
want to make sure that DOE is cooperating with DHS and the FBI
with implementation of actions in response to this, but also,
to make sure that DOE is taking the lead as the Sector-Specific
Agency.
Mr. Secretary, you and I had a conversation yesterday just
about making sure that DOE--which does have this legislatively
designated authority as the lead in the Energy Sector when it
comes to cyber--that continues.
I would like you to speak specifically to that with regards
to DOE's role, and then I have one more quick question for you.
Secretary Perry. Yes, ma'am. Senator, thank you.
Just we work very closely with the Department of Homeland
Security. There's clear bifurcation, if you will, of our
responsibilities. And certainly, the Department of Energy, we
are the Sector-Specific Agency that partners with the Energy
Sector to ensure infrastructure security and resilience and
coordinate response and recovery.
The CESER office that we make reference to that we're
standing up here is our response to the clear challenges that
the sector has relative to these, sometimes, non-state players
or state players that are coming in and attacking NotPetya,
that attack last year that the Russian government was involved
with. There has been ransomware that's been stuck in. WannaCry
was the codename for it that we've seen.
The formation of CESER, this office, if you will, enhances
the Department's role in the sector-specific agency for the
Energy sector and it better positions the Department to address
emerging threats and natural disasters and support the
Department's expanded national security responsibilities. The
reporting relationship to the Under Secretary of Energy will
ensure the importance and the direct pipeline of information,
if you will, back to the Secretary of Energy. I think this
placement is very important to bridge the gap between science
and technology development and the operators and implementers
focused on securing our systems.
So, there is a clear role that DOE plays on cyber. We are
committed to being as technically advanced as possible, and
it's the reason that we request the funding and the reason we
have structured the agency, or not the agency but the
Department as such, to clearly send a message that this is
important and that we're going to fund it as such.
The Chairman. Let me ask you, Mr. Secretary, the same
question that I ask every other Cabinet member when they are in
reporting to us on their budget, and this relates to the Arctic
because this is an area, not just of interest to me, but really
of interest around the world. My complaint or my fear has been
that Administration after Administration fails to really
appreciate the opportunities, the challenges, that the Arctic
presents.
And so, I ask the same question, effectively. What is
contained in your budget request that is specific to Arctic-
related activity and how you view the Department's mission and
role, effectively, in the Arctic?
Secretary Perry. Senator, I think it's good news for you
that I've been there before. I've been on the North Slope. I
have visited that part of the state as an appropriator when I
was in the Texas legislature and even before that, time spent
in your state taking in the grandeur and the beauty and the
diversity of that state.
I think it's very important to have people with eyes on,
situational awareness, if you will, of the state, of the needs.
One of the reasons I'm going with you is I'm going to see
some things I've never seen before, whether it's microgrids,
the importance of microgrids or the chat or the conversation on
the small modular reactors, is there a role that they could
play in a state as diverse as thinly populated, if you will, as
your state.
The idea that a transmission system as we have in the
continental 48 of the United States is going to work in Alaska
is a myth. It can't. It's going to take some unique ways to
address challenges that the Arctic has.
We're committed to those, our national labs, the Office of
Electricity. We're going to be working with you and commit to
you to be very open to the innovation and the technology that
can serve the people of Alaska in, hopefully, a way that
they've never seen before.
The Chairman. Well, I appreciate that.
My time is up.
I will just note, not only for you, Mr. Secretary, but for
the other colleagues on the Committee that Alaska is hosting
the National Lab Day at the end of May which will be an
opportunity to not only have national labs understand what the
Arctic holds but vice versa.
So, thank you.
Senator Cantwell.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Secretary, on Hanford, the cleanup budget, you have
made some assumptions about the Plutonium Finishing Plant that
I actually think are off in this assessment of cutting $230
million out of that. Will you go back and review those
assessments as it relates to Plutonium Finishing Plant and live
up to the tri-party agreement, make sure that as you are making
this budget that you are going to live up to making the
milestones in that agreement?
Secretary Perry. Yes, ma'am. I think it's very important
for us.
As you said in your opening remarks that there are some
real challenges there and going out there and spending the
time, my Deputy Secretary spending multiple trips to the area
and others, I think, it was really important for an edification
process for us to understand just the complexity, the breadth
of the mission there. And I am committed to finding the
solutions.
Senator Cantwell. And living up to the tri-party agreement?
Secretary Perry. Yes, absolutely.
Senator Cantwell. Okay, great.
Now on the PNNL side, we saw some great technology, whether
that was in cyber or smart grid.
Secretary Perry. Batteries.
Senator Cantwell. Batteries, thank you. You remember, good.
Secretary Perry. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Cantwell. Alright.
So why cut this area of the budget? I am not the only one
here representing national laboratories, right?
Secretary Perry. Absolutely.
Senator Cantwell. So.
Secretary Perry. And I hope and I lay on the table a
history of being a manager of a rather large enterprise as the
Governor of the State of Texas. I was an appropriator and an
agency head in that state as well. So, the experience that I
bring, just because there is a reduction of a line item,
doesn't necessarily mean that there's going to be a reduction
in results. I hope there's some comfort that what we're doing
is prioritizing in these national labs.
Are we going to be able to fund every line item the way
that the line items were funded back prior to the 2018 proposed
budget? Probably not. But that doesn't necessarily mean that
the results that we're going to have out of those national labs
are any less consequential.
Senator Cantwell. Well, I'm not sure I agree with that, but
I hope you are right. I definitely want science to be a bigger
priority within this Administration.
But let me turn to cyber for a second because you were, I
think, at a House Committee. I wasn't sure if this was before
the Commerce Committee, which you were also there with a member
of the Cabinet, but you said you were not confident that the
Federal Government has a broad strategy in place as it relates
to cybersecurity. I don't know if you were talking about
duplication or issues, but my concern is that we still don't
have an assessment. We don't have a risk assessment.
Secretary Perry. Okay.
Senator Cantwell. So, if we don't have the risk assessment,
how do we know what we are really budgeting toward?
Secretary Perry. Yeah.
Senator Cantwell. Now, you took one step at it which, I
think, given everything that has happened, a 10 percent
increase is not where we need to be. I have called for a
doubling, but I could see where I am wildly underfunding what
is one of the most serious threats to us as a nation right now.
So what can we do to get this threat assessment done by
these agencies?
I think I mentioned to you when I hear from our colleagues
at Armed Services or Homeland Security, the military sit at the
very table you are sitting at and then tell them, yes, this is
a real threat, a real problem, but DOE has to fix it. And then,
here you are sitting with a 10 percent increase and no threat
assessment.
Secretary Perry. Yeah.
Senator Cantwell. So what can we do to get both a better
understanding of our real risks and an accurate budget increase
to fund what is critical, critical, to our national security?
Secretary Perry. Senator Cantwell, thank you for
recognizing the challenge that we have. It is very real. It is
ever changing.
And again, I don't want to belabor this point of a 10
percent increase being less than what you think is appropriate
for this. That's why we have these hearings is to discuss these
areas of conflict.
When it comes to you believe it needs to be more, I might
believe it needs to be a bit more myself, but the fact is we're
spending some dollars in other areas in our budget that are
going to have real concrete effect on cyber. And I'll give you
an example. In exascale computing and our ability to be able to
manage massive amounts of data is going to be, I think,
tantamount to our success in combating the cyberattacks that
are going on. That amount of money has been increased by 31
percent. So it's not just in that line item on standing up the
cyber----
Senator Cantwell. Do you believe that we need a risk
assessment as a nation?
Secretary Perry. Do I?
Senator Cantwell. Do we need a risk assessment of this
problem?
Secretary Perry. I think that's going on as we speak.
We have three different areas in DOE that are focused on
cyber and have been meeting and having these conversations
before. The coordination and the conversation is ongoing,
Senator.
Senator Cantwell. Well, I am sure that all of us, either in
a secure room or publicly, would like to see the government's
risk assessment.
Secretary Perry. Absolutely.
Senator Cantwell. I hope you agree that they need one. I
don't think we have gotten it yet, so I hope you can help us
get one.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cantwell.
Senator Cassidy.
Senator Cassidy. Hi, Secretary Perry. How are you?
Secretary Perry. Doctor, how are you, sir?
Senator Cassidy. Last week this Committee advanced the
Small Scale LNG Access Act of 2017 which gives Caribbean and
Central American countries greater access to liquified natural
gas. The legislation mirrors DOE rulemaking announced last
September. This bill, just to put a plug in for it, benefits
American workers, the American economy, American geopolitics
and lowers global greenhouse gas emissions.
There are some objections that somehow this would raise
domestic natural gas prices, but according to the CIA World
Factbook, the entire energy demand of all Caribbean nations
combined is 1.2 percent of the U.S. Given that only small
volume projects are eligible to benefit from the legislation
and the 1.2 percent, the low energy demand, what do you think
will be the impact of this legislation on U.S. natural gas
prices?
Secretary Perry. In a simple statement, I would suggest it
would be miniscule, even if identifiable at all.
Senator Cassidy. And how do you think this would impact the
energy markets that we are targeting, those in the Caribbean
and Central America?
Secretary Perry. I think opening up those markets is
incredibly important whether it's being able to modernize, get
away from some very ineffective fuels from the standpoint of
both cost and to the environment. Being able to bring that LNG
to play in those markets would be good for their----
Senator Cassidy. And many on this Committee are concerned
and just to speak to them about global greenhouse gas
emissions.
So, if we're replacing high sulfur, highly viscous
Venezuelan crude as an energy source with, I would prefer
natural gas from Louisiana, but you would probably prefer
Texas, but U.S. natural gas. What would that do for those
global greenhouse gas emissions?
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Texas gas does burn cleaner. That's true that you
identified that.
[Laughter.]
In all seriousness, we saw a major transition from older
inefficient plants in my home state in the 2000s to gas plants
and we saw the sulfur dioxide down by 60+ percent emissions,
the nitrogen oxide down by almost over 50 percent.
Senator Cassidy. And that is not even using Venezuelan sour
crude.
Secretary Perry. That's correct.
Senator Cassidy. Which many of these folks do.
Secretary Perry. That's right.
Senator Cassidy. You are using something cleaner than that.
Secretary Perry. Yup.
So the point is we know that you can see emission
reductions and substantial emission reductions when you
transition away from older inefficient plants and particularly
plants that are using, you know, we can get into a whole other
discussion which we don't have time here for about the
Northeast being forced to use some pretty ineffective fuels
because they do not allow the transport of natural gas across
some of those states.
Senator Cassidy. Well, let me ask you something else.
Texas was a leader in wind power, probably is the leader in
wind power.
Secretary Perry. Still is, yes, sir.
Senator Cassidy. One thing that we have noted is that using
more natural gas because you can have your startup plant in
background work, that actually you enable expansion of
renewables by converting your baseload, if you will, to natural
gas. Any comments on that?
Secretary Perry. No, sir, you're correct.
Senator Cassidy. Yes.
I think we saw that you get an 0.8 incremental increase of
renewables for every one percent or every unit of one, if you
will, increase of that.
Secretary Perry. Yeah.
Senator Cassidy. So anyway, just to, kind of, explore that
with you. Thank you.
One more thing that is a concern.
There is a MOX plant being built in South Carolina. I won't
ask you to comment on this too much except that there was an
order for a, kind of, contractor collaborative process to re-
baseline Order 413.B from the Department of Energy. I am not
sure that has been updated in this collaborative process. Can I
have your commitment just to review that and get back to us on
that process?
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Senator Cassidy. I appreciate that.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Senator Cassidy. I yield back. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator, I guess it is now, Cortez Masto.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Secretary Perry, yesterday I sent you a letter on current
Yucca Mountain activities and expenditures and an update on
expenditures that would be associated with a restarted Yucca
Mountain licensing proceeding. It is important that my
constituents have an accurate understanding of the balances of
the accounts for nuclear waste disposal and what expenditures
are being made in regards to Yucca Mountain in the absence of
Congressional direction.
Would you commit to giving this letter your attention and
providing a quick response within the next two weeks?
Secretary Perry. I literally just had it in my hand this
morning, and I'm going to review and give you as timely a
response as possible, so.
[The letter on current Yucca Mountain activities follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. Thank you.
Your budget recommends spending $120 million to bring high
level nuclear waste to Nevada and, prior to your confirmation
you were asked about Yucca Mountain and you stated to this
Committee in writing that, ``I cannot at this time make an
assessment about the time and cost associated with the Yucca
project, but I am committed to learning more about the project
and helping to resolve this national problem.''
I want to focus on the first part of your answer which is
the time and cost. In regards to cost, are you aware of the
last year in which the Department of Energy completed a total
system, life cycle cost assessment for Yucca Mountain?
Secretary Perry. I am not.
Senator Cortez Masto. Let me tell you. It was 2008, more
than a decade ago.
Are you aware of the detailed estimates this report
included on the total costs for Yucca Mountain?
Secretary Perry. I am not.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
In 2007 dollars, about $96 billion, and it has not been
adjusted for inflation.
Are you aware that this report also indicates the
Department of Energy will need $13.5 billion, again, in 2007
dollars, and 10 years just to obtain a construction
authorization and license from the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission?
Secretary Perry. I take your word for it, Senator.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
One of the many yet-to-be-addressed concerns regarding
engineering safety and costs pertains to DOE's design for
titanium drip shields that are supposed to sit over each of the
thousands of waste canisters in Yucca Mountain's underground
tunnels to keep out corroding water. No plan has been made to
design these structures, no pay-for has been determined which
is particularly crucial considering the amount of material
required has been said to exhaust the nation's supply of
titanium and no plan has been made on how to install the
shields. This unacceptable state of affairs was detailed by
former NRC Commissioner, Victor Gilinsky, in a bulletin of the
Atomic Scientists Journal article in November 2014.
Has any such consideration like this been made?
Secretary Perry. Senator, I would tell you that in the
decade that's passed since that report that you're making
reference to that a lot of technology has changed and I don't
want to----
Senator Cortez Masto. Has the Department of Energy done a
consideration or analysis based on that, to put costs
associated with it?
Secretary Perry. No.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
And if you are going to make a budget request to restart
licensing for a facility that requires such expensive,
innovative engineering, wouldn't it be more appropriate to lay
all of these considerations before Congress before asking for
more money?
Secretary Perry. I think what we're asking, Senator, is
that these dollars are for the licensing side that the NRC is
working on and for our operational side of it just to cover the
cost of that. It's not to be looking at the structural issues
that are involved there that may or may not be final.
Senator Cortez Masto. So, in that regard, did the
Department of Energy feel confident in the current license
application for Yucca Mountain or would it need to submit a new
application for changes?
Secretary Perry. I think we would be going forward with the
licensing process as the law requires us to and I think----
Senator Cortez Masto. Are there additional costs associated
with it?
Secretary Perry. Not that I'm aware of.
Senator Cortez Masto. Would the Environmental Impact
Statements for the project require any updates?
Secretary Perry. I would suggest it probably would.
Senator Cortez Masto. Does the Department of Energy even
have a final design for the facility?
Secretary Perry. No.
Senator Cortez Masto. So why should Congress agree to
appropriate any funds without answers to any of these
questions?
Secretary Perry. Well, I think this issue has been on the
table for a long time and Congress has, you know, Congress
funds a number of things without having a final plan done. So,
this is nothing out of the ordinary. This is basically the----
Senator Cortez Masto. I appreciate that comment, but I
disagree.
Secretary Perry. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Cortez Masto. I am sitting here in Congress, and I
want a final plan. I want to know how the money is being spent.
I want an analysis. I want an assessment. I think it is
irresponsible not to ask those questions, to ask for that
information and it is your job to provide that information.
I am looking forward in the future if we are going to go
down this path, and we have had this conversation before, I
think you need to come up with concrete answers and an
assessment and a cost affiliated with it for many things that
are happening right now at the Department of Energy and I
disagree with some of the comments you have made and have
concerns and echo some of the concerns of my colleagues with
respect to the budget cuts that are occurring and being
requested for the Department of Energy and the impact it is
going to have on Nevada as well.
Thank you. I notice my time is up.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Barrasso.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Secretary, thanks for coming back. It is always good to
see you.
As you and I have discussed, I am strongly opposed to the
Department's practice of bartering excess uranium to fund the
cleanup and decommissioning of the Portsmouth plant. We have
talked about that and that is not something that you, or this
Administration, had begun and we have talked about the need to
get rid of it because the GAO has repeatedly said that the
barters are illegal.
The barters have also contributed to record low uranium
prices and put uranium workers, certainly in Wyoming as well as
states who are producing uranium, out of work. Last year U.S.
uranium production was at the lowest levels since 1950, and we
are on the cusp of losing our ability to produce our own
nuclear fuel. So the Administration, I think, in terms of our
own national security cannot let that happen.
Could you commit to ending these barters, funding the cost
of cleanup and decommissioning services at Portsmouth
exclusively with the Congressional appropriations?
Secretary Perry. Senator, thank you.
It's a privilege to be back here in front of you and as you
and I have had conversations both privately and as I've stated
publicly, I think this uranium bartering process has to be on
my list of one of the most poorly designed policies I've ever
come across since becoming Secretary of Energy. It pits two
very important objectives against each other and it doesn't
serve either one of them very well and, personally, I'd like to
see it stopped completely.
We realize what the challenge is. Our efforts should be
focused on letting the uranium marketplace work as it should
while continuing, without disruption, the important work that's
taking place at the Portsmouth site.
So, given the needed funding is passed in the 2018 Omnibus,
I would be pleased to announce the suspension of the barter
program in 2018 and between now and then decide on the Fiscal
Year '19 budget and I'm certainly committed to working with
Congress on that. I hope we can extend ending the barter beyond
this Fiscal Year, working together to fully fund our
environmental management cleanup through the appropriations
process.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
I want to move to one other area.
In your testimony you expressed support for advancing
America's coal industry through innovative clean coal
technologies. The Department proposes in its budget, however,
to cut funding for carbon capture utilization and storage
research and development by about 80 percent.
I think now is not the time to cut this funding for carbon
capture utilization and storage. Expanded use of these
technologies is going to help us protect our environment,
support the continued use of America's abundant fossil
resources that we have.
Just over a month ago I worked with a bipartisan group of
colleagues to pass legislation extending and expanding tax
credits for carbon capture utilization and sequestration. We
should, I believe, build upon the success of this legislation
by maintaining a robust research and development program to
support the expanded development of this technology. What
assurances can you give me that the Department's budget request
is sufficient to support this development and commercialization
of clean coal technologies?
Secretary Perry. Senator, as I said earlier to Senator
Cantwell, just because there's a reduction in any particular
line item, it doesn't mean that the results that we're going to
be having are not appropriate and our commitment to carbon
capture utilization, storage, is very strong.
We went to China last year to the Clean Energy Ministerial.
We got CCUS placed into the list of different technologies that
they're going to be funding and working on in a worldwide way.
We were in the UAE with substantial fossil fuel developers and
promoting carbon capture utilization in that arena as well. So
not only is the agency committed to continuing to fund, but
also in our national labs, to use their substantial technology
and innovation to come up with new techniques, new avenues to
be able to use coal in a way that is not only appropriate to
the environment but that's also, from an economic standpoint,
very pleasing.
Senator Barrasso. Well, thank you very much.
I have some additional questions I will submit in writing.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Barrasso.
Senator Duckworth.
Senator Duckworth. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Secretary Perry, when we met during your confirmation
process, you promised me you would visit both Argonne and Fermi
labs in Illinois, and I want to thank you for following through
with your commitment and visiting both of those labs.
Although I don't agree with all aspects of the budget the
Administration is proposing, I am happy to see that the work
that Argonne and Fermi labs are leading, like exascale
computing and the Long-Baseline Neutrino Facility, are actually
priorities for the Administration.
Secretary Perry, I also want to thank you and your team for
working with my office to provide input on bipartisan
legislation I am working on along with Senators Graham and
Bennet to help veterans secure good jobs in clean energy.
Our nation has experienced an exponential growth in clean,
renewable energy. Today solar energy is the fastest growing
industry in the U.S. and wind energy is quickly becoming a
dominant form of energy.
In addition, rapid innovations in technology are unlocking
additional forms of low carbon emission energy options. I
believe there is tremendous opportunity for our veterans to
find careers in these energy sectors. Will you support passing
my bill at this Congress to create an innovative Department of
Energy program that will promote the hiring of veterans in the
clean energy industry?
Secretary Perry. Senator, I think you know, probably as
well as anyone in this room, my commitment to our veterans and
in a multitude of ways. We look for ways to bring them into the
workforce because you and I both know that they already have
matured beyond their years. They're already trained up in a lot
of different areas so that we don't have to retrain them or to
give them initial training. We are supportive of all programs
that help employ those that we have made a commitment to
because they have served this country in a sacrificial way.
Senator Duckworth. Thank you.
I was also very pleased to learn from Argonne that under
your leadership DOE is prioritizing research in precision
medicine. There appears to be several direct applications for
this work in our military community, including helping to
prevent suicide, addressing heart disease and treating some
forms of cancer.
I know you have mentioned this to me in the past. Could you
please provide recommendations on how Congress can better
support the work of DOE and our national laboratories in
advancing precision medicine research and development?
Secretary Perry. We will and let me just say in a broad way
that we already have in our national labs working on some of
the nuclear medicine and obviously down in, I think, Jefferson
lab in Norfolk there in their physical particle lab, some
science that's going on that has the ability to really improve
our, the scientific side of, the health community and using
nuclear medicine there.
But one thing that I would invite you to do sooner, better
yet, let me send them to you, and I'd love to have my ACTIV
program that we're just now standing up that is focused on
veterans' mental health. And it's not just veterans, it's also
our first responders. You know, the NFL is going to be
intrigued with this as will our Olympic athletes for that
matter, a mother who's got a daughter who plays soccer, any
place where concussions can come into place. And we're using
our massive computing capacity at the national labs,
particularly in your district, for that purpose. I'd love for
them to come up and brief you so that you have a really good
handle on this, because I know your love for our servicemen and
women and our veterans, as well as the science on this, can
change some people's worlds in a really positive way.
Senator Duckworth. Thank you. I do appreciate the increases
in the budget to both of our national labs.
We need to remain at the forefront of the supercomputing
capability on a global scale. If we don't, other nations will
not only catch up but surpass us, and they are actively
investing huge amounts of money in that. It is good to see that
that is covered in this year's budget.
Thank you. I yield back, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Duckworth.
Senator Portman.
Senator Portman. Thank you, Madam Chair, I appreciate it.
Secretary Perry, I appreciate you making good on your
promise which was made during the confirmation process to come
out to the Portsmouth Gaseous Diffusion Plant. We heard talk of
it earlier. It is in Piketon, Ohio.
For 50 years it enriched uranium for our government, for
our nuclear Navy, for our nuclear power plants, for the tritium
we need in our nuclear arsenal. The workers at that plant made
a lot of sacrifices with some health issues, and now we are
cleaning up that plant.
And to my colleague from Wyoming, who has departed, he
talked about the need for us to stop using barter. Well,
unfortunately we had to rely on barter because in the last
Administration, they did not provide us the appropriations. In
fact, they even slowed down the cleanup from 2025 to 2044,
slowed it down by about 20 years with the funding they
provided, even including the barter which is a huge mistake,
not just for that site and for the safety of that area and the
reindustrialization that everyone wants, but also for the
taxpayer because it ends up costing the taxpayer a lot more
when you extend the life of these cleanups. So we need the
funding.
I just did a little research. There were 323 mining jobs in
Wyoming last year in uranium. When the funding was to be cut
off at Piketon, as you know, 800 jobs were on the chopping
block.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Senator Portman. We have 1,800 people that are doing this
cleanup. You have seen what they do firsthand.
They are great people. They are doing it in a smart,
committed way, but man, this funding going up and down and the
barter being pulled, would obviously create, again, this crisis
out there where we would lose a lot of good people and we need
them. It is a community that has very high unemployment
already. I guess what I am suggesting today is let's not pull
the plug on the barter until we have the appropriations.
Secretary Perry. Sure.
Senator Portman. I guess I am looking for a commitment from
you today that you will continue the barter program unless
adequate appropriations are provided in the funding for FY'18
and FY'19 with regard to the Piketon plant.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Senator, I am committed to the cleanup of that facility. My
preference, obviously, is to have it appropriated the old-
fashioned way, if you will, from a straight-up appropriation
where your citizens and the workers at that plant know that
Congress is committed to the funding of that through a normal
appropriation. Obviously, if that does not happen, and then I
have shared that with Senator Barrasso as well, if that does
not happen the commitment to that cleanup is there and it is
solid and it is long-term.
Senator Portman. Thank you. I appreciate it, Mr. Secretary.
I do not disagree with you, as you know, and I appreciate
your commitment to it. We are just trying to clean this thing
up.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Senator Portman. It is not good for the area, and it is not
good for the taxpayers.
The other issue, as you well know, because I have talked
about this and you saw the site. The Obama Administration,
toward the end of its term, pulled the plug on the new
generation of enrichment. I listened to what my colleague and
my good friend, and he is from Wyoming, said, if we don't have
this mining, he said, we would lose our ability to produce our
own nuclear fuel, but we have already lost it.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Senator Portman. We do not have any domestic-owned or
domestic-controlled enrichment process in the country now
because we have shut down Piketon. We shut down Paducah. We
were on track under the previous Administration, through the
ACP program, which is American Centrifuge Plant, to create that
with this new, much more energy-efficient technology called
centrifuge.
So my question to you is, are you aware of the fact that
there was going to be a re-evaluation of the Obama
Administration approach to this? I believe you talked about it
in your confirmation? And if so, what are the results of that?
Do we have any sense as to where we are going on the next
generation of enriched uranium?
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir. The short answer is yes, sir.
We're working toward that as we speak.
I think my commitment to bringing the civil nuclear program
in this country back to one of stability and, frankly, to lead
the world is pretty much on display. It has been.
We think that there has been, for whatever reason, a--I'm
not going to call it an anti-nuclear mentality but the nuclear,
civil nuclear business, has been left by the wayside, whether
it's building new plants here, whether it's been committing to
small modular reactors. We have tried to reinvigorate that,
send some clear messages that this country needs to lead the
world in civil nuclear technology and these centrifuges are
obviously a very important part of that process.
Senator Portman. I appreciate that. We need to have a
source for enriched uranium. We also need it for our nuclear
Navy, as you know, as well as anybody, and we also need it for
our tritium because that low-enriched uranium is necessary to
keep our nuclear arsenal up to date. Finally, from a national
security point of view, in terms of non-proliferation, maybe
the single most important thing we can do as Americans is say
if you don't enrich uranium in your country, which often, as
you know, has gotten diverted into nuclear weapons programs,
Iran being the greatest example, we'll provide you that
enriched uranium. We can't do that now. We can't tell people we
can provide the enriched uranium. We do have a stockpile,
admittedly.
Secretary Perry. Yup.
Senator Portman. But we have no program to be able to
continue that. By not having a commitment to it, to restart it,
it is going to take billions of dollars and years and years. I
just wish we could get started on it now so we have that
capability into the future.
I thank you very much. I have other questions for the
record I will ask, and I appreciate your service.
Secretary Perry. Thank you, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Portman.
Senator Manchin.
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and thank you
for holding this hearing. And Secretary, it is always good to
be with you and it is good to see you again.
I am reminded that our friendship goes back to our days as
Governor in 2005 that we really knew each other, knew quite
well when you had Katrina and you graciously took all of the
hundreds of thousands of people from Louisiana and Mississippi
and helped them. We were able to send troops down, also send C-
130's and assist, and we have been hooked together ever since.
Also, you have been quite busy fulfilling all your promises
and commitments in a bipartisan way to visit all the states you
have. I want to thank you too, because you came to West
Virginia and you looked at what we had and what we did, at some
of the power plants that we have.
And also, NETL, the National Energy Technology Lab, in
Morgantown which is working on the clean coal technology which,
I think, Senator Barrasso had asked you about. I appreciate
your commitment on that and using the great coal that we have
in our state in a much cleaner fashion and looking for
different technologies there.
Also, the storage hub, which we will talk about and also
the rare earth elements which we have found that we were able
to extract and be self-sustaining here in America. Those are
very important projects that NETL has been leading the charge
on and you have been very supportive.
What I would like to ask you about is the Title 17 Loan
Guarantee Program from the DOE. I know it had been recommended
to be phased out, but there is still an awful lot of mileage
left there. I think there is about $8.5 billion in authority
left for the fossil projects on clean coal technology but also
the storage hub which is extremely important to us and, I
think, the security of our nation.
So, I think first of all, your concerns about the program
being eliminated in spite of strategic importance and also do
you agree/disagree on that program and what we can do to make
it even stronger?
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Senator, thank you for your longtime friendship and, just
as an aside, I'll say that coming to your district, sitting
down with you and Senator Capito, the leadership over at the
University of West Virginia and the Governor's Office, economic
development folks in that community, really turned on a bright
light for me from the standpoint of how developed that region
of America, who's sitting on top of the Marcellus and the Utica
and that huge gas deposit and creating a duplicative national
security of a refining capability in petrochemical. It was a
really important trip for me.
To the LPO, the Loan Programs Office, I think the key words
from my perspective in a realistic way is phasing out. There
are billions of dollars there that have already been
appropriated I think that we could certainly, with your
guidance, use in a very thoughtful way that can affect a lot of
citizens in a positive way.
I'm not going to try to get into anybody's head other than
to say that if this Committee and Congress, collectively,
decide to go forward with that program, that we will operate it
with the type of oversight and transparency and the results
that you all will be proud of.
Senator Manchin. Secretary, also, I want to talk to you
about, and you and I have spoken directly on this, the storage
hub for the national security of our nation, but also with the
tremendous find of new resources we have in the fracking that
we have done. West Virginia, Kentucky, Ohio and Pennsylvania
have been a tremendous boon for our energy independence, if you
will.
With that, we have promised, we have promoted a storage hub
which will give us the product and keep it in a very safe
location, also strategically away from our weather-torn areas
such as your state gets hit quite frequently and so does
Louisiana.
I don't know what you all are doing toward that and how
your support--or do you feel that it would be a great strategic
direction for our nation?
Secretary Perry. As the Governor, I'd wake up in August and
September and say a little prayer that a Category Five
hurricane did not come up the Houston ship channel. I'd seen
that model before and it's devastating, not just in the number
of people that lose their lives, which is obviously at the top
of that, your concern list, but the devastation that it does to
the country's petrochemical capacity to have a duplication of
that in a region of the country that is protected from that
type of a natural disaster would be, I think, invaluable.
So duplicating that in that Appalachian region--
Pennsylvania, Ohio, Kentucky, West Virginia--not only in an
area that economically could certainly use the shot in the arm,
sitting on top of the great natural resources of the Marcellus
and the Utica can transition a region of America that would be
very pleasing economically.
Senator Manchin. Well, your support, I will say this, the
Department of Energy's support and the Administration's support
is going to be vitally needed for this to be accomplished, but
it is something, I think, that is drastically needed. The
economic impact is $36 billion, almost at the turn of the
switch, but on top of that, the security of our nation. And
sir, your attention to this is greatly appreciated.
Secretary Perry. We are going to be focused on it like a
laser.
You're absolutely correct from the standpoint of this is
one of the projects that I've seen that the government can help
with and actually not have to fund. I mean, the private sector
will supply the funding. They just want to make sure that the
permitting process isn't--the ability to get done what we're
asking them to get done can be done, as expeditiously as
possible.
Senator Manchin. Thank you.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Manchin.
I appreciate your bringing up the loan guarantee program. I
think there are many of us around here who feel that well, that
program needs some reforms, and we actually suggested those in
our energy bill that we had moved out of here, but we have some
funding that is left in it that, we think, could certainly be
used to leverage some infrastructure out there. So thank you
for raising that.
Senator Gardner.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Madam Chair. And thank you,
Secretary Perry, for your testimony and leadership today.
I had the honor of joining a couple of our colleagues in a
visit to the Middle East here a couple of weeks ago. As we were
flying over Jordan, right around dusk, I could not help but
look down and see Amman, Jordan, right below us on an airplane
and think about what if the great inventions surrounding us
hadn't been discovered by people in America?
I was looking down at roads that were filled with cars,
Henry Ford, who perfected the assembly line and the mass
manufacturing of automobiles; looking at houses that were lit
up by lights that Thomas Edison helped invent; flying on an
airplane that is the outgrowth of work first done by the Wright
Brothers in the United States--all of whom played an incredible
part of who we are today as a nation. And I began to wonder,
what happens if those next inventions are not from the United
States? What happens if it is not America that discovers those
things or people in America that discover those things, but it
is China, it is India, it is Russia, it is somebody else? What
happens when the great things that have fundamentally
transformed our economy come from somewhere else?
And so, that is when I look at the budget for the
Department of Energy, I am concerned about some of the areas of
research and the advanced research, in particular. I want to
make sure that we continue to advance in this country because
what happens if that great next energy discovery is not in the
United States, but it is indeed in China, or India and they are
able to manufacture it? They are able to capitalize on those
jobs and the next time we fly over, whether it is Amman,
Jordan, or Denver, Colorado, we look down and do not see the
impact that America has had, but the impact that some other
nation has had because we took our eye off the ball.
We are proud of the contributions that our national lab
system has made, the efforts we have made at advanced energy
research, incredibly proud of the work the National Renewable
Energy Laboratory has done in Colorado. I think we have
achieved so much because we have had that research and that
partnership with the Federal Government that we can't, you
know, we can't get rid of that, sort of, idea that we have the
opportunity to partner and build funding opportunities.
And so, the benefits for our nation in energy security,
energy resiliency, energy affordability, significant economic
job creation, the economic advantages to this research that we
will only be able to achieve if we continue to support our
scientists and engineers at our federal facilities and research
facilities.
Can you give me the assurances that I need, many of us
need, to make sure that we continue our strong support of our
national labs and that you understand the importance of DOE-
sponsored research and that you will support it going forward?
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Senator, the thing I've been most proud of in the year that
I've spent as the Secretary of Energy is being able to go to
these national labs. As I said in my opening remarks and I
talked about, I never met any more patriotic, more committed
individuals as those that are working at our national labs.
Obviously, the support of them from Congress is very powerful,
is palpable. It will continue on, I know that.
And to address with specificity what you brought up in a
really beautiful observation about this country, the dollars
that you all are going to appropriate, the dollars that we've
asked for, for exascale computing, probably will make the
biggest impact upon all of that type of research that you're
making reference to, the innovation that's going to come out of
the labs, it's going to be expedited exponentially by the
commitment to the exascale, supercomputing capacity that we
have at those. And our commitment is very deep and broad in
that arena.
Senator Gardner. Well, Mr. Secretary, I look forward to
working with you on that funding.
Secretary Perry. Thank you.
Senator Gardner. As well as a number of other areas of
funding, to make sure that we continue being the pride of
United States in our national lab system. But more than that,
the pride and envy of the world as they look at our great
centers of innovation and excellence, represented by our
research, development and national lab system.
Switching now, real quick, to grid cybersecurity issues.
The Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability has
led an effort, in coordination with the labs, to talk about the
technological challenges of grid modernization. In many cases
these assets that we are working with are privately owned and
do not have the resources for research and development on their
own. Therefore, DOE has provided a lot of support in the
research testing and validation and deployment of technologies
for the grid.
The budget request splits the office into two, I believe,
with one focused on cybersecurity and energy security and one
focused on electricity delivery.
I am going to ask a few questions. I am going to run out of
time, so maybe we can continue this conversation after the
hearing.
The DOE Grid Modernization Initiative and the Grid
Modernization Laboratory Consortium have brought together
technical expertise from national labs to address the
challenges that the grid faces from a cybersecurity and energy
storage standpoint. The cross-cutting initiative has been a
success. I think most people would admit it, and it is
important the DOE continue to lead this program.
So, number one, can you comment on the Department's plans
for these two efforts? If you could get back to us on that,
that'd be great.
Secretary Perry. Yes, Senator.
Senator Gardner. And then this week we have heard a lot
about foreign nations attacking our grid. We have the
possibility of a foreign nation that has attacked our Colorado
Department of Transportation with the SamSam ransomware virus,
shutting down 2,000+ computers in the Department of
Transportation. Are you confident the Department's budget
request will provide the resources necessary to ensure that our
electric grid remains secure? Is there something else that we
can do to support a strong, coordinated, interagency, federal
effort to make sure critical infrastructure has the necessary
cybersecurity tools? And there are other discussions we can
have. I am out of time, but----
Secretary Perry. Senator, I will get those to you post
haste.
Senator Gardner. Thank you. Thank you.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Recognizing again the Secretary's time schedule and that we
have four more colleagues, we will try to get through this
quickly.
Senator Wyden and then Senator Heinrich.
Senator Wyden. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Secretary, it is good to see you.
Secretary Perry. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Wyden. A little bit of Pacific Northwest business.
I told the Bush Administration, George W. Bush, his folks,
that Bonneville was not going to get sold off on my watch and
it is not going to get sold off now either. So I just want to
put you on notice on this.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Senator Wyden. We also are very concerned in our part of
the world about eliminating the National Energy Technology Lab
in Albany which, I think, is doing singularly good work. I was
in Albany, Oregon, just a couple of days ago and heard again,
and I hope you will reconsider that.
I do want to ask you about Hanford because you are up on
the layout there. You were there recently. On March 6th, the
project director for the waste treatment plant sent the private
construction contractor a letter demanding that the company
explain why it could not document that the steel used at the
plant was up to safety standards, and the project director said
that this was a potentially unrecoverable quality issue.
Basically what that means in English is they could not open the
plant after billions of dollars had been spent and decades of
effort, if that was actually the case. A week later, Mr. Hamel
was transferred and I would like to believe the best in people,
but it is hard to see that that was a coincidence.
So I want to ask a couple of yes or no questions. I want
Mr. Hamel to promptly provide the Committee with the detailed
history and explanation about this potentially devastating
safety issue at the $17 billion waste treatment plant that has
not yet treated an ounce of radioactive waste. Will you, yes or
no, direct him to provide us that information.
Secretary Perry. Yes.
Senator Wyden. Great.
Second, I would like you to make Mr. Hamel available to us
so that we can ask him directly, without interference, about
this issue. Will you do so?
Secretary Perry. I am not sure I can make him do that,
but----
Senator Wyden. No, will you----
Secretary Perry. But the request would certainly be there.
Senator Wyden. You will tell him that it is acceptable to
you for him to sit down directly with us?
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Senator Wyden. Thank you.
Then, I think that just allows me to wrap up and save the
Chair a little bit more time.
This is extraordinarily important.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Senator Wyden. We have seen billions of dollars go into
this. You have now got the project director saying that there
is a potentially devastating safety issue, and he has just been
transferred after reporting this. So this story really needs
now to get into the details. It is a whistleblower story. It is
a safety story. It is an accountability story.
When you met with me privately before you were confirmed,
you said that on those kinds of issues, we could work together.
The answers you have given this morning are constructive.
I need follow-up. We need to have this done promptly and if
it's not, then we will have to go the route of the Inspector
General. I would rather not have to go that route. And by
indicating that you will tell him to provide us the
information, the detailed history and the explanation of this
potentially devastating safety issue, that is a constructive
first step. And that you will tell him it is acceptable to you
that he meet with us without interference, that is a
constructive step. So I look forward to pursuing this and
talking about it more in the future.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Senator Wyden. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you. Sounds like you have a plan.
Senator Manchin. Oh, excuse me, Senator Heinrich.
Senator Heinrich. Thank you.
Secretary Perry, welcome.
I want to start out by talking a little bit about
laboratory-
directed research and development, or LDRD. It is, in my view,
an incredibly important investment in high risk but high reward
activities at our national labs. It allows our scientists at
places like Los Alamos and Sandia, as well as other labs around
the country, to pursue innovative solutions to some of our
nation's most vexing energy and also national security
problems. Do you agree that LDRD is important, in fact, vital
to the lab's ability to recruit and retain the best and
brightest scientists and engineers?
Secretary Perry. Certainly important. Yes, sir.
Senator Heinrich. Do you support maintaining the lab
director's current discretion to set aside up to six percent,
as authorized by Congress for LDRD?
Secretary Perry. I will follow the directions of Congress,
sir.
Senator Heinrich. So you are comfortable with that figure
as it is currently set?
Secretary Perry. If you all think that is the appropriate
number, we will work within the parameters of that.
Senator Heinrich. Let me ask you a little bit about ARPA-E.
I am still trying to wrap my head around it. Given the
advancements that have been made there with solar cells, with
power controls, with lithium-ion batteries, why would we want
to zero out that program?
Secretary Perry. Senator, I come from a background of
having worked in that type of environment, if you will. That
was what I did when I was the Governor of the State of Texas
with the emerging technology fund.
I know the results of really well-managed programs, and I
know that there are people on both sides of the aisle that are
very supportive of ARPA-E. I looked at the results of it and
have found some very, very positive things that came out of it.
So let me just leave it at this. If this Congress, if this
Committee, they support the funding of that, it will be
operated in a way that you will be most pleased with.
Senator Heinrich. I appreciate that. I know the Chair is a
supporter, and I as well think it is important that this body
revisit some of those funding levels.
The Chairman. Concur.
Senator Heinrich. Moving on to storage, Secretary.
Your testimony indicates that energy storage remains an
important area of focus. We have certainly seen huge strides in
storage in the last few years.
I am pleased to see the request restores full funding for
the Energy Storage Innovation Hub, known as JCESR. I hope the
hub will soon be renewed for five years or reauthorized.
However, your budget, as I mentioned, zeros ARPA-E, nearly
eliminates the Office of Electricity Storage Research Program
and starts a new Beyond Batteries initiative. Talk to me a
little bit about your focus on storage and then explain what
the Beyond Batteries initiative is.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
In a broad sense, I think that battery storage is the
``Holy Grail'' of the energy storage side of things. So, when
we're able to do that is, I've had great confidence and it will
probably come out of a national lab or at least some of the
work come out of a national lab. Programs grow, they mature and
I think that's what you're seeing happen here.
Beyond Batteries is a visionary quest to find us in a
position to lead the world in battery storage, new materials.
It's one of the reasons that this country needs to be self-
sufficient as we can be when it comes to rare earth minerals,
what Senator Manchin was talking about in his district, some
deposits there that are very positive in that direction.
So, I hope you will look at this, Senator, as the next
step, an appropriate next step. DOE has been, historically,
done early stage financing, get innovations to particular
places, commercialize them and those programs are mature and we
go on to the next challenge. So that's what we see it doing.
Senator Heinrich. I am going to run out of time before
long.
Secretary Perry. Yes.
Senator Heinrich. I would just make the argument, I am
certainly intrigued by what Beyond Batteries would mean. I
think we need to be open to new technologies.
But while lithium-ion has certainly had a huge impact on
the market, I think additional new chemistries, for example,
are an appropriate place that is still at that same level of
development within the lab's role as early stage, not late
stage technology transfer.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir.
Senator Heinrich. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Heinrich.
Senator Hirono.
Senator Hirono. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Secretary, Hawaii has the most forward thinking,
renewable electricity goal in the country of reaching 100
percent of reliance on renewables and alternatives by 2045. And
this budget goes in totally the wrong direction by cutting 66
percent for renewable energy and energy efficiency and 60
percent for electric grid modernization.
It is not only Hawaii moving to sustainable energy. There
is a huge future, global market, for clean energy technologies
and your budget would weaken the United States in developing
the clean energy technologies that the rest of the world wants
to buy.
According to a report by Bloomberg New Energy Finance,
China invested $132 billion in clean energy technologies last
year compared to $57 billion in the United States. China is not
reducing its investments in clean energy R&D so why should the
United States?
I think we are going in the wrong direction. So I want to
ask you, why are we doing that? Why? I know that you said that
we are continuing to provide resources for research and fossil
fuels and nuclear power. Where is the commitment to renewable
sources of energy when you are facing these kinds of budget
cuts?
Secretary Perry. Certainly they're still there, some,
almost $700 million of funding for that and we're really
focusing on early stage R&D. And we're going to maintain the
United States' leadership position in these very transformative
sciences. And I'm comfortable, Senator, that the commitment is
still there.
We've had some great success stories, whether it was
dealing with hydrogen fuel cells in automobiles, whether it's
the Solar Energy Office met and exceeded its goals of five of
the last five years. In short, we're hitting or exceeding our
goals and then, you know, you set new goals. Some of the work
that we're doing on carbon capture and utilization and getting
that technology out into the world, into India and China, for
instance, can be very, very helpful to the environment.
Senator Hirono. So, Mr. Secretary, I understand the
importance of the early stage R&D, but if you don't go beyond
early stages then the technology that is developed can never
possibly be utilized.
For example, in September this Committee's Energy
Subcommittee held a hearing on how to foster innovation in the
energy sector with an emphasis on the role of our national
energy labs. The Director of Emerging Technology Strategy for
Duke Energy, one of the largest electricity utility companies
in the country, explained that utilities need to know that a
new technology fully works before they trust it on their power
system. She explained that it is not necessarily fundamental
sciences or what I would call early stage R&D, but the fact of
the matter is we can't operate out of system with technology
solutions that do not have history. She continued that anybody
who says the national labs are infringing upon the potential of
the private sector perhaps doesn't understand the complexity of
the system we are operating.
One of the reasons I introduced the Next Generation
Electric Systems Act last Congress was to support public-
private partnerships to demonstrate how to integrate energy
storage, rooftop solar and other advanced electric grid
technologies.
I do thank the Chair and Ranking Member for including
Advanced Grid Demonstration grants in their energy bill, and I
wish the President's budget had the same foresight. My point
is, Mr. Secretary, we need to support beyond the early stage
stuff. I hope that you will recognize the continual needs for
the alternative energy sector.
Secretary Perry. I do.
Senator Hirono. Great.
The Chairman. Okay.
Thank you, Senator Hirono.
Senator Smith. Recognizing that we are trying to keep the
Secretary on time, so we will be very quick.
Senator Smith. Yes, thank you very much, Madam Chair and
Mr. Secretary, it is very nice to meet you and thank you for
being here.
I am very glad that Senator Hirono asked the question about
the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Office. I strongly
support that and appreciate what, I think, was a willingness, I
hope a willingness, to work with us on getting that budget
number up to a place that would work much better for my state.
Secretary Perry. Yes, Senator.
Senator Smith. I also would just like to quickly note, I
have a similar request, I will say, on the importance of
weatherization assistance which is so important in Minnesota.
The Weatherization Assistance Program has helped. It helped
seniors stay in their homes. It helped young families afford
their homes because they can afford energy better when we
weatherize their houses. It is so important in Minnesota.
As a former business person, I appreciate that the return
on investment for this program is good. According to Oak Ridge
National Lab, we see a $1.72 benefit for every $1.00 that is
invested in weatherizing homes. Of course, it creates a lot of
jobs too.
I just want to ask you, I would really like to work with
you on this as well and see if we can't find some common ground
on keeping the Weatherization Assistance Program working well
for Minnesota and our country?
Secretary Perry. Yes, Senator. We'll work with you.
As a Governor, let me just say, I think it's really
important for the states to play a very important role in that
arena as well.
Senator Smith. Yes, I agree with that and our state does
play an important role and we are looking for a good
partnership with the Federal Government.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Smith.
Senator King.
Senator King. I am going to try to stop at 30 seconds.
Secretary Perry. Go.
[Laughter.]
Governor.
Senator King. Governor Perry, welcome.
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir, thank you, Governor.
Senator King. Or Secretary, you are supposed to be called
by your highest ever title and Governor----
Secretary Perry. I'm not going to get into that, sir.
[Laughter.]
I'm just glad to be here in any role.
Senator King. Three quick points.
Number one, congratulations on the formation of the
Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response Office.
Very timely. Very important. I think a great initiative and
look forward to working with you on it. This is one area of
huge national vulnerability. The fact that you have created an
office to focus exclusively on that problem, I think, is
commendable and I certainly, as I say, look forward to working
with you on that. That is number one.
Secretary Perry. Thank you, sir.
Senator King. Number two is please maintain a focus on
research. I believe one of the most important things the
Federal Government can do is do research that isn't necessarily
going to pay off right away because the commercial sector does
that very well. But we all know that we would not have
fracking, would not have the revolution in the price of oil and
gas that we have but for support for the Department of Energy
many years ago. We need to be thinking in the future about that
kind of support for future technologies that we, perhaps, can't
even imagine now.
So, research, however it is defined, whichever department
it is in, I think, is one of the most important functions that
the Department of Energy can perform. I hope you will continue
that focus on things like storage, for example, which you have
characterized as one of the really important parts of the
energy future of this country. Committed?
Secretary Perry. Yes, sir. All the way.
Senator King. And number three, weatherization. It really
is important. I want to echo my colleague from Minnesota.
We face situations in Maine where people have to choose
between medication, heating their home and putting food on the
table. Weatherization is a great way of avoiding expenditures
in the future.
So, please, if the Congress refunds, re-establishes that, I
hope the Department will continue to actively promote it
because it is very important to our constituents.
Secretary Perry. Senator King, the Department is going to
be a good partner, but more importantly, if having been an
appropriator in one of my previous lives, having been an agency
head and then having been a Governor and now the Secretary of
Energy, I respect this process.
And if you see fit, this Committee sees fit, Congress sees
fit to fund particular line items, I give you my solemn oath
that it will be administered and managed as transparently and
as successfully as possible.
Senator King. Mr. Secretary, I cannot ask more than that.
Thank you very much.
Secretary Perry. Thank you, sir.
Senator King. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator King.
Mr. Secretary, thank you.
This is well ahead of Senate time. We are one minute over
your hard stop, so I think we did pretty well.
I think you heard, sir, the concerns from many about these
budget category areas. We will be looking critically at them as
we focus on these important priorities, whether they be
weatherization, cleanup, cyber, but we appreciate the
opportunity to work with you and your team.
Secretary Perry. Senator, thank you and thank you again for
your thoughtfulness in allowing me to walk out.
Thank you all for your pleasant experience today.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. Happy to be with you.
[Laughter.]
The Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:32 a.m. the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]