- IMPROVING DATA SECURITY AT CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCIES
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
IMPROVING DATA SECURITY AT CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCIES
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC AND CONSUMER POLICY
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
March 26, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-12
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available on: http://www.govinfo.gov
http://www.oversight.house.gov or
http://www.docs.house.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-064 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM
ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland, Chairman
Carolyn B. Maloney, New York
Jim Jordan, Ohio, Ranking Minority
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Member
Columbia
Justin Amash, Michigan
Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Jim Cooper, Tennessee
Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Mark Meadows, North Carolina
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Harley Rouda, California
James Comer, Kentucky
Katie Hill, California
Michael Cloud, Texas
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida
Bob Gibbs, Ohio
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Peter Welch, Vermont
Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Jackie Speier, California
Chip Roy, Texas
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Carol D. Miller, West Virginia
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Mark E. Green, Tennessee
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Kelly Armstrong, North Dakota
Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
W. Gregory Steube, Florida
Ro Khanna, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
David Rapallo, Staff Director
Richard Trumka, Subcommittee Staff Director
Amy Stratton, Clerk
Contact Number: 202-225-5051
Christopher Hixon, Minority Staff Director
------
Subcommittee on Economic and Consumer Policy
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois, Chairman
Mark DeSaulnier, California,
Michael Cloud, Texas, Ranking
Katie Hill, California
Minority Member
Ro Khanna, California
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Chip Roy, Texas
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
Carol D. Miller, West Virginia
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
C
O
N
T
E
N
T
S
----------
Page
Hearing held on March 26, 2019...................................
1
Witnesses
Michael Clements, Director, Financial Markets and Community
Investment, Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................
3
Andrew Smith, Director, Bureau of Consumer Protection, Federal
Trade Commission
Oral Statement...............................................
5
Mike Litt, Consumer Campaign Director, U.S. PIRG
Oral Statement...............................................
6
Jennifer Huddleston, Research Fellow, Mercatus Center at George
Mason University
Oral Statement...............................................
8
The prepared statements for the above witnesses are available
at: https://docs.house.gov.
INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
----------
The documents listed below are available at: https://
docs.house.gov.
* Consumer Finance Protection Bureau Complaint; submitted by
Rep. Krishnamoorthi
* R Street Institute Letter; submitted by Rep. Miller
* National Association of Federally-Insured Credit Union
Letter; submited by Rep. Miller
* Credit Union National Association Letter; submitted by Rep.
Miller
* Conference of State Bank Supervisors Letter; submitted by
Rep. Krishnamoorthi
* Epic.org Letter; submitted by Rep. Krishnamoorthi
IMPROVING DATA SECURITY AT CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCIES
----------
Tuesday, March 26, 2019
House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Reform,
Subcommittee on Economic and Consumer Policy,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:40 p.m.,
2154 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Raja Krishnamoorthi
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Krishnamoorthi, Hill, DeSaulnier,
Pressley, Tlaib, Grothman, and Miller.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. The subcommittee will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a recess
of the committee at any time. This hearing is entitled,
Improving Data Security at Consumer Reporting Agencies. I
welcome all of you here today. Thank you so much for coming. I
now recognize myself for five minutes to give an opening
statement.
The Subcommittee on Economic and Consumer Policy is
dedicated to addressing the issues affecting American consumers
and our larger economy. Today, we look at what can be done to
improve data security by consumer reporting agencies, otherwise
known as CRAs.
September 7, 2017, changed our data security landscape
forever. That was the day that Equifax announced that it had
exposed the social security numbers and other sensitive
information of nearly half of all Americans. Specifically, 148
million Americans had their sensitive information exposed.
That event educated many people for the first time about
CRAs and the huge amounts of sensitive information that they
hold. What people still may not know is how many more of these
companies exist in America. The Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau, or CFPB, estimates that there are more than 400 CRAs
today.
Criminals want access to the treasure troves of data that
CRAs hold. They want that information so they can open
fraudulent accounts and run up debt in the names of innocent
people. In studying this issue, I was deeply saddened to learn
about one Illinois resident whose credit was so badly damaged
by identity theft resulting from the Equifax breach, that the
person was denied both employment and housing.
This is but one example illustrating the extreme and
decades-lasting implications of allowing peoples' social
security numbers, birthdates, addresses, driver's license
numbers, and credit card information to be exposed to cyber
criminals.
Again, I want to let this sink in. This one particular
breach, with regard to Equifax has the potential to cause
extreme harm to nearly half of the population, or 148 million
Americans.
A year and a half has passed since the Equifax breach and
the causes of that breach have been investigated and exposed.
Moving forward, it is our job in Congress to help prevent
future data breaches and to prevent more Americans from having
their sensitive, personal information compromised.
Through the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, otherwise known as
GLBA, Congress directed the Federal Trade Commission to
implement data security rules for CRAs. To achieve that, it
created the, ``Safeguards Rule,'' which requires CRAs to take,
``reasonable steps to protect consumer data.'' But the FTC has
limited recourse against the CRAs that violates the Safeguards
Rule. It cannot seek penalties for first violations, and the
FTC can only seek monetary compensation for consumers if they
have identified a specific harm.
Because the negative effects of a breach can often take
years to surface, it is extremely difficult to reduce this harm
to a single dollar amount. CRAs also hold huge sway over the
lives of consumers. The information they control could
determine if someone gets a loan, a job, insurance, or a home.
Yet, CRAs are not accountable to those same individuals.
If consumers dislike a CRA, they cannot hold them
accountable by taking their business elsewhere. But Congress
can and should hold CRAs accountable by giving Federal
watchdogs the tools they need to make CRAs care more about data
security.
Failure to implement proper data security must cost CRAs
more than investing in good security to prevent a breach. That
is why today, Senator Elizabeth Warren and Chairman Elijah
Cummings released a proprietary report by the Government
Accountability Office, the GAO, which we will closely examine
in this hearing.
In this new report, GAO has recommended giving the FTC
penalty authority for first violations to prevent breaches and
to protect data security. This is a nonpartisan analysis, and
in fact, democratic and republican FTC chairmen have called for
increased penalty authority for first-time violations,
including the current FTC Chairman, Mr. Joseph Simons.
Enhancing FTC penalty power to enforce data security
follows the model set by regulations in the banking industry.
There, so far, knock on wood, we have avoided the types of
large, harmful data breaches that brought us here today.
Simply put, GAO does not think that the current regulatory
system is strong enough to get CRAs to improve their data
security. So far, many CRAs have been able to internalize the
profit off of consumer data, externalize the risk, and leave
consumers holding the bag.
Today's hearing is the first step in ensuring the data of
American consumers is being properly protected. Now, with that,
I would like to recognize our Distinguished Ranking Member,
Mrs. Miller, sitting in for the ranking member. You have five
minutes.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do not have an
opening statement, but I do want to thank you all, you
witnesses, for appearing here today, and I look forward to your
testimony and our discussion.
I also have the prepared remarks of Ranking Member Cloud,
and I ask unanimous consent that they be inserted in the
record.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Without objection, so entered.
[The Prepared Statement referenced above follows.]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mrs. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Mrs. Miller. Today, we are
joined by Mr. Andrew Smith, the Director of the Bureau of
Consumer Protection of the Federal Trade Commission; Mr.
Michael Clements, the Director of Financial Markets and
Community Investment at the GAO; as well as Mike Litt, the
Consumer Campaigns Director at U.S. Public Interest Research
Group; and finally, Jennifer Huddleston, a Research Fellow at
the Mercatus Center.
If the witnesses would please rise, I will begin by
swearing you in.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Let the record show that the witnesses
answered in the affirmative. Thank you and please be seated.
The microphones are sensitive, so please speak directly into
them. Without objection, your written statements will be made
part of the record.
I should tell you about the lighting system. I told a
couple of you, but green means go; red means stop; yellow is
different than what we see at stop lights. Here, you have to
speed up, not slow down. So with that, why don't we begin with
Director Clements? You are now recognized to give an oral
presentation of your testimony.
STATEMENT OF MICHAEL CLEMENTS, DIRECTOR, FINANCIAL MARKETS AND
COMMUNITY INVESTMENT, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
Mr. Clements. Chairman Krishnamoorthi, Representative
Miller, and members of the subcommittee, I am pleased to be
here today to discuss a recent report addressing oversight of
consumer reporting agencies or CRAs. Our bottom-line message:
actions are needed to strengthen oversight at CRAs.
CRAs serve an essential function in the financial services
industry. These companies collect large amounts of sensitive
information about consumers. These companies maintain and
analyze that information and ultimately package the information
into consumer reports.
These reports help determine whether and how much consumers
pay for credit and can also be used in employment and rental
decisions among other purposes. At the same time, consumers
have limited choice in the CRA marketplace. Unlike many other
products and services, consumers cannot exercise choice if they
are dissatisfied with a CRA.
Further, consumers do not have the legal right to delete
their records with a CRA. CFPB and FTC have noted the level of
consumer protection required can depend upon consumers
exercising choice in the marketplace. Less choice implies the
need for greater oversight.
The 2017 cyber attack on Equifax with the theft of at least
145 million consumers' records has focused attention on
oversight of CRAs. With this context, a focus on FTC's and
CFBP's oversight of data security in the CRA marketplace.
First, FTC. FTC enforces CRA compliance with the FTC Act
and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, or GLBA, among others. Section
5 of the FTC Act authorizes FTC to investigate and take
enforcement action against companies that engage in unfair or
deceptive practices, including those related to data
protection. FTC has taken action against 66 companies,
including CRAs, under Section 5 for unfair or deceptive
practices related to data protection.
GLBA seeks to ensure that financial institutions protect
consumers' non-public information. As required by GLBA, FTC
adopted its Safeguards Rules. Among other things, the
Safeguards Rule requires that financial institutions assess the
risk to consumer information and have a plan to mitigate those
risks.
FTC can enforce the Safeguards Rule through injunction,
redress, and discouragement. However, assessing monetary harm
can be difficult with data breaches, because, for example, the
resulting harm may occur years in the future. Thus, we
recommend that Congress consider granting FTC civil money
penalty authority for violations of GLBA. This would give FTC
the tools to carry out the enforcement authority that Congress
has already provided to FTC.
Second, CFPB. CFPB enforces and examines CRA compliance
with several consumer protection laws, including the Dodd-Frank
Act in portions of GLBA. Under the Dodged-Frank Act, CFPB
supervises larger market participant CRAs. Those with more than
$7 million in annual receipts from consumer reporting.
However, we found that CFPB does not have a good handle of
the number of CRAs that meet its larger market participant
threshold. Thus, we recommended that CFPB identify additional
sources of information that would help ensure that it is
tracking all CRAs that meet its threshold.
From 2015 through 2017, CFPB examined several CRAs.
However, we found that its prioritizing process does not
routinely account for data security risk. To determine specific
areas of compliance to assess, CFPB considers sources such as
consumer complaints and past exam finding. While important,
these sources do not consider how an institution would detect
and respond to cyber threats.
Following the Equifax cyber attack, CFPB initiated data
security exams of the major CRAs, but it is unclear whether and
how CFPB would incorporate data securities into its
prioritization process going forward.
Thus, we recommended that CFPB assess whether its process
for prioritizing CRA examinations sufficiently incorporates
data security risks that CRAs pose to consumers' information.
Chairman, Krishnamoorthi, Ranking Member Miller, and
members of the subcommittee, this concludes my prepared
statement. I would be pleased to respond to any questions you
may have.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you very much, Mr. Clements.
Mr. Smith, please.
STATEMENT OF ANDREW SMITH, DIRECTOR, BUREAU OF CONSUMER
PROTECTION, FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Chairman Krishnamoorthi. Mr. Chairman
and members of the subcommittee, I am Andrew Smith. I am the
Director of the Bureau of Consumer Protection at the Federal
Trade Commission. I appreciate the opportunity to appear before
you here today to discuss data security at the consumer
reporting agencies.
I also want to thank Mr. Clements and GAO for its recently
issued recommendations to improve the tools available to the
FTC to enforce the data security laws applicable to consumer
reporting agencies.
My written statement represents the views of the
commission. This opening statement represents my ideas alone
and not necessarily the views of the commission or any
individual commissioner.
To promote the security of consumers' personal information,
including information at the credit bureaus, the FTC focuses on
three main areas. The first of these is enforcement. For nearly
two decades, the FTC has been the Nation's leading data
security enforcement agency, where charged with enforcing data
security requirements contained in specific laws, such as the
Fair Credit Reporting Act and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. We
also enforce Section 5 of the FTC Act, which prohibits unfair
or deceptive practices, including unfair or deceptive practices
with respect to data security.
In this law enforcement role, the commission has settled or
litigated more than 60 actions against businesses that
allegedly failed to take reasonable precautions to protect
consumers' personal information. In 2017, the commission took
the unusual step of publicly confirming its investigation of
Equifax and the Equifax data breach, due to the scale of public
interest in the matter.
Our second area of focus is policymaking. The FTC has
conducted workshops, issued reports, and made rules to promote
data security. For example, just earlier this month, we
announced a notice of proposed rulemaking to update our
Safeguards Rule under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.
The Safeguards Rule was originally issued in 2002. It
requires financial institutions within the FTC's jurisdiction,
including credit bureaus, to implement reasonable process-based
safeguards to protect personal information.
The proposed revisions to the Safeguards Rule are based on
our nearly 20 years of enforcement experience. These revisions
are intended to retain the process-based approach of the
Safeguards Rule and to provide financial institutions with more
certainty regarding the FTC's expectations with respect to data
security.
Our third area of focus is education. The commission has
issued numerous guidance documents for businesses including
written materials, blog posts, and a comprehensive small
business cyber education campaign, which includes, how-to
videos and training materials. These materials distill lessons
learned from our enforcement actions in a succinct and
accessible manner.
With respect to cyber security at credit bureaus, the
education of consumers is also critically important. Following
the Equifax breach in September 2017, we established a
dedicated web page for victims of the breach. During that first
month, the FTC blog on the Equifax breach reached the most
viewed Government webpage, nationwide, surpassing pages for
disaster assistance after major hurricanes. The FTC's Credit
Freeze FAQs article and IdentityTheft.gov recovery steps also
made the top five most viewed Government webpages in September
2017.
We vigorously use our existing authority to protect
consumers, but we need additional tools. In this regard, we
appreciate and agree with GAO's recommendation to give the FTC
civil penalty authority for violations of the Safeguards Rule.
In fact, however, we have called more broadly on Congress
to enact comprehensive data security legislation that includes
rulemaking, civil penalty authority, and enhanced jurisdiction
for the FTC.
First, the legislation should authorize the FTC to issue
data security rules under the Administrative Procedures Act, so
that we can keep up with business and technological changes.
Where we currently have rulemaking authority, we have used it,
as demonstrated by the proposed revisions to the Safeguards
Rule, which I just mentioned.
Second, the legislation should allow the FTC to obtain
civil penalties for data security violations. Currently, we
have authority to seek civil penalties for data security
violations under the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act
and the Fair Credit Reporting Act, and we have used it. To help
ensure effective deterrents, we urge Congress to enact
legislation to allow the FTC to seek civil penalties for data
security violations in appropriate circumstances.
Now finally, the legislation should extend the FTC's
jurisdiction over data security to nonprofits and common
carriers. Entities in these sectors often collect sensitive
consumer information and significant breaches have been
reported, particularly in the nonprofit educational and
hospital sectors.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you, and I
look forward to answering your questions.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Mr. Smith.
Mr. Litt, you have five minutes.
STATEMENT OF MIKE LITT, CONSUMER CAMPAIGNS DIRECTOR, U.S. PIRG
Mr. Litt. I am sorry about that.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Take two.
Mr. Litt. All right, good afternoon. Again, my name is Mike
Litt with U.S. PIRG. I appreciate the opportunity to testify
before you today.
In order to improve data security at credit reporting
agencies, also known as credit bureaus, we need robust
financial penalties, stronger oversight, and better consumer
control of our data. You mentioned the Equifax breach. All we
have to do is look at that to see the real dangers that are
posed to real people when credit reporting agencies drop the
ball on their data security and lose our data.
I am one of the 148 million Americans whose financial DNA
was exposed, and we are put at risk of identity theft and all
sorts of fraud for the rest of our lives. Equifax still has not
paid a penalty after putting people in harm's way. We have no
choice over Equifax or the other credit bureaus--that can
collect our information and sell it.
And when they lose it, we cannot leave them the way we can
other companies. It is exactly that dynamic, why it is
important that we have robust financial penalties when data is
lost and strong oversight to prevent data loss in the first
place.
If you are a larger credit bureau and you do not comply
with the Federal Trade Commission's Safeguards Rule. There
should be mandatory penalties. If you lose personal data, there
should be mandatory fines, but at the very least, we need to
make sure that the FTC can actually issue penalties for the
first violation of the law. They investigated the Equifax
breach, but they will only be able to issue a consent order and
then only if Equifax breaks that order and then violates the
law a second time can there actually be any fines. We need to
change that.
Next, I would like to discuss some ideas for oversight from
my written testimony. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
does have tools that the FTC does not. It can issue civil
penalties after first violation of the law. It can examine
companies to catch problems ahead of time.
We know from Equifax's SEC filing last month, that the CFPB
has been investigating the Equifax breach, and they have
expressed their intent to actually issue civil penalties.
So clearly, the CFPB is using its authority to take action
on data security. We would like to see them consider and
prioritize data security for examinations of other companies as
well. The oversight committee's report on the Equifax breach
that came out in December shows that hackers exploited
unencrypted info and weak data controls. The FTC just proposed
an amendment to its Safeguards Rule that would require some
good first steps for security measures, such as data encryption
and multi-factor authentication and data controls.
Finally, I would like to talk about better consumer control
over our own data. The best way to stop an identity thief from
opening new accounts in your name is to get credit freezes,
also known as security freezes at all three of the national
credit bureaus. Basically, a credit freeze blocks or freezes
access to your credit reports.
Before the Equifax breach, the credit bureaus charged fees
for freezes in most of the states. After the breach, 19 states
made freezes free. Congress followed suit. Passed a law that
eliminated fees for everybody. In my written testimony, I
explain problems with the national freeze that we would like to
see fixed, and we have got some other ideas in there for better
consumer control.
But really the best solution would be to make sure that
access to our own credit reports is actually frozen
automatically by default. We should not have to opt in to
control access to our own data.
So to summarize all of this, we are not the customers of
the credit bureaus, but the credit reporting agencies possess
vast amounts of our personal information, including our
financial DNA and that is really why we need to be able to have
robust financial penalties and stronger oversight to
incentivize them to protect our data.
The FTC and the CFPB should use their authorities and be
granted expanded authorities in order to achieve those goals.
Additionally, we should be given more control over our own
personal data.
I look forward to working with you. Thank you so much.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Mr. Litt.
Ms. Huddleston, you have five minutes.
STATEMENT OF JENNIFER HUDDLESTON, RESEARCH FELLOW, MERCATUS
CENTER AT GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY
Ms. Huddleston. Thank you. Good afternoon. Chairman
Krishnamoorthi, Representative Miller, and distinguished
members of the Economic and Consumer Policy Subcommittee.
My name is Jennifer Huddleston, and I am a Research Fellow
with the Mercatus Center at George Mason University. My
research focuses, primarily, on the intersection of law and
technology, including the important issue surrounding data
security and data privacy.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss some of these
issues today, particularly in regards to the 2017 Equifax
breach. These conversations are particularly important as we
continue to see headlines around data breaches and data
privacy.
As policymakers consider how to address such concerns, they
should be careful to avoid unintended consequences to
innovation, as a result. With this in mind, I would like to
focus on three key points today.
First, that regulators should avoid an overly expansive
definition of harm in their approach to data security to avoid
unintended consequences to innovation. Second, the way the
FTC's current enforcement approach has provided a balanced
approach to data security and data privacy allowing innovation
to flourish and providing consumers a form of redress. Finally,
with regards to credit reporting agencies, that policy
solutions should be narrowly tailored and focused on the unique
position of these agencies and the data they possess, so as to
avoid, or limit, unintended consequences to broader data base
industries.
To begin, regulators should be cautions about an overly
expansive definition of harm and their approach to data
security that could have unintended consequences to innovation.
While there is general agreement that data breaches have the
potential for harm, there is disagreement on when harm occurs,
the need for Government intervention, and what particularly
constitutes harm in these scenarios.
There is a wide range of personal preferences and what
information we choose to share publicly or privately through
various data systems. A flexible system provides options for
both consumers and businesses and encourages innovative
solutions when it comes to data security. While it is easy to
rush to the worst conclusions when we see scary headlines and
hear news of breaches such as Equifax, only focusing on the bad
could prevent future innovation that would provide better
alternatives and better data security, more generally.
A lack of flexibility and a rigid system could lock in
existing options, rather than providing incentives to innovate
and provide better data security, more generally.
Now I would like to turn to the general success of the
FTC's current enforcement approach with regards to balancing
innovation and redress for consumer harm. The FTC has been
active in both personal data and credit reporting and financial
privacy. It has addressed data breaches under both deception
and unfairness doctrines as well as other laws when specified.
But in general, it has built a common law of consent
decrees, rather than more formal regulation and adjudication.
While this allows for greater flexibility as innovation
evolves, it also can raise concerns due to lack of clarity and
certainty for regulated parties.
At the same time, though, this approach has allowed
consumers benefits of a data-driven economy while still
providing redress when consumer harm occurs.
Finally, with regards to the unique situation of credit
reporting agencies, the policy solutions in regard should be
narrowly tailored so as to avoid unintended consequences to
data base industries, more generally.
The credit reporting agencies are in a unique situation, in
that there is no opt in or opt out for consumers. Additionally,
due to high barriers to entry, there may be less concern about
potential impact on competition that such regulation could
have.
Given these factors, the policy solutions to address these
concerns with regards to data breaches and data security should
focus on these unique aspects and the data that is uniquely
concerning when it comes to these agencies.
At the same time, though, we should also consider, what, in
addition to regulation, or as an alternative to regulation,
might be done more generally. For example, consumer education
and empowerment, including increased transparency so that
consumers are aware of what to do in the event of data breaches
and what resources are available to them. As well as common law
alternatives for those that have experienced harm and
accountability for those who caused it.
The U.S. has been a leader in innovation, and this makes it
especially important to carefully consider the potential for
unintended consequences and not prevent potentially innovative
solutions that would provide better security in the future.
Thank you, and I welcome your questions.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Ms. Huddleston.
First of all, thank you to all of you for joining us today.
All of the witnesses, and of course, the members of the
audience.
I want to start with Mr. Litt. I recognize myself for five
minutes of questions.
You know, Equifax had very sensitive information about at
least 148 million people: their names, social security numbers,
addresses, dates of birth and so on. Do the other CRAs have
similar information about as many consumers?
Mr. Litt. Yes, in fact it is probably more. The CFPB has
said that each of the credit bureaus possess approximately 200
million different consumer files.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. I mentioned some types of personal
information. Are there other types of sensitive information
they possess?
Mr. Litt. Well they have information that is in our credit
files that could show whether you are in debt or debt
collection, your credit history. Also credit bureaus have
investigative reports on some consumers. So these are basically
background checks that can include interviews with your
coworkers, your neighbors, your friends and family, other
people in your life.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Do you have any indication that CRAs
are collecting less information today than they were at the
time of the Equifax breach?
Mr. Litt. No, I have absolutely no indication of that.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Can you explain a couple of the more
serious risks that consumers face when their sensitive data is
exposed?
Mr. Litt. Yes, so in the case of the Equifax breach where
you have just your name and your social security number, an
identity thief can try to apply for a utilities account,
credit, a loan, get a smart phone on your account. Then they
can use your date of birth and they can try to apply for your
social security benefits, your tax refund that you might be
counting on, your medical services and benefits.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Okay, without objection, I would like
to enter into the record, a complaint submitted to the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau by an Illinois parent who was a
victim of the Equifax data breach.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. This was the complaint and, you know, I
read a portion of this earlier, or read about it earlier. But
basically, this person was unable to receive housing or
employment because of the harm from the data breach.
Director Smith, I have a question for you. With their high
concentration of sensitive information, are CRAs subject to
constant attack by cyber criminals? What is the nature of the
attacks and the threats posed by cyber criminals?
Mr. Smith. So that is probably a better question for the
credit bureaus, but, you know, our understanding is that
financial institutions, generally, and credit bureaus,
specifically, are subject to constant attack, given the value
of the information that they warehouse.
I think what you find is if you spoke with financial
institutions, they would say that they are under constant
attack. That is one of the issues for us in the FTC. We want to
make sure that financial institutions are always monitoring for
penetration and intrusion so that the breaches are actually
being detected. Because that is one of my real fears -- that
there are breaches that are going undetected.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Well that is what I was going to ask
you next. Equifax may have garnered the most attention, but,
you know, can you talk about other data breaches at any other
CRAs in recent years?
Mr. Smith. Well we have brought some enforcement actions in
connection with data breaches at consumer reporting agencies.
The most prominent is probably our action against ChoicePoint
several years ago where they were selling credit reports to a
ring of known identity thieves. There we sought--well we
obtained $10 million in penalties and $5 million in consumer
redress.
I will say that most of the cases of the 66 cases that Mr.
Clements mentioned in the data security area, a couple have
involved credit bureaus but mostly not. It is mostly other
types of companies and primarily operating online.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Got it. Mr. Clements, can I ask you the
next question? Can you identify other, you know, regulatory
areas where, you know, the penalty for a first violation has
been found to be effective or, you know, what's the nature of
the impact of such a type of penalty?
Mr. Clements. We do know in the banking space that the
Federal banking regulators, that would be, for example, Office
of Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Reserve, and FDIC,
do have civil penalty authority under GLBA for those type of
violations.
They are also examining these institutions on a regular
basis. If it is a larger institution, it is subject to
continuous reviews. If it would be a smaller institution, every
12 to 18 months there would be an examination.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Got it. I am out of time. I am going to
recognize Mrs. Miller for the next set of questions.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Huddleston, in your testimony you state that the
Federal Trade Commission's current approach has been flexible
and therefore has allowed innovation to flourish while still
protecting consumers. Can you please expand upon that?
Ms. Huddleston. Thank you, Mrs. Miller. I would point to
the fact that the Federal Trade Commission has been active in
data breaches and data privacy going back to the late 1990's
with GeoCities. Our data security and our innovation when it
comes to online websites and what we expect them to protect has
come a long way. Part of this has been rather than having an
ex-ante approach of regulation, they have been able to provide
a flexible guidance that allows different methods to develop to
better protect consumers.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you. While it may sometimes be a useful
tool, enforcement actions by Federal agencies should not be the
only way to ensure consumer data is safe. Would you agree?
Ms. Huddleston. One of the interesting elements with
enforcement actions is how once they are enacted they can be
unflexible and unmoving. This can affect both consumers and
companies that are subject to consent decrees. At the same
time, there are also already existing tools, including the
common law for consumers who may have direct proof for harm of
something like identity theft. There can also be criminal
issues involved depending on the nature of what has happened as
a result of the breach.
Mrs. Miller. What are the pitfalls of excessive Government
intervention in a rapidly evolving area like information
technology?
Ms. Huddleston. We have benefited a lot from innovation and
many of us have seen how rapidly, in our lifetime, things have
changed as a result of allowing innovation to accelerate. If we
have a lot of regulation in a rapidly changing area, such as
data security, it is possible we may lock in the existing
system, rather than getting a better system that could protect
our data more.
Mrs. Miller. What are some buffers that could be created to
narrowly tailor regulatory authority?
Ms. Huddleston. When considering what to do with regards to
the credit reporting agencies, such as Equifax and these
concerns, I would suggest that we look very carefully at how we
are defining data and how are defining what entities are
covered. So that we are truly addressing those concerns.
Mrs. Miller. What can the Federal Trade Commission do to
provide greater education to consumers?
Ms. Huddleston. I think that in light of the Equifax
breach, what we have seen is a lot of consumers really want to
get interested in how they can protect themselves and take
those steps as we heard mentioned in earlier testimony.
Immediately after the Equifax breach, the blog post on what
to do was one of the most visited Government websites. Continue
to provide that information to consumers, be it through
websites or through other educational campaigns, so that
consumers can then take the appropriate and next steps
themselves.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you. We have heard a lot recently about
the General Data Privacy Regulations, or GDPR, in Europe and
the California Consumer Privacy Act, or CCPA. What are the
problems with expansive, top-down regulatory regimes such as
this?
Ms. Huddleston. With the GDPR, we have already seen that
there are fewer data actors in Europe. You already had a very
top-down regulatory regime, but smaller players have had to
exit the market, in some cases, because of the cost of
compliance.
Therefore, you may not be getting innovative solutions that
could be more protective, and you are not seeing the type of
competition that we would like to see when it comes to that,
that can provide better security.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I have here three
letters addressed to our subcommittee concerning issues before
us today. The first is from the R Street Institute, a
nonpartisan think tank. The second is from the National
Association of Federally Insured Credit Unions. And the third
is from the Credit Union National Association. I ask unanimous
consent that these letters be inserted in the record.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Without objection, so entered.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Mrs. Miller.
Ms. Pressley, you are on the clock for five minutes.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I want to thank all
of our witnesses for joining us today. It is clear from your
testimony that consumer reporting agencies occupy a very unique
space.
They deal in consumer data, but they do not deal with
consumers. Their customers are businesses. Their products are
the data that they gather about you and me and millions of
other Americans. They have the power to affect peoples' lives
in critical ways. They provide the reports that determine
everything, from whether you can get a loan to whether you can
obtain housing or even employment. Yet, they put people at risk
when they lack adequate data protection safeguards like we saw
with the Equifax breach which impacted nearly 148 million
consumers in 2017.
In fact, last month at a hearing held by the Financial
Services Committee, which I am a member of, I asked the CEO of
Equifax whether anyone on their leadership team was held
accountable for this data breach. His response was, ``There was
plenty of accountability. The entire leadership team in 2017
did not receive a bonus.''
This is, I am sure, you would agree, an insult to the
millions of consumers that were affected by the breach and
continue to this day to struggle to bounce back after having
their data compromised.
So I want to touch on what options, if at all, consumers
have in this market. You spoke to some of this you--all of
you--in your testimony. If you could elaborate, where clearly
there is no accountability for CRAs when breaches like this
happen.
Director Clements, in the GAO report you explain that
consumers lack choices in the consumer reporting market. So if
we could unpack that, just for the record, ``Consumers are not
voluntarily providing their data to CRAs. Business are not
voluntarily providing their data to CRAs.'' Businesses are
doing that, correct?
Mr. Clements. Consumer data ultimately is input to the
process. So you are correct.
Ms. Pressley. Okay. So, consumers are never actively
providing consent for our data to be provided to CRAs. Again
given your testimony, that is an accurate characterization,
correct?
Mr. Clements. Right.
Ms. Pressley. Okay. So if a constituent of mine is
dissatisfied with Equifax's data protection practices, can he
or she choose to remove their data to the competitor's and only
have Experian and TransUnion maintain their files?
Mr. Clements. No.
Ms. Pressley. Well what about leaving the consumer
reporting market, entirely? Could someone force the CRAs to
delete their records?
Mr. Clements. The CFPB has told us that consumers have no
legal right to remove their data from a CRA.
Ms. Pressley. Okay and so consumers do not voluntarily opt
in to have their information shared to the CRAs, nor can they
opt out? Instead, businesses are providing it, whether
consumers want them to or not. And once the CRAs have the
information, consumers are essentially locked out, correct?
Mr. Clements. That is correct.
Ms. Pressley. Okay. Mr. Litt, I have a couple of minutes
left. Most other private businesses cannot avoid consumers the
way CRAs can. Most businesses have to try to consumers happy or
risk losing them to their competitors. But CRAs are different.
Can consumers make decisions with their dollars that would
incentivize CRAs to ensure that they protect the sensitive data
about their customers?
Mr. Litt. No, they have no say in the matter.
Ms. Pressley. Without the pressure of market forces, is
data security at CRAs a necessary area for Government
regulation?
Mr. Litt. Absolutely.
Ms. Pressley. Back to you, Director Clements. The GAO
report indicates that CFPB has identified credit reporting as a
higher risk market for consumer harm. Can you explain why it
made that determination?
Mr. Clements. I cannot explain CFPB's logic. Our logic,
what we think CRA is a high-risk area. One is it serves an
essential function in the marketplace, in financial services
industry. Second would be the large amount of sensitive
information that is contained there. Then third, the fact that
consumers have limited choice in this marketplace.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you. So without consumer choice, CRAs
lack the same market pressures as typical businesses to
adequately protect consumer data. That is a market failure, and
it reinforces the need for strong Government rules to help
ensure sufficient consumer data protection at CRAs.
Thank you all for your testimony here today, your expert
testimony. I look forward to working with all of my colleagues
so that we can provide ample oversight and accountability for
these CRAs, since clearly, they cannot be trusted to do that
themselves.
Thank you. I yield my time.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Ms. Pressley.
Now, Mr. Grothman. You have five minutes.
Mr. Grothman. Very good. I will start out with a question
for Mr. Smith. Am I correct in saying that the FTC has
authority to take enforcement action against credit reporting
agencies that do not properly protect consumers' personal
identifiable information or that act in an unfair and deceptive
manner when it comes to consumers' personal data?
Mr. Smith. Yes. We enforce the Fair Credit Reporting Act
against consumer reporting agencies. We enforce our Safeguards
Rule against consumer reporting agencies. As you noted, we have
general authority to prohibit unfair and deceptive practices.
Mr. Grothman. You brought over 60 cases against companies
since 2002?
Mr. Smith. For data security violations, yes.
Mr. Grothman. You brought 30 cases against companies for
violating the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, including the Safeguards
Rule?
Mr. Smith. That sounds Okay to me. That sounds right.
Mr. Grothman. What is the process for bringing one of these
cases?
Mr. Smith. Generally we would learn of the case through a
variety of means. It might be press reports. It might be
consumer complaints. It might be tips or reports from other
agencies. Then we will usually issue a civil investigative
demand, which is an administrative subpoena to the company and
conduct the investigation through the normal course.
Mr. Grothman. As a practical matter, my data has been
breached, how do I find out about it?
Mr. Smith. You will generally find out about it because the
company notifies you, because there are, in every state, there
are laws that require companies where there is an authorized
access or acquisition of data, requires the company that has
been breached to send the affected consumers a notice.
Mr. Grothman. Okay, but as a practical matter, that is if
the company identifies or contacts me themselves. What bad
thing would happen to me that I would find out about it? Or how
often, when there is a breach, do bad things happen?
Mr. Smith. So it is very difficult for us to say how often,
when there is a breach, do bad things happen. Every once in a
while, we can actually tie breached information to subsequent
fraud against consumers. One example of that is when there was,
I think it was the Yahoo had their user names and passwords
that consumers used at other sites. So, there was a sum ability
to link, but generally, the proximate causation of compromised
data to any eventual consumer harm, that can be a difficult
thing to show.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. How many people, do you think, had bad
things happen because of this? Do you have any idea?
Mr. Smith. Because of?
Mr. Grothman. Of the breaches.
Mr. Smith. Of breaches generally or of the Equifax breach,
specially?
Mr. Grothman. Well, both.
Mr. Smith. So we spend a lot of time studying identity
theft in the economy, generally. We know that there is sort of
a background level of identity theft. In any given year, a
certain number of us will be subject to identity fraud. The
reasons for that may be difficult to discern.
What we are looking at when we try to look at sort of gross
aggregate levels of harm to consumers is following a big breach
like Equifax, is there any change to that background level of
identity theft?
My understanding, and again, I am not commenting on any
particular investigation that we have in front of us. But my
understanding is that Equifax has claimed that there has not
been any increase, generally, in the gross level, of identity
theft. But that just could mean that the information has not
yet been used.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Do we have any hard numbers as far as
in the Equifax breach? How many people had a bad thing happen
to them? Not getting a letter in the mail saying that, you
know, your identity has been breached, but a bad thing was done
with that information?
Mr. Smith. Right. I think that is going to be very
difficult for anyone to show. I mean, the bad things that we
would be thinking about would be someone opening a credit card
in your name, for example. That is the causation, the cause of
link between the Equifax breach and that new account opening in
your name.
Mr. Grothman. They really do not know. Nobody knows. Okay.
Ms. Huddleston, you are a scholar focusing at the
intersection of technology and the law. Do you think the FTC
has an approach to ensuring data privacy and security has been
effective so far?
Ms. Huddleston. The good thing about the FTC's approach to
data privacy and security is that it has been flexible to move
with the technology. The concern is that, because it is often
done through consent decrees, it does not necessarily provide
regulated entities with the knowledge of what is constantly
expected of them. At the same time, our court system and the
common law may be able to provide redress for those consumers
who do have the measurable harm you were mentioning in your
earlier question.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. I think I have time for one more
question. This is kind of a little bit off the topic, but just
in general, I always think with these agencies, the major
concern is that there are flaws in their information, in which
you could be harmed, and you do not even know that you are
being harmed.
Do you think we are doing an adequate job of policing that
potential problem? In other words, if there are Glenn Grothmans
in the world, and the other guy is a spendthrift, to what
degree are we catching that sort of thing? Or to what degree
are people's credit score being harmed unfairly? Do we catch
that sort of thing?
Mr. Smith. So I can start on that. I think that mistaken
identity is a big problem in the credit reporting system. We
want to make sure--so my name is Andrew Smith. There are tens
of thousands of Andrew Smiths. How do I make sure that a bad
Andrew Smith does not get mixed up with me? Or how do I make
sure that his information does not wind up in my file? Those
are challenging issues that are a part of the data security
issues, right, but they do not have to do with data quality.
Mr. Grothman. Right. It is not exactly on point, but I
think probably insofar as you worry about these agencies. I
guess with what we have done, we will go one. The chairman is
giving me the hook. That is Okay.
Mr. Smith. Well I will say that we brought a case, just a
couple of months ago, for this very accuracy issue, where there
was information about a bad person showing up in your file. It
was against a company called Real Page and we obtained a $3
million penalty under the Fair Credit Reporting Act. So there
are laws against it, and they are enforced.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Very good. Thank you.
Ms. Tlaib, you have five minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you. I want to thank all of our witnesses
today for joining us. Director Clements, I would like to
discuss the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau's role in
ensuring data security at consumer reporting agencies. In
Michigan alone, close to 4.6 million consumers were impacted by
Equifax's unprecedented data breach.
My constituents, of course, do not have the luxury of
constant credit monitoring. So it is imperative that we remain
diligent in our oversight of these credit reporting agencies,
especially now that they are using credit scoring and reports
for car insurance and other elements directly impacting
people's quality of life.
How many CRAs fall within CFPP's larger participant
supervisor power?
Mr. Clements. CFPB has told us it is tracking between 10
and 15 of those companies.
Ms. Tlaib. The GAO report, the Government Accountability
Office report recommends that CFPB leverage traditional
resources of information to make sure it is tracking all CRAs
that may qualify, why?
Mr. Clements. CFPB told us that it was unsure whether that
was the exact number of companies that its threshold of $7
million of annual receipts. So there could be a few additional
companies.
Ms. Tlaib. Has CFPB indicated a willingness to do that?
Mr. Clements. CFPB has mentioned a willingness to leverage
other data sources.
Ms. Tlaib. To fulfill its mission, it is important the CFPB
knows all of the CRAs that falls within its jurisdiction. So
the CFPB has the power to conduct supervisor examinations of
CRAs. After the Equifax breach, the GAO report indicated that
CFPB even developed internal guidelines for examining data
security. Did CFPB actually conduct any examinations of data
security at CRAs?
Mr. Clements. Our understanding is that following the
Equifax breach, the CFPB has conducted multiple targeted data
security exams at CRAs. What it was not doing was incorporating
that type of information prior to the Equifax breach. So it was
not looking at data security prior to the breach.
Ms. Tlaib. The GAO report indicated that CFPB has the
authority to conduct these data security examinations of CRAs--
these acronyms in D.C. I cannot believe it. Pursuant to its
general authority to assess compliance with Federal consumer
protection laws, such as Dodd-Frank Act, preventing any fair,
deceptive, and abusive acts in practice. Yet, The GAO report
indicated that CFPB has not committed to continue considering
data security risks in selecting examinations going forward. Is
that correct?
Mr. Clements. That is correct.
Ms. Tlaib. GAO's report also said, in light of the Equifax
breach, as well as the CFPB's acknowledgement of the CRA market
as a higher risk market for consumers, it is important for CFPB
to routinely consider factors that could inform the extent that
CRA data security risks, such as the number of consumers that
could be affected by a data security incident and nature of
potential harm, resulting from the loss of exposure of
information.
So this GAO report recommends continue[ing] to prioritize
the risk of data breach in selecting examination topics. Can
you explain why that is particularly important?
Mr. Clements. Certainly. In the past, what CFPB was looking
at when it was doing the supervision was focusing on consumer
complaints, past exam filings and public filings. So they ended
up looking at issues such as the accuracy of the data and the
dispute resolution process. We do not dispute at all that those
are important, but it was not factoring in the risk to consumer
information that a breach might happen.
That was...just within the prioritization process. Does
that mean that in every instance they would need to do that
type of exam? At least you are considering it when you are
making a decision of, "I am going to do an exam of a CRA. What
factors should I look at in that assessment?"
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you. The report also noted that other
institutions that hold sensitive consumer data like insured
depository institutions are already subject to technology
examinations, which include cyber security component. Would we
not want the same kind of supervision on CRAs as we have for
banks?
Mr. Clements. I think our findings really get to two
points. On the one hand is factoring in on those examinations
that CFPB is conducting data security. Then the other
recommendation we make in D.C. is to have some predictability
and a penalty available should the firm not meet the
requirements in that case of Gramm-Leach-Bliley. So really, our
findings were a combination of both examinations and the
penalty.
Ms. Tlaib. Okay, thank you so much. I yield my time.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Ms. Tlaib.
Ms. Hill, you are up for five minutes.
Ms. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thank you all for
being here. I know you have touched on the answers to some of
these, but I want to get clarification on a few things and just
get this for the record.
Director Clements, I would like your help in understanding
the scope of the credit reporting market. People may be
familiar with the big three: Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion,
but I was struck by the following statement in the GAO report,
which states, ``According to the CFPB, the consumer reporting
market comprises more than 400 companies, and these companies
issue three billion reports and make more than 36 billion
updates to consumer files each year.''
So beyond the big three, there are hundreds of these
companies out there, each holding our sensitive information. Is
that correct?
Mr. Clements. That is our understanding from CFPB, yes.
Ms. Hill. Great. These CRAs have subsidiaries that conduct
marketing activities. The GAO report indicates that CRAs are
able to share information with their affiliates for marketing
purposes as long as they disclose that and give consumers an
option to opt out. Is that right?
Mr. Clements. It depends on the relationship that the
individual would have with the credit reporting agency. If I
have a relationship with the credit reporting agency, for
example, if I am buying a credit monitoring service, the credit
reporting agency can then share that information with its other
affiliates. But again, it needs to provide notice, opt out
option. Then I, as the consumer, would have to not opt out. If
that is the case, there can be sharing with other affiliates
within the CRA.
Ms. Hill. What would another case be where they would not
have the sharing opportunity?
Mr. Clements. If I am not a customer of the CRA, then I do
not have a customer relationship and then the rules are
slightly different.
Ms. Hill. Different how?
Mr. Clements. There would be less sharing opportunities in
that case, because again, I am not a customer in that instance.
Ms. Hill. Okay. So in addition to consumers being concerned
about their information being breached through the backdoor,
they also have to worry about it leaving through the front door
on its way to the marketing arms of the CRA. Is that right?
Mr. Clements. Again, it depends on the customer
relationship and whether the customer choose the opt in or opt
out of the sharing.
Ms. Hill. I mean, actually like it is not usually, even you
``opt in or opt out'' it is not a very transparent process. I
think it is usually you check a box, because you are trying to
hurriedly fill out a form to get something that you need, but
is that what you are referring to?
Mr. Clements. I think in terms that the specifics we did
not get into that. I probably defer to FTC or CFPB in terms of
the ease of a customer opting in or opting out.
Ms. Hill. Okay. Director Smith, FTC published a helpful
guidance to companies about complying with the Safeguards Rule
that you make available online. It is entitled, ``Financial
Institution and Customer Information: Complying with the
Safeguards Rule.'' In the How to Comply Section, it states,
``One of the earliest steps companies should take is to
determine what information they are collecting and storing and
whether they have the business need to do so. You can reduce
the risks to customer information if you know what you have and
keep only what you need.''
Director Smith, it does not appear that CRAs were heeding
that advice prior to the Equifax breach. Since then, have you
seen any indication that CRAs have downsized the amount of data
they are keeping about us?
Mr. Smith. So we do not have any information about them
downsizing the information. I would say that, that guidance is
more sort of directed at companies being mindful of the
information that they have, inventorying it, and making sure
that they still have a need for it. I suspect that if we were
to ask the CRAs, they would say, ``This is information that we
need.''
Ms. Hill. Okay. Do know if Equifax or any of the other CRAs
have reduced their use of social security numbers?
Mr. Smith. Not to my knowledge, no.
Ms. Hill. Okay, Mr. Litt, social security numbers are used
both as identifiers and authenticators, can you please explain
the difference?
Mr. Litt. Sure an identifier basically matches your file,
matches you to your file. And an authenticator proves who you
say you are. So you can think of an identifier as a username
and an authenticator as a password.
Ms. Hill. Okay so, in theory, an authenticator should be
something secret that only you can provide. Is that right?
Mr. Litt. That is right.
Ms. Hill. So after Equifax exposed so many social security
numbers, they are no longer a secret, should CRAs stop using
them as authenticators?
Mr. Litt. Yes, they should start using them, at least as
part of their authentication process.
Ms. Hill. Does the continued use of social security numbers
as authenticators help fuel identity theft?
Mr. Litt. Yes, they do, especially with the Equifax breach,
because that is more than half the adult population, and you
cannot change them.
Ms. Hill. Do you know if Equifax or the other CRAs have
stopped using social security numbers in the authentication
process?
Mr. Litt. I am not aware of that.
Ms. Hill. So at this point, social security numbers are
widely known, and I would like to see companies acting
accordingly and to stop using them as authenticators. Thank you
so much.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Ms. Hill.
With unanimous consent, I enter the following statements
into the record. I have a letter from the Conference of State
Bank Supervisors and a letter from the Electronic Privacy
Information Center.
Without objection, so entered.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. I would like to thank our witnesses for
their testimony today. Without objection, all members will have
five legislative days, within which, to submit additional
written questions for the witnesses, to the chair, which will
be forwarded to the witnesses for their responses. I ask our
witnesses to please respond as promptly as you are able at that
time.
Thank you so much again. This meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:41 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[all]