- WORLDWIDE THREATS
[Senate Hearing 115-449]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-449
WORLDWIDE THREATS
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MARCH 6, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Armed Services
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov/
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
34-390 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
JOHN McCAIN, Arizona, Chairman
JACK REED, Rhode Island
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
BILL NELSON, Florida
ROGER F. WICKER, Mississippi
CLAIRE McCASKILL, Missouri
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire
TOM COTTON, Arkansas
KIRSTEN E. GILLIBRAND, New York
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
JONI ERNST, Iowa
JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
TIM KAINE, Virginia
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
TED CRUZ, Texas
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
LINDSEY GRAHAM, South Carolina
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
BEN SASSE, Nebraska
GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
LUTHER STRANGE, Alabama
Christian D. Brose, Staff Director
Elizabeth L. King, Minority Staff
Director
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
March 6, 2018
Page
Worldwide Threats................................................
1
Coats, Honorable Daniel R., Director of National Intelligence....
4
Ashley, Lieutenant General Robert P., Jr., USA, Director, Defense
35
Intelligence Agency.
Questions for the Record.........................................
111
(iii)
WORLDWIDE THREATS
----------
TUESDAY, MARCH 6, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:32 a.m. in Room
SH-216, Hart Senate Office Building, Senator James M. Inhofe,
presiding.
Committee members present: Senators Inhofe, Wicker,
Fischer, Cotton, Rounds, Ernst, Tillis, Sullivan, Cruz, Graham,
Sasse, Reed, Nelson, McCaskill, Shaheen, Gillibrand,
Blumenthal, Donnelly, Hirono, Kaine, King, Heinrich, Warren,
and Peters.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR JAMES M. INHOFE
Senator Inhofe. The committee will meet to hear testimony
of the--on Worldwide Threats.
We're pleased to welcome our distinguished witnesses: Dan
Coats--we all know Dan very well--and, of course, General
Ashley. It's nice to have you here.
It's particularly timely that we are here with our Nation's
top intelligence officials in the context of the
administration's newly released National Defense Strategy. I
just returned from a CODEL [Congressional Delegation], with
Senators Rounds, Ernst, Sullivan, and a member of the House
Armed Services Committee, where we visited the Philippines,
Taiwan, Korea, Japan, with the new threat that we're faced with
in the South China Sea. Senior military and civilian defense
leaders have long warned that our competitive advantage is
eroding. We remember General Dunford said--just the other day,
he said that we are losing our qualitative and quantitative
edge that we've enjoyed for such a long period of time.
Rising powers, like Russia and China, have been investing
in military modernization and developing capabilities
specifically targeted to contest America's overmatched
capabilities. In fact, China is increasing its spending in
fiscal [year] 2018 by 8.1 percent over the last year, the third
straight year in a row that they've had massive increases in
their military spending. It's important to point out that
Russia has made some advances in weapon systems, in clear
violation of the INF [Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty]
Treaty, which Putin touted during his presentation of the
Russian State of the Union, just last week. The INF Treaty
doesn't apply to China.
While our response here at home during the last
administration was to provide our military with inadequate
funding, budget uncertainty, and readiness crises, now, in a
new era of great power competition of Russia and China--China,
which we witnessed during our CODEL last week, and what they're
doing in reclaiming land and--to be used for the wrong
purposes--it's a pretty scary thing.
Director Coats, you summed up the gravity of the current
threat environment when you wrote, in your prepared statement,
``The risk of interstate conflict, including among the world's
great powers, is higher than at any time since the end of the
Cold War.''
So, on that happy note, I thank you very much, both, for
being here.
Senator Reed.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR JACK REED
Senator Reed. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And I'd like to welcome back our former colleague, Director
Dan Coats, and also General Ashley. Thank you, sir. You're
making your first appearance before the committee. Welcome.
The new National Defense Strategy states that the central
challenge facing the Nation is the reemergence of long-term
strategic competition with Russia and China, and that this
competition replaces terrorism as the primary concern in U.S.
national security. Without question, both Russia and China pose
a serious threat to our national security. In order to counter
these threats, we must better understand their objectives and
the means through which they will seek to achieve them. In
doing so, we must consider the full spectrum of capabilities of
our potential adversaries, from high-end platforms to low-end,
hybrid, or irregular approaches.
The Kremlin is aggressively pursuing strategic competition
across the full range of capabilities, from nuclear and
conventional military modernization to asymmetric operations
below the level of military conflict, intended to undermine the
foundations of our democracy and inflame social divisions. We
need a clear-eyed understanding of President Putin's intentions
asserting Russia's claim to great power status and using every
tool at his disposal to destabilize the rules-based
international order that has promoted strategic stability for
decades.
Most pressing is that the intelligence community fully
agrees that Russia is already launching an assault on the U.S.
midterm elections later this year, yet we have repeatedly heard
from administrative officials that the White House has not
directed the intelligence agencies or the relevant DOD
[Department of Defense] components to disrupt or blunt Russian
cyber and other attacks against the fundamental institutions of
our society.
In the case of China, we need a whole-of-government
approach that counters the economic, diplomatic, and military
competition we face. In other words, a military response alone
will not be successful. China is a large entrepreneurial
country with a long-term vision. We must also endeavor to
ensure that China adheres to the rules-based order from which
it has benefited so greatly.
I am deeply concerned about the continued militarization of
the territorial features of the South China Sea, its illicit
theft of U.S. technology and intellectual property, and its
coercive activities against its neighbors, including the
economic retaliation against South Korea for accepting the
THAAD [Terminal High Altitude Area Defense] deployment
necessary to defend itself from North Korea. China should work
with its neighbors, instead of destabilizing the regions
through its actions, to resolve its disputes peacefully and
through the legal mechanisms that exist.
Great power competition may be the current geostrategic
reality, but we must not neglect other equally complicated
challenges. I believe it would be harmful to our national
security if we exclusively focused on great power competition
at the expense of the ongoing threats posed by rogue regimes,
terrorist organizations, and other nonstate actors and criminal
organizations.
For example, we face a clear and present threat from North
Korea that must be contained and deterred. A preemptive war
with North Korea would be a catastrophic event for the people
of South Korea and the region. Instead, we must come up with a
robust deterrence strategy that lay a strong missile defense
with strict sanctions and sustained diplomatic effort. We must
also pursue a robust counterproliferation effort. Our strategy
must be multilaterally and globally coordinated. We can contain
the threat that North Korea poses without going to war if we
engage in a consistent strategy and adequately resource our
government agencies, especially the State Department, in the
coming years.
According to all reports, Iran is complying with its
obligations under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
However, Iran continues to play a destabilizing role in the
Middle East through its development of ballistic missiles and
support of proxy groups, particularly in Syria and Yemen.
While the so-called physical caliphate previously enjoyed
by ISIS [Islamic State of Iraq and Syria] has been dismantled,
the group has not been defeated. ISIS-directed and inspired
attacks will remain a persistent threat for some time to come.
Likewise, al Qaeda has proven resilient and continues to
seek new sanctuaries from which it can launch spectacular
attacks against the West.
In Afghanistan, the coalition continues to confront a
variety of threats, from the Taliban-led insurgency as well as
the variety of militant groups that call South Asia home, many
of which have proven resilient in the face of significant
military pressure. The National Defense Strategy calls for more
resource-sustainable approach to efforts in Afghanistan.
However, the administration is set to increase the number of
troops in country, which follows on the heels of last year's
increase. At the same time, we hear reports that countries like
Russia may be seeking to expand efforts to engage with our
adversaries in the Taliban, possibly to play a spoiler to our
efforts.
It is clear that we are living in complex times. I look
forward to your testimony on these issues and thank you for
your service.
Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Reed.
Since a quorum is now present, I ask the committee to
consider Lieutenant General Paul Nakasone, who appeared before
this Committee this last week, to be General and Director,
National Security Agency; and Chief, Central Security Service;
Commander, U.S. State--United States Cyber Command; and Dr.
Brett Park, to be Deputy Administrator for the Defense Nuclear
Nonproliferation, National Nuclear Security Administration.
Is there a motion?
Senator Reed. I so move.
Senator Inhofe. Second?
Senator Fischer. Second.
Senator Inhofe. All in favor, say aye.
[A chorus of ayes.]
Senator Inhofe. Opposed, no.
[No response.]
Senator Inhofe. The ayes have it.
[The list of nominees follows:]
Military Nominations Pending with the Senate Armed Services Committee
Which are Proposed for the Committee's Consideration on March 6, 2018.
1.
LTG Paul M. Nakasone, USA to be general and Director, National
Security Agency/Chief, Central Security Service/Commander, US Cyber
Command (Reference No. 1594).
_______________________________________________________________________
TOTAL: 1
Director Coats, we appreciate your being here, back with
your--all of your friends. We would like to hear from both of
you. And if you can confine your statements to around five
minutes, that would be helpful. We have a lot of questions. We
have a well-attended meeting here.
Senator Coats--or Director Coats.
STATEMENT OF HONORABLE DANIEL R. COATS, DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL
INTELLIGENCE
Director Coats. Well, Mr. Chairman, thank you--and Ranking
Member Reed--thank you and members of the committee. It's an
honor for me to be here today alongside General Ashley to
represent the men and women of the intelligence community whose
hard work is reflected in the testimony that we are about to
provide.
As you will hear during my remarks, we currently face the
most complex, volatile, and challenging threat environment in
modern times. The risk of interstate conflict is higher than
any time since the end of the Cold War, and we have entered a
period that can best be described as a race for technological
superiority against our adversaries, who seek to sow division
in the United States and weaken U.S. leadership. Thus, it is
evermore important that we remain vigilant to the range of
threats worldwide as we seek to do all we can to provide
security to the American people.
I'll provide a brief overview of some of the top threats,
starting with the functional topics and then moving to regional
threats. Much of what has been said by the Chairman and the
Ranking Member has--will be reaffirmed and reflected in what I
say, and so I'll try to keep this as brief as possible.
Let me begin, however, with the cyberthreat, which is one
of my greatest concerns and top priorities of our office. From
U.S. businesses to the Federal Government to State and local
governments, we are under cyberattack. While state actors pose
the greatest cyberthreats, the democratization of cyber
capabilities worldwide has enabled and emboldened a broader
range of actors to pursue their malign activities against us.
We assess that Russia is likely to continue to pursue even more
aggressive cyberattacks, with the intent of degrading our
democratic values and weakening our alliances. Persistent and
disruptive cyber and influence operations will continue against
the United States and European countries and other allies,
urging elections--using elections--excuse me--as opportunities
to undermine democracy and sow discord and undermine our
values. In addition to Russian actors, we will see Chinese,
Iranian, and North Korean cyberactors continue to build off
past successes to improve the scope and scale of their cyber
capabilities.
Quickly, let me talk about weapons of mass destruction.
Overall, the state efforts to modernize, develop, or acquire
WMD [weapons of mass destruction], their delivery systems, or
the underlying technologies constitute a major threat to the
United States and our allies. North Korea will be the most
volatile and confrontational WMD threat this year, and Russia
will remain the most capable WMD power, and is currently
expanding its nuclear-weapons capabilities.
State and nonstate actors, including the Syrian regime and
ISIS, possess and, in some cases, have used chemical weapons in
Syria and Iraq, and we continue to be concerned about other
actors' pursuit of biological weapons.
My third topic is the ongoing terrorist threat, which spans
the sectarian gamut from ISIS and al Qaeda to Lebanese
Hezbollah to state-sponsored activities of Iran and other
affiliated and nonaffiliated terrorist organizations. United
States-based homegrown violent extremists remain the primary
and the most difficult-to-detect Sunni terrorist threat in the
United States.
ISIS remains a threat to United States interests in Iraq
and Syria, despite territorial losses, and will likely focus on
rebuilding in the region, enhancing its global presence, and
planning and inspiring attacks worldwide.
Al Qaeda will remain a major actor in global terrorism as
it continues to prioritize a long-term strategy and remains
intent on attacking the United States and U.S. interests
abroad.
And Lebanese Hezbollah, with the support of Iran, will
continue to foment regional instability through its involvement
in Syria and direction to other Shiite's militant groups.
Let me briefly transition. I know probably we will be
talking about commercial space, and we need to look to the
heavens as well as the Earth, in terms of threats to the United
States. We can discuss that in more detail in the question
period. Let me just note that Russia and China have been
expanding their space-based reconnaissance, communications, and
navigation systems, and both countries seek to mature their
counterspace weapons as a means to reduce U.S. and allied
military effectiveness and perceptions of U.S. military
advantage in space.
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, both of you touched on the
various regional issues. We saw the news this morning relative
to North Korea. Hope springs eternal, but we need to learn a
lot more, relative to these talks. We will. The IC [intlligence
community] will continue to do every possible collection and
assessment we can, relative to the situation that exists in
North Korea. I know we'll be talking about that issue.
I want to note, China will increasingly seek to expand its
regional influence and shape events and outcomes globally. It
will take a firm stance on its regional claims, and intends to
use its One Belt, One Road Initiative to increase its reach to
geostrategic locations across Eurasia, Africa, and the Pacific.
In looking at South Asia and Afghanistan, we assess the
overall security picture will modestly deteriorate in the
coming year, and Kabul will continue to bear the brunt of
Taliban-led insurgency. Afghan National Security Forces face
unsteady performance, but, with coalition support, probably
will maintain control of most major population centers.
Complicating the Afghan situation is our assessment that
Pakistan-based militant groups continue to take advantage of
their safe haven to conduct attacks, including against United
States interests.
Moving now to Russia, we assess President Putin will
continue to apply assertive foreign policies to shape outcomes
beyond Russia's borders while constraining his domestic
opposition in the runup to next month's presidential elections.
We also assess that Putin will resort to more authoritarian
tactics to remain in control amid challenges to his rule.
With respect to Russian influence efforts, Russia perceives
its past efforts as successful, and views the 2018 United
States midterm elections as a potential target. We continue to
see Russian activities designed to exacerbate social and
political fissures in the United States. In the next year, we
assess Russia will continue to use propaganda, social media,
false-flag personas, sympathetic spokesmen, and other means of
influence to try to build on its wide range of disruptive
operations. We expect Russian influence efforts to continue in
other locations, as well. For example, we assess Russian
aggression in the Ukraine will persist, even as we seek to
bolster Ukraine's ability to defend its territorial integrity.
Let me turn now to the final regional plan that I've--that
I plan to talk about today, the Middle East and North Africa.
This region will be characterized by political turmoil,
economic fragility, and civil and proxy wars in the coming
year. Iran will remain the most prominent state sponsor of
terrorism and an adversary in the Middle East. Its provocative
and assertive behavior increases the potential for escalatory
actions, especially in Iraq, Syria, and Yemen, that threatens
United States forces and allies in the region.
Turkey is seeking to thwart Kurdish ambitions in the Middle
East, and the ongoing Turkish incursion into northern Syria is
complicating counter-ISIS activities in the region and
increases the risk of United States forces located in the area.
Syria will face continued unrest in fighting throughout 2018,
with spikes in violence occurring as Damascus attempts to
recapture urban areas, as we are now witnessing.
I will pass over, in the interest of time, our assessments
on Iraq, the situation in Yemen, and some other conflicts. Let
me note that the conflicts at--around the world today have
displaced more people since World War II, and these present
major social and humanitarian challenges.
Finally, just let me add one additional thought to our
Nation that I would like to present. It is deeply concerning
that our increasingly fractious political process, particularly
with respect to Federal spending, is threatening our ability to
properly defend our Nation. The failure to address our long-
term fiscal situation has increased the national debt to, as
you know, over $20 trillion and growing. Our continued plunge
into debt is unsustainable and represents a dire future threat
to our economy and to our national security. From a national
security perspective, it was then former Chairman Joint Chiefs
Mike Mullen who first identified the national debt as the
greatest threat to our national security. Since then, he has
been joined by numerous respected national security leaders of
both parties, including our current Defense Secretary, Jim
Mattis. I believe it's vitally important for all of us to
recognize the need to address this challenge and to take action
as soon as possible before a fiscal crisis occurs that truly
undermines our ability to ensure our national security.
With that, I will turn this over to General Ashley, and
then we will be ready--for his remarks--and we'll be ready to
take your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Coats follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Director Coats.
General Ashley.
STATEMENT OF LIEUTENANT GENERAL ROBERT P. ASHLEY, JR., USA,
DIRECTOR, DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Lieutenant General Ashley. Chairman Inhofe, Ranking Member
Reed, and members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to provide the Defense Intelligence Agency's
assessment of a global security environment and address the
threats confronting the Nation.
My statement for the record details a range of challenges,
competitors, threats, foreign military capabilities, and
transnational terrorist networks. In my opening remarks, I'd
like to just briefly address a few of these areas.
North Korea. North Korea is a critical threat to the United
States and our allies in Northeast Asia. North Korea leader Kim
Jong-un has pressed his nation down a path to develop nuclear
weapons and deliver them with ballistic missiles that can reach
South Korea, Japan, Guam, and the United States. He has
instituted a rapid missile development and flight testing
program that has, over the last two years, brought North Korea
closer to its goals. Moreover, North Korea conducted its sixth
nuclear test, in September of last year, which generated a much
larger seismic signature than previous tests. Concurrently,
Pyongyang has invested in conventional systems and training
designed to increase the threat to South Korea. North Korea's
nuclear and missile testing has deepened the regime's
isolation. While the United Nations has imposed additional
sanctions on North Korea, Kim shows no interest in walking away
from his nuclear or ballistic missile programs. Additional
missile launches are near certainty, and further nuclear tests
are possible as Pyongyang seeks to refine its weapons design
and its reliability.
China. In 2017, China armed forces continued implementing
sweeping organizational reforms to enhance the ability of the
People's Liberation Army to conduct joint operations, fight
short-duration, high-intensity regional conflicts at greater
distances from the Chinese mainland. China's military
modernization plan includes the development of capabilities for
long-range attacks against adversary forces that might deploy
or operate in the western Pacific Ocean. China is leveraging
its growing power to assert sovereignty claims over features in
the east, the South China Seas, and the China-India border
region. Beijing's military modernization program is expanding
in concert with an intent to invest in a range of missions
beyond China's periphery. China's increasingly lethal joint
force will be capable of holding United States and allied
forces at risk at greater distances from the Chinese mainland.
Russia. Russia views the United States as the primary
threat to its national security and its geopolitical ambitions.
The Kremlin seeks to establish a sphere of influence over
former Soviet Union states, prevent further eastward expansion
of NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization], and ensure that
no major international issues are addressed without Russia's
input or at its expense. The Kremlin views the powerful
survivable strategic nuclear force as a foundation of Russia's
national security, and sees modernized general-purpose and
nonstrategic nuclear forces as critical to meeting its
conventional military threats. Russia's aggressive actions
abroad over the last several years, its military interventions
in Syria and Ukraine, have boosted Russia's confidence in its
military and increased Moscow's geopolitical profile.
Afghanistan. In South Asia during the past year, Afghan
National Defense and Security Forces, ANDSF, protected major
population centers and denied the Taliban strategic gains while
combating ISIS in the Khorasan Province, as well as al Qaeda.
The ANDSF will build on its incremental success by continuing
to develop offensive capabilities while the Taliban will
threaten Afghan stability, undermine public confidence by
conducting intermittent high-profile attacks in urban areas,
increasing influence in rural terrain, threatening district
centers, and challenging vulnerable ANDSF locations.
Iran. Iran remains the primary nation-state challenger to
United States interests and security within the Middle East.
Iran continues to improve its conventional capabilities to
deter adversaries and defend its homeland. Iran has regions--
has the region's largest ballistic military arsenal that can
strike targets throughout the region, up to 2,000 kilometers
from their borders. Following Iran's implementation of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action in January of 2016, the
International Atomic Energy Agency continues to report that
Iran has not enriched uranium beyond allowable levels, and
maintains limits on centrifuge numbers, and allows monitoring
of nuclear fuel and heavy water stocks. Iran remains committed
to modernizing its military, building the capability of its
partners in the region, while balancing a desire to gain from
its integration into the global economic system.
Cyber. Our top competitors are developing and using
cyberspace to increase their operational reach into our
military and civilian systems, exploiting our vulnerabilities
and challenging the adequacy of our defense.
Terrorism. ISIS suffered significant setbacks in 2017.
Territorial losses in Iraq and Syria and persistent
counterterrorism operations against ISIS global network have
impeded its ability to exploit instability in the region where
it operates. ISIS members are dispersing and prioritizing
clandestine networks to preserve their core capabilities. While
ISIS capabilities have been degraded in numerous countries, it
remains a significant threat and continues to inspire more
attacks throughout the West than any other terrorist
organization. Al Qaeda also remains a serious and persistent
threat to United States interests worldwide.
Finally, advanced technological threats. Our competitors
are working to develop more advanced technologies, which pose
an increasing challenge to our warfighters, our decisionmakers,
and the intelligence community. Developments in hypersonics
will provide the ability to strike targets more quickly and at
a greater distance. The development of quantum technologies,
supercomputers, artificial intelligence is enabling new
military capabilities, and competitors are prioritizing
research in quantum-enabled communications and quantum
computing, which could supply the means to field highly secure
communications systems and eventually break encryption
algorithms.
With this brief overview, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to
the committee's questions.
[The prepared statement of Lieutenant General Ashley
follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Inhofe. Thank you very much, the excellent opening
statements. Scary, but excellent.
I mentioned that Senator Rounds, Ernst, and Sullivan and I
spent time in the South China Sea. It was disturbing to see--to
witness what's going on there, because, frankly, we didn't know
the magnitude and what kind of effect it had on our allies
there--the Philippines, the--Taiwan, South Korea. It's having a
very--it's intimidating our allies to see--and the word
``reclamation'' is not very accurate, because they're not
reclaiming land. This is land that never was there, so they're
creating land, and without any legal authority to do so. It's
obvious that it's--would be done to use for military purposes,
because that's what they have on these islands, not just a--
10,000-foot runways, but cannons and missiles and the rest. So,
this is very dangerous that--as we look at it and see the
effect it's having on our allies there. But, China is producing
at least--in addition to their increased spending, at least a
dozen warships a year, developing new long-range weapon systems
and fifth-generation fighters and--after three years of
significant increases in defense spending.
This is what's going on right now. It's a major thing that
is having an effect of challenging us in the United States as
the body that would--for leading the free world.
Director Coats, let's start with you, on your view. What do
you think they're doing out there, specifically in that part of
the China Sea, building that aggressive of a fortress out
there? What do you think the reasoning is?
Director Coats. I think it's been very clear, over the past
few years, that China is willing to take pretty extraordinary
means, in terms of expanding its influence, not over--not only
over the region, as you suggested, in South China Sea, but
throughout the globe. The One Belt, One Road program for China,
I have learned--I don't want to clarify the actual number, but
a report was recently--released recently on--unclassified
version--that China will spend about $8 trillion in 68
different nations, establishing its geostrategic positioning
that not only is economically--for economic purposes and trade
purposes, but also for use of military facilities. South China
Sea is one of the areas that they early started on, and really
almost like--we weren't all--paying all that much attention to
it; all of a sudden, they had islands with, as you said,
10,000-foot runways, not just for bringing tourists over to
enjoy the beaches, but also to establish military presence.
They definitely are expanding their regional influence as
well as their global influence. They're spending an
extraordinary amount of money on that as well as on upgrading
their military, as Admiral Ashley--General Ashley--excuse me,
General--noted in his remarks.
Senator Inhofe. Yeah.
Director Coats. And it's become a world power. And that is
their goal. And they're using----
Senator Inhofe. And if their goal----
Director Coats.--methods through----
Senator Inhofe. Do you think part of their goal is a goal
of intimidation? Because that's what's happening right now with
our allies there. They are--there's a fear that they have.
Maybe they're looking at us and looking at China, wondering
which one to side up with. What do you think?
Director Coats. Yeah. Well, I've traveled to Asia, and I've
talked with countries that are allies of the United States,
and----
Senator Inhofe. Yeah.
Director Coats.--want to be allies of the United States,
but they fear the influence of China. They use a lot of loans,
provide a lot of credit----
Senator Inhofe. Yeah.
Director Coats.--to these nations that is very attractive,
nations that don't have those resources to build roads, to
build facilities. But, it is for a design purpose. I think----
Senator Inhofe. Yeah.
Director Coats.--that is a threat to the future of
America's influence around the world.
Senator Inhofe. Yeah. I agree.
General Ashley, the statement that was made--I used that in
my opening statement--by our President, back when Kim Jong-un
made the threatening statements about what he was going to do
with his nuclear button, and people were critical of our
President, but he was saying something that came from the heart
and was a reality, in terms of the power that he has as
President of the United States. And it worked. I mean, it was a
matter of hours after that that they contacted South Korea and
said, ``We're going to join you in the Winter Olympics.'' Well,
we were over there, and we watched the effect that it had on
people. I agree, when you said ``hope springs eternal,''
there's no reason to believe that Kim Jong-un is going to be a
changed person. But, I think the news last night, that he's
actually made a response to the message that was sent, in that
he's ready to negotiate, he's ready to stop his nuclear
activity and testing, do you share my somewhat optimistic view
of what happened, General?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Senator, right now I don't share
your optimism. That's kind of a ``show me.'' We'll see how this
plays out. There could be a number of----
Senator Inhofe. Okay. We'll write that down, and we'll see
who's right and who's wrong.
Senator Reed.
Senator Reed. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you both, gentlemen, for your service, your
testimony.
Director Coats, I've always appreciated your candor, your
intellectual honesty as a colleague and a friend. Today, you
started off by citing cyber as one of your major concerns,
particularly Russian encroachment on our elections. We have
asked other members of the intelligence community what's being
done, and haven't heard much about what's being done. It really
begs the question, What are we doing? So, let me just--has--to
your knowledge, are you aware of a formal meeting of the NSC
[National Security Council] in which this issue was not only
discussed, but formal recommendations to counter this malign
activity were presented to the President for decisions? Are you
aware of anything like that?
Director Coats. Senator, there are ongoing discussions
among a number of our agencies--Department of Homeland
Security, Department of Defense, the State Department, and
others--relative to the cyberthreat. Our office recently met
with three of the most--current agencies dealing with this, NSA
[National Security Council] and others, to talk about the
effect of cyber on the upcoming elections, but as well as the
impact of that. It's a whole-of-government approach. I have
discussed it personally with the President of the United
States. He has said, ``I assume you're doing your job, all of
you who head up these agencies, relative to cyber, but if you
need for me to say--direct you to do it, do it.'' That's since
we had our discussions on the threat assessment with the SSCI
[Senate Select Committee on Intelligence].
Senator Reed. Yes, sir.
Director Coats. It is a top concern. It--the White House is
engaged, and has been. Tom Bossert's office, Rob Joyce, and
others have been leading that effort there, but it is a current
discussion underway, in terms of how we best address not only
the defense, but how do we look at ways to respond to this to
prevent us from being vulnerable to attacks.
Senator Reed. Again, I'd just comment as the discussions, I
think, are ongoing. It's just the plan of action and the
direction to take action seems to be missing. And somewhere in
that is ultimately the President. That's the nature of his
office, the nature of our Constitution.
Director Coats. I would agree with that, Senator, and--but,
I think, working with the Congress also much of the time in my
last term here in the Senate was working to try to identify
legislative action regarding critical infrastructure and
putting a cyber plan in place. And I think this is something
whole-of-government, because I think it has to work with
Congress to----
Senator Reed. I concur.
Director Coats.--decide what policies we would provide.
Senator Reed. It has to be whole-of-government--Homeland
Security, Department of Defense--but, you know, it starts at
the top if we're going to get anything done.
Let me just ask a--change subjects for a moment--is that--
I've had the opportunity to travel overseas over the last
several months, visiting United States forces--South Korea,
Djibouti, Somalia, and Jordan. One of the disconcerting
discoveries is that we do not have an Ambassador in South
Korea, we do not have an Ambassador in Jordan, we do not have
an Ambassador in Somalia, and we have troops in contact in
Somalia, we have critical equities in all these other
countries. Does it disturb you that we don't have this--the
State Department engaged like that across the globe, in terms
of our national security and your intelligence operations?
Director Coats. Well, as a former Ambassador, I like to see
Ambassadors get nominated and confirmed. But, that really is a
question for Secretary Tillerson and the State Department to
address. There has been ongoing discussions on that, but I
don't have any inside knowledge as to--in terms of the
decisionmaking process.
Senator Reed. Thank you.
General Ashley, again, thank you for your service. You
point out that the Chinese are investing a huge amount of money
in quantum computing. If this technology is realized, it would
be revolutionary--and I say that, you know, emphatically--in
terms of encryption, in terms of identifying vessels
underwater, et cetera. Do you think the United States is
putting sufficient resources behind this effort? Again, whole-
of-government effort?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Yeah, I can only speak to where
the Chinese investments are going in that assessment. I can't
speak to where we are, as a Nation, and where we're investing.
I could elaborate on the Chinese aspects of that.
Senator Reed. Are you making the depth, the scope of this
investment clear to your colleagues that do have, you know, the
responsibility to inform leaders about what we should be doing?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Senator, we are.
Senator Reed. Okay. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Inhofe. Senator Rounds.
Senator Rounds. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, first of all, let me thank you for your service
today to our country.
Director Coats, I'm just curious. You indicated that you
have had direct conversations, and good conversations, with the
White House regarding cybersecurity and so forth. I'm just
curious, do you believe that this country today has an
appropriate and clear policy with regard to cyberwarfare?
Director Coats. No. I think that's a work in process, and
needs to be in process. I do believe there is real concern that
we take action, because we're seeing the results of our
adversaries using cyber to degrade any number of things here in
the United States. I think putting a plan together, as I said,
needs to be a whole-of-government effort, because various
agencies and various forms of, not only government, but private
institutions, companies, business, financial, et cetera, are
being threatened with this. It mounts a very significant threat
to the United States.
Senator Rounds. You made very clear the seriousness of the
cyberthreat. For the last several years, the National Defense
Authorization Act has very specifically directed that there
should be a policy established. Have you seen progress made
over the last several years with regard to the creation of that
policy? Who is heading it up?
Director Coats. Well, as I said, there's no--it is a whole-
of-government effort. There is White House involvement, as well
as agencies' involvement. The--but, in specific answer to your
question, I don't think that progress has been made quick
enough to put us in a position where we have a firm policy, an
understanding, not only ourselves, but what our adversaries
know, relative to how we're going to deal with this. It's a
dicey issue. We know the capabilities, and been on the losing
end of some of those capabilities of other cyber actors.
Starting a--the potential retaliation for actions that are
taken from an offensive response have to be weighed in the
context of all that. Our critical infrastructure, which--a
number of efforts are underway to protect that infrastructure,
but we still haven't, from a policy standpoint, either from the
executive branch or the congressional branch, defined exactly
what that is and how we're going to support those defenses.
Then, the question of response, I think, is something that
really needs to be discussed, because there are pros and cons
about how we should do that.
Now, I have personally been an advocate of playing offense
as well as defense. I think we've done a pretty good job on
defense, but we don't have an offensive plan in place that we
have agreed on to be the policy of the United States.
Senator Rounds. I've had the opportunity of serving as the
Chair of the Cyber Subcommittee for this Committee, and along
with Senator Nelson, who is my Ranking Member. We have,
basically, come to the same conclusion that you have, that this
is a critical and most certainly a primary source of threats to
the United States now and in the future. We're also concerned
that, while the whole-of-government is working on it, we do not
have an appropriate policy in place today; and it should be, as
you have suggested, a primary point to be reckoned with in the
future.
I would also agree with your assessment--I think the
Science Board for the Department of Defense has made it very
clear that, for the next ten years with regard to cyberattacks,
our defensive capabilities will not match the offensive
capabilities of our peer competitors, requiring that deterrence
be enhanced on our part. I'm very pleased to hear that you feel
the same way. I hope that message gets across, that that has
got to be a part of our cyber policies now and in the future.
Thank you for that.
Let me ask just one other quick one, here. With regard to
space, buried on page 13 of your items, it has to do with the
threats in space and the threats to our capabilities to use
space. Do you think there's a disconnect between what our
policy is right now with regard to our capabilities in space
and what our peer competitors are doing to limit our ability to
see and to utilize the--what has now become acceptable
technical capabilities--GPS [Global Positioning System] and so
forth--that--are they in a position right now to basically shut
down our use of space in a time of war or a near-war position?
Director Coats. Our assessments have been that we hold a
significant advantage in space, that it's--our assessment also
says that there are other nations, particularly China and
Russia, that are seeking to catch up with us. I would turn to
General Ashley, relative to the military use and protections
that we are providing for our satellites in trying to maintain
that advantage that we now currently have.
Lieutenant General Ashley. I would say that is integral to
their strategies. When you look at the--kind of, the near
peers, whether it's Russia or China, they understand the
dependencies that we have on space. And so, they're developing
capabilities for how to counter that, whether it's a directed
energy weapon that's terrestrial, whether it is a co-orbital
attack satellite, whether it's jamming from the ground. So,
they're looking at strategies and how they develop, really,
kind of a layered approach to deny us that capability, because
they realize how integral it is, not only for us, and it'll be
integral for them, as well.
Senator Rounds. Last question. Better at it than we are?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Sir, they're in the development
stage at this point.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Inhofe. Senator Shaheen.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you both for being here. Director Coats, it's always
nice to see you back in the Senate.
I want to make sure that I understood what you said to
Senator Reed. I understood you to say that the--when you raised
the concerns about needing to respond to what Russia is doing
to interfere with the potential elections coming up in 2018,
that what you heard from the President was that you should do
whatever you needed to, to thwart that. Did I understand that
correctly?
Director Coats. My response was in--in the question that
was asked relative to the cyber issue, the direction to go
forward on cyber, not a--that did not, in my--I did not
understand it to be said in the context of the Russian
influence on the elections.
Senator Shaheen. So, you haven't heard anything, then, from
the White House or the administration about directly responding
to interference that--we've heard testimony from a number of
intelligence officials, who have said that there is currently
interference going on from Russia into our upcoming election
cycle for 2018, and you haven't had any direction from the
White House or the administration to respond to that. Is that
correct?
Director Coats. No, I wouldn't put it in that context.
There obviously is concern about an ongoing--this ongoing
effort of Russians to interfere with our elections. The White
House is well aware of that, as we all are. Agencies have been
tasked to address this. The meeting that I talked about also
included our working with State and local officials--election
officials relative to protections to put in. Of course, our job
is to do the warnings. Our job is to do the--collect the
information, do the----
Senator Shaheen. Right.
Director Coats.--assessment, and provide the warnings.
Senator Shaheen. I don't want to interrupt, but that's a
direct contradiction from what we heard from Admiral Rogers
when he was before this Committee. He said that he had not
heard from anyone in the administration or the White House
about taking any action to respond to what Russia is doing to
interfere in our elections. But, it still sounds to me like
you're saying something different. So, let----
Director Coats. Well, the NSA, which Admiral Rogers
directs, is one component of many agencies that are involved.
DHS [Department of Homeland Security] really has taken the lead
on this. The White House----
Senator Shaheen. So----
Director Coats.--has been engaged on this. The Department
of Defense, other agencies, have been engaged on this.
Senator Shaheen. So, can you----
Director Coats. But, in----
Senator Shaheen.--tell this Committee what is being done to
respond? Is that something you can tell us in this open hearing
so that I can reassure my constituents that we are, in fact,
trying to address this?
Director Coats. Much of what is being done, or is being
examined to be done, would fall in a classified area that I
would be happy to address in a classified session. But----
Senator Shaheen. Mr. Chairman, I would urge you and the
Ranking Member to hold a classified briefing for this Committee
so that we can hear firsthand what's being done to respond.
Let me ask you, General Ashley--to change the subject a
little bit--last week, before his State of the Nation--in his
State of the Nation speech, Vladimir Putin bragged about
weapons that Russia has developed that can avoid our missile
defense system and that can strike anywhere in the United
States, or, in fact, in the world, he said. Is that an accurate
assessment of what we understand Russia to have developed?
Lieutenant General Ashley. So, let me put the--kind of, his
State of the Union in context. Obviously, an election year is
coming up. And it was really for consumption of a domestic
audience. But, I will say that we're aware of the systems that
he spoke about. They are in a research-and-development phase.
And any further discussion, I'd have to go to a classified
session, and we could talk about this.
Senator Shaheen. Well, again, I hope we will have the
opportunity to hear about that in a classified session. As you
know, that got a lot of attention in the United States, and a
lot of concern.
Can I also ask you both, When you talked about the threat
from weapons of mass destruction, you talked about sarin gas in
Syria, but there was no mention made of chlorine gas attacks in
Syria, which we know are happening almost regularly now. Is
that something that we also consider a weapon of mass
destruction? How are we responding to that?
Director Coats. We do consider that as a weapon of mass
destruction. Probably more use of chlorine than sarin. We are
currently assessing this recent attack. We do not have full
information yet relative to the--each side is blaming the
other. We don't have the assessments made yet, but we are very
concerned about this, and I can--as you saw the President's
response to the attack last year, this is something that is
under serious discussion as we speak. Again, something that
needs to be discussed in a classified session.
Senator Shaheen. Well, again, I did--I do remember the
President's response last year, and that's why I raise it,
because, given the serious humanitarian conditions that are
happening in Syria, for us to allow those weapons of mass
destruction, those chemical attacks, to continue, I think goes
against all humanitarian assessment of what we should be doing.
Director Coats. I couldn't agree more.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Inhofe. Senator Ernst.
Senator Ernst. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Director Coats, General Ashley, very good to see you again.
Thank you for your service.
Director Coats, I'd like to start with you, please. In your
opening statement, you note that U.S. allies and partners'
uncertainty about the willingness and capability of the United
States to maintain its international commitments may drive them
to consider reorienting their policies, particularly regarding
trade, away from Washington. And, as we await the President's
decision on imposing tariffs on steel and aluminum, I believe
that it is important that we consider any national security
implications that this might have, those tariffs. The National
Defense Strategy states that the U.S. needs to strengthen
current alliances and foster new partnerships in order to
combat threats around the globe. And, just from your
perspective, Director, what message do you think this tariff
would say to our allies and partners? And can you explain how
our relationships with other countries can aid in our national
security efforts?
Director Coats. Well, the threat of--that we see--the
threats that we see around the world obviously need to be
looked at in the context of who's on our side and who are our
adversaries, and how we can better maintain relations with our
allies in order to address these. When General Mattis talked
about, ``We're trying to address some of these situations
through by, with, and through,'' it means working with allies.
Obviously, trade is one of many, many threads of--that tie
us together. There are pros and cons. The President's
announcement recently has not been finalized, as you know, and
was done so in the context of national security, the concern
that certain types of materials, like steel and aluminum, are
important for national security purposes, to have that capacity
here, and not to be relied--relying on foreign entities, even
some that we might call adversaries now, but might not be,
later.
Our job in the intelligence community is to assess things
after they've happened and--or are about to happen--and try to
provide information to our policymakers so that they can make
determinations on the policy. So, I really am not in a position
to discuss policy on trade, but the IC will provide everything
we can to influence and to provide--not influence, excuse me--
to provide policymakers with what they need to make those
decisions.
Senator Ernst. Very good.
Well, I often notice, anytime that any of us here are
attending defense talks overseas, whether it's the Shangri-La
dialogue or the Munich Security Conference, that not only do we
talk about national defense, but we also seem to talk about
trade, especially in the Pacific. You know, the Chairman just
stated that we returned from an overseas trip just a couple of
weeks ago. Oftentimes many of those partners really do
emphasize the need to remain strong trade partners, because,
where there is an absence of United States trade, often we see
China stepping in to close those gaps. So, obviously, I'm a
strong supporter of our trade relationships.
Director Coats, and General Ashley as well, from that
CODEL, the experiences that we took away, we had the
opportunity to talk about some of the challenges we face on the
Korean Peninsula. We have seen where North Korea has been able
to garner support through illicit trade. And, just example, we
know that North Korea has exported ballistic missile technology
to countries like Iran and Syria. Can you talk about how the
intelligence community can help in aiding and restricting that
flow of illicit materials overseas? Just as briefly as you can.
Director Coats. We take proliferation, and particularly
weapons of mass destruction, very, very seriously, and try to
track that to the very best of our abilities. We know the
history of North Korea transfers for cash and for other
reasons. It's particularly critical now, as we are dealing with
a very serious situation with North Korea. We have seen
workarounds, sanctions that have been imposed, by the North
Koreans to achieve, essentially, revenue----
Senator Ernst. And do we----
Director Coats.--to support their military. It's something
that we take very seriously. It's a very high priority for us.
Senator Ernst. Okay.
And, General Ashley, is that something, through the
military community, we're able to work with partner nations to
share information to stop that trade?
Lieutenant General Ashley. I think what you want to do is
make sure you sensitize all the nations that would be somewhere
in that supply chain as to where the risk might lie and how
they might interdict that. The challenge with some of the
technologies is its dual-use, so some of the chips, they're not
necessarily prohibited. When you actually start moving the
stuff from a maritime standpoint, we've seen more aggressive
behavior around the Peninsula, in terms of trying to catch
trans-shipments and other actions like that. So, that kind of
aggressive actions will, you know, serve our interests, in
terms of being able to interdict that. But, really, sensitizing
all the nations that are involved in those regions to the
potential movement of commodities, anything that's tied into
the development of a missile or all the components that you
would use to build that would be something that we would share
across all those nations and all those defense departments.
Senator Ernst. Very good.
Thank you, gentlemen, very much.
Senator Inhofe. Senator Blumenthal.
Senator Blumenthal. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you both for your long and distinguished service
to our Nation.
Director Coats, have you read the indictment against 13
individuals, Russians, and three Russian entities that was
recently returned by Special Counsel?
Director Coats. I'm familiar with it, and I've read a
summary of it. I haven't read all the details.
Senator Blumenthal. Would you agree with me that Russia
committed an act of war against the United States by
interfering in our past election, as detailed graphically and
dramatically by that indictment?
Director Coats. If you describe it--well, it's--it--it's
not a conventional war, it's a war of influence.
Senator Blumenthal. It's an attack----
Director Coats. If you----
Senator Blumenthal.--on the United States that constituted
an act of war. In fact, Russia itself described it as
``informational warfare.''
Director Coats. I think that's a--I think it's the
obligation of the Congress to determine whether or not
something is an act of war against the United States.
Senator Blumenthal. Whatever you describe it--and I would
call it an act of war--it is continuing, is it not?
Director Coats. I--that's what I said in my opening
message, yes.
Senator Blumenthal. Yet, the President of the United States
has never directed you to do to Russia what they are doing to
us, correct?
Director Coats. President directs me to do my job, and my
job is to provide the intelligence which formulates policy.
Senator Blumenthal. But, he's never given you orders to
take any specific action either to deter or retaliate against
Russia for its act of war on our country.
Director Coats. There are some issues that would--we could
discuss in classified session, but I can't do that here.
Senator Blumenthal. Well, you're talking to the American
people, now, who have been that Russia attacked our Nation. Can
you assure the American people that the President told you to
take effective deterrent action, in addition to what we're
doing in the past?
Director Coats. President told me to do my job. My job is
to collect--to oversee the 17 intelligence agencies----
Senator Blumenthal. But, he never----
Director Coats.--that we have, and provide that----
Senator Blumenthal.--instructed you not----
Director Coats.--intelligence information to our--to the
President----
Senator Blumenthal. He never instructed you----
Director Coats.--and to our policymakers.
Senator Blumenthal. I apologize for interrupting. He never
instructed you either to counter, deter, to retaliate, to take
any action or to devise a plan against Russia.
Director Coats. These are issues that I would like to
discuss in a classified session relative to this and----
Senator Blumenthal. Well, I think the American people
deserve to know whether, in fact, the President directed his
top intelligence officials to effectively counter this
continuing act of war on our country.
Let me shift questions, if I may. I'm sure you're aware of
both public and private information that at least four
countries discussed how to influence and manipulate certain
officials of the administration--in particular, Jared----
Director Coats. I've seen----
Senator Blumenthal.--Kushner.
Director Coats.--I've seen that leak.
Senator Blumenthal. They discussed how to manipulate Jared
Kushner through his business arrangements, his family's
financial difficulties, his lack of policy experience. Can you
assure us that you are taking effective action to protect our
national security against that manipulation?
Director Coats. We are doing everything we can to protect
the United States citizens from harm from abroad, including
what you have just described. Once again, we provide the
intelligence that provides information to our policymakers to
make decisions as to how to go forward.
Senator Blumenthal. Jared Kushner no longer has access to
top secret classified information, but he continues to have
access to secret information, correct?
Director Coats. He has a temporary security clearance, as
do several others. General Kelly has taken the position that we
need to shorten that list. It's in process right now. But,
these decisions are made by the FBI [Federal Bureau of
Investigation]--I mean, these clearances are cleared by the
FBI, and----
Senator Blumenthal. Isn't his continuing access to that
information a threat to our national security?
Director Coats. I don't believe it's a threat to our
national security. No, I don't. Because--he now has, under
General Kelly's correction, had a temporary access to some
types of information, but not to highly classified information.
Senator Blumenthal. Senator Grassley and I have written to
both the White House, Don Magan, and to the Director of the
FBI, Christopher Wray, asking for a full explanation of the
continuing security clearance process, because we--I continue
to believe, speaking only for myself, that it continues to be
defective. I hope you will cooperate in that review.
Director Coats. We certainly will cooperate, from an
intelligence standpoint, for that review.
Senator Blumenthal. Can you assure us that you will take
action in the event that any foreign government seeks to
manipulate a member of the White House staff?
Director Coats. Well, once again, I want to just make clear
that taking action is a policy decision. We provide the
information, the truth to power, the truth to those who make
those policy decisions. To the extent that the intelligence
community can participate in those actions, that has to be
formulated through policy.
Senator Blumenthal. But, you will make recommendations.
Director Coats. We're very much a part of all these
discussions, yes.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Inhofe. Senator Fischer.
Senator Fischer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, gentlemen.
If we could gear this back to some worldwide threats that
we're facing as a country. I know, in the recently released
Nuclear Posture Review [NPR], it was stated that Russia
mistakenly assesses that the threat of nuclear escalation or
actual first use of nuclear weapons would serve to de-escalate
a conflict on terms favorable to Russia. That's commonly
referred to as an ``escalate to de-escalate'' strategy. And
since the document's release, some--the Russian government, in
particular--have disputed this assessment, and they deny that
Russia has such a strategy.
General, I would ask you, Do you agree with the NPR's
assessment that the ``escalate to de-escalate'' strategy
reflects Russian doctrine?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Senator, I do. That has been
part of their doctrine for some time.
Senator Fischer. I understand that, since we are in an
unclassified forum, we can't discuss in great detail how you
arrived at that conclusion, but, in general, is it fair to say
that this strategy is reflected in their military exercises,
statements of senior leaders, and development of military
capabilities?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Let me kind of give an
overarching--in terms of what they think about when they think
about their nuclear triad. That is integral to their deterrence
strategy, and it's the same kind of triad that we have. But,
when you talk about nonstrategic nuclear weapons, it really
is--it's ``escalate to de-escalate,'' and it's been couched in
different terms--``escalate to dominate'' or ``escalate to have
conflict termination.'' And the strategy there is that you
create a pause--in this case, a strategic pause--where you're
back into talks and discussions within the conflict. Where I
would see them using this would be a situation where Moscow saw
their national vital interest--actually, Russia proper was at
risk.
Senator Fischer. In the NPR, it does state in there that a
limited first use or--limited first use could paralyze the
United States and NATO, that the Russians do believe that that
would happen, and that it would end a conflict on terms
favorable to Russia. Do you agree with that statement in the
NPR?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Yes, ma'am. That would be the
desired outcome.
Senator Fischer. Okay, thank you.
Gentlemen, both of your opening statements discuss the
increasing nuclear capabilities of Russia as well as with
China. Do you agree with the NPR's assessment that, since 2010,
global threat conditions have worsened markedly, both in
terms--in general terms and with specific respect to nuclear
threats?
Director Coats. I would agree.
Senator Fischer. General?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Fischer. Thank you.
General, in your statement for the record, you assess that
Kim Jong-un has, ``attempted to reinvigorate North Korea's
conventional military.'' We've focused extensively on North
Korea's nuclear weapons development, but can you please
elaborate on North Korea and, have they invested in
modernization of their conventional force, as well?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Yes, ma'am. A lot of that is
really focused on the old Soviet equipment that they have, in
terms of modernization, better accuracy, better systems,
integrated to the existing weapons that are part of that
inventory. I think the big change that we've seen from his
father to Kim Jong-un is the rigor of training. Prior, with his
father, you did not have the level of discipline, you did not
have the level of rigor that we would normally associate for
what you do to get a force ready to go to war. Kim Jong-un has
taken that readiness aspect very, very seriously. They do not
have a capability that could, you know, reunite the Peninsula,
but there is significant capability that's over the 38th
parallel, in terms of the amount of damage that they could do
with their conventional forces in a conflict.
Senator Fischer. Do you believe the sanctions regime has
impacted North Korea's efforts to modernize their conventional
military?
Lieutenant General Ashley. It is starting to have an
impact.
Senator Fischer. In a general sense or in specific areas
where they are looking at that modernization?
Lieutenant General Ashley. I would take the modernization
into a classified session to talk to some of the specifics
where we see that there is an impact.
Senator Fischer. Okay. What element of North Korea's
conventional force do you believe poses the greatest risk to,
not just our forces, but South Korea, as well?
Lieutenant General Ashley. It's just the sheer number of
artillery pieces and ballistic missiles that could be fired in
initial salvos into South Korea.
Senator Fischer. I'm short on time, but there was--on the
evening of February 7th, the United States forces repelled an
attack in Syria. Do you believe that these Russian mercenary
groups are acting under the direction of, or in coordination
with, the Russian Government?
Lieutenant General Ashley. I can't speak to whether or not
that particular action was executed with the knowledge.
Information I have right, at the unclassified level, is that we
do not think the Russians directed that particular maneuver
that you're referencing from that PMC.
Senator Fischer. Okay. If I could follow up later with you
on these----
Lieutenant General Ashley. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Fischer.--this line of question, I would like that.
[Deleted.]
Thank you.
Senator Inhofe. Thank you.
I want the members to be aware, we do have two votes coming
up at 11:00 o'clock. It'll be the intention of Senator Reed and
me to work through this. Senator Wicker will be voting early on
the first vote, and then coming up to chair it while I go back
for the second and third. I think we'll do this together.
Senator Hirono.
Senator Hirono. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director Coats, you and others have testified that it is a
fact that Russia is continuing its efforts to interfere with
our elections. Admiral Rogers, last week, testified that he had
no specific authority to counter these efforts. And both you
and he pointed out that Homeland Security is the lead agency
to--is the lead agency, I assume, to counter the Russian
efforts to interfere with our elections. My understanding is
that Department of Homeland Security is working with the State
elections people to make sure that the elections infrastructure
are not--will not be vulnerable to hacking by Russians. But,
who's responsible to counter the use of social media by
Russians to conduct what they call ``informational warfare''?
Is this also Department of Homeland Security's responsibility?
Director Coats. Well, as I said earlier, this is more of a
whole-of-government effort here. DHS plays the primary role,
but other agencies are involved. This is an ongoing process, in
terms of how we put together a strategy in the policy as--to
deal with this and to counter this.
Senator Hirono. I'm not aware----
Director Coats. Each agency is well aware--is well aware of
the need--that is impacted, is well aware of the need to do
this. But, as I did say, you know, one coherent strategy
between the executive branch and the congressional branch has
not been put in place yet.
Senator Hirono. Well, that's the thing. So, I--look, our
concern is, who's in charge here? Who is the lead entity to
bring everybody together? Because you have Homeland Security,
you have Cyber Command, you have FBI, you have a lot of
entities, and somebody has to take the lead. And, you know,
this is in the context of $120 million that the State
Department was given specifically to deal with the Russian
interference with our elections, and they have not spent a
dime. So, should the State Department be the lead agency to
come up with a whole-of-government approach to their--Russia's
continuing interference? Noting also that the 2018 elections
are right around the corner, why do we not have a whole-of-
government strategy already in place?
Director Coats. Well, as I said, it is in process. The
White House is actively engaged, the Office of Mr. Bossert and
Rob Joyce. This is a high priority for them, so they're working
through that, through the National Security Committee. And it
is a topic that we understand has to be addressed, and we are
addressing. We see this continuing influence by the Russians,
and we want to be not only defensively ready, we're working
with States and local election officials. So, I don't have a
specific answer to your specific question, which is, which
agency or which individual person has taken the lead at this
point?
Senator Hirono. Don't you think there should be a lead
agency, maybe the State Department, which has $120 million to
do the exact thing we're talking about?
Director Coats. Well, I think that's a decision that has to
be made at--by the President and the White House. And what is
under--being undertaken as we go forward here probably will
lead to that. We do have a Cyber Command, through the military,
which you just confirmed the new----
Senator Hirono. Yes.
Director Coats.--incoming----
Senator Hirono. I do have----
Director Coats.--Director of that. So----
Senator Hirono. I don't--I hate to interrupt you, but I'm
running out of time. But, I think that the conclusion is that
this is not a top priority for the President. You're doing your
very best to be very statesmanlike about it.
I have a question for you regarding the most recent reports
that South Korean officials are saying that North Korea is
willing to begin negotiating with the United States on
denuclearization, and they're planning an April summit between
the two leaders. What are your thoughts on North Korea's
perceived willingness to negotiate their nuclear capabilities?
I know, General Ashley, you have some doubts about this. What
do you believe should be the U.S. role as these discussions
continue? If you can start with your response.
Director Coats. Sure. We--we'll know a lot more in a few
days, as our envoys come back and give us--as well as the South
Koreans come back--and give us the details of what was
discussed. I happen to have a long history, here, in a previous
life, of watching both Democrat and Republican administrations
trying to reach agreement with North Korea on the nuclear
question. All efforts have failed. We know that Kim Jong-un
is--while he's unpredictable, he's also very calculating. We
know that he probably--that he views possession of nuclear
weapons as essential to his well-being as well as the well-
being of his nation. He has repeated that--stated that over and
over. All efforts in the past have failed and has simply bought
North Korea time to achieve what they want to achieve.
I'm quite skeptical about all of this. As I said, both
Democrat administrations, going all the way back to Clinton
administration, have been frustrated by their efforts. That has
ultimately led to just giving them time to further develop.
So, we'll see. As I said, hope springs eternal. We ought to
look at this. But, it's been very clear we have made--drawn a
very clear line: North Korea has to agree to not possess
nuclear capability. And, until that happens, we cannot have an
agreement with them. That is our position. And so, we'll see
what happens, here.
Maybe this is a breakthrough. I seriously doubt it. But,
like I said, hope springs eternal.
Senator Hirono. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Inhofe. Senator Tillis.
Senator Tillis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director Coats, thank you for being here. We miss you in
the Senate. We're glad you are where you are.
And, General Ashley, when you mark down that list of
skeptical versus optimistic, put me on your side, in terms of
North Korea. I--marking it--get the tickmark.
You know, I want to go back--I didn't plan on talking about
it, but, when we have this discussion about an act of war, I'm
pretty sure--I'm relatively new to the Senate, but I believe
that's an article 1 power. And it would seem to me that, if we
have people who have a deeply held belief that it is an act of
war, then they should be talking about taking the steps that
Congress takes, based on the information presented, to put
their money where their mouth is, in terms of declaring war.
I do have a question about Russia, though. It has to do
with the nature of the threat and what we don't know about--you
know, when we talk about conventional weapon systems, we talk
about standoff, we have a better understanding of what we need
to engage in that theater--let's say the cyber theater--do we--
when we talk about an act of war in cyberspace, do we have any
earthly idea what the nature of the capabilities and the
threats are of our adversaries to the point that you would have
confidence to go into a fight and know it wouldn't be a fair
right?
Director Coats. Well, we're doing all the assessing that we
can in that regard. As we--as General Ashley said, the efforts
of our adversaries are in--more in development stage than ours
are. But, we're well aware of the threat. And I think we have
to start thinking about threats as we look up into space, as
well as threats here on Earth, and it--use the same kind of
principles that we use to assess what's happening here, because
it--you know, space----
Senator Tillis. Director----
Director Coats.--warfare could be a major issue for us.
Senator Tillis. When you have--in the past, you would view
the actions of a hostile nation, it was easy to identify
exactly what they did, and then you could determine how to
respond to it. Isn't one of the challenges that you have--and I
know some people have taken you to task even in this hearing--
is that we're really trying to sort through the fact patterns
to know exactly who was involved and then exactly how to
respond? Is that a fair way to characterize it?
General Ashley?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Let me take this from a Defense
Department perspective. I think part of what you're alluding to
is attribution. And so, when you get into things like cyber,
attribution becomes somewhat more problematic. Your initial
question was, do they have a pretty good capability? Yeah, they
have a pretty good capability. And it is global. One of the
things interesting about cyber is that it is not bounded. The
previous question we had with regards to some of those other
capabilities, you know, and you look at the character of war
that's changing, and some of the technology, you literally have
the capability to reach the globe with weapon systems. Cyber is
a weapon system.
In terms of looking at the context of the nature and the
character of war, you know, we no longer have the Westphalia,
and everybody lines up on the border, 1648, right, and we come
across. The line of which you declare hostilities is extremely
blurred. And if you were to ask Russia and China, do you think
you're at some form of conflict with the U.S.?--I think, behind
closed doors, their answer would be yes. It's hard to make that
determination to definitively say, you know, what constitutes
an act of war, when you're in the gray zone in a lot of the
areas that you operate.
Senator Tillis. In my remaining time, I want to ask you--as
we move up to a markup on the NDAA [National Defense
Authorization Act], and we're looking at resources that we
need. Two--I'll just--I'll ask the question, and you all answer
in the time provided.
One, what more should we be looking at? Are there any
things that you're seeing us considering that are particularly
helpful, or not helpful? What more should we be thinking about?
And the other one, General Ashley, it has to do with the
work that we're doing with our allies, how you would gauge
their--in the various areas in your written testimony, both of
which were very good--how you would gauge the health of the
relationship and our NATO partners, and what more do we need to
do there? Or give them a scorecard.
Lieutenant General Ashley. Let me go with the partners
question first. The Secretary of Defense laid out a couple of
key lines of effort. He said we've got to be more lethal, and
he said we've got to be more efficient, in terms of how we--you
know, the governance and effectiveness. But, one of his three
key lines of effort was partners. He has an appreciation for:
we cannot do this by ourselves, and our success has always been
integral to leveraging partners. They're going to bring
insights, they're going to bring capabilities, and they're
going to bring capacity that we do not have.
I think one of the things that we've got to take a hard
look at is in terms of intelligence-sharing and how do we
better integrate--you know, we've had this Five Eyes community
for the longest time, but really the way we should look at some
of these problems are discrete toward what that problem is. If
you have a problem that's in South Africa or Northern Africa,
then maybe it's not a Five Eyes solution, maybe there's seven
nations that contribute to that, when we look at colonial
relationships and which partners are there. So, I think the
intel-sharing and opening the aperture is an area that we need
to push the envelope on, but leveraging our partners is
absolutely integral to our success.
Director Coats. I'd like to just address the NATO
situation. We see NATO as recovering--fall of the wall and
Russia--USSR [Union of Soviet Socialist Republics] dissolves.
What's the role for NATO? Thanks to Vladimir Putin, we've
gotten a wake-up call. The Russian bear came out of the
hibernation, and was hungry and started grabbing countries,
like Crimea--places like Crimea and now the fighting in Ukraine
and the issues in Georgia. NATO is now back in business.
They've got a ways to go, but we're on the--the trend is right.
It's disappointing that the most--the country that I was
Ambassador to, the country most capable of providing strength
and resources to NATO, Germany, is not doing--living up to
its--punching up to its weight. And, with the election that
just took place, this doesn't point to any additional move in
the right direction.
However, having said that, there are a number of nations,
particularly border nations, that are upping their game on
this. There are exercises that are taking place. My--I've got a
grandson who's a airborne ranger, and he's in--been in these
exercises over on the border nations of Europe and Russia.
The--an intelligence division has been stood up. Been over to
Brussels twice on that. It's providing a significant
coordination in the integration of intelligence that NATO
hadn't had before. So, they are upping their game, and they see
the threat coming, and want to be prepared, and--so at least
we're moving in the right direction relative to NATO, in my
opinion.
Senator Inhofe. Senator Heinrich.
Senator Heinrich. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Director Coats, with regard to cyber, I fear that the
phrase ``whole-of-government approach'' has become a catchall
for ``it's someone else's job.'' We hear this catchall phrase
over and over again. Saying ``whole-of-government approach'' is
not a substitute for action. And it's not a substitute for a
real cyber doctrine, something that could achieve deterrence.
When are we going to expect an actual cyber plan from this
administration?
Director Coats. I can't give you a specific date. I can
only say that we will continue to provide as much information
intelligence that we can gather to the policymakers so that
they can make this decision.
Senator Heinrich. So, you know, I'd love to hear somebody
say, ``the buck stops here'' instead of ``whole-of-government
approach.'' What have you personally done to either expedite
this process or to at least create a sense of urgency in the
White House?
Director Coats. I have daily and weekly interactions with
the people at the White House, and we discuss any number of
issues. It is clearly an issue for the National Security Agency
and for the NSC, at the White House, and for others. So, there
are ongoing discussions in this part of the whole range of
threats that we face. As I earlier have said, there has not
been, yet, a formulation of a lead agency that would work with
the Congress on legislative action and putting a policy in
place relative to that. There are complicated issues here
regarding----
Senator Heinrich. Well, let me----
Director Coats.--the retaliation and so forth----
Senator Heinrich.--let me just suggest that we're----
Director Coats.--that are being----
Senator Heinrich.--we're running out of time.
Last week, I asked Admiral Rogers if our response to
Russian cyberattacks has been adequate enough to change their
behavior. He said that we had failed to change their calculus,
and that their behavior has not changed. Would you agree with
his assessment?
Director Coats. I would agree with that.
Senator Heinrich. Do you believe it's possible to change
someone's behavior, particularly someone like Vladimir Putin,
without imposing some sort of cost on them for their actions?
Director Coats. I believe that.
Senator Heinrich. How should we impose those costs on
Russia?
Director Coats. Well, that's the question. The question is,
how do you assess the retaliation and the impact and what it
might lead to? I think that is the operative question that has
to be addressed. I could----
Senator Heinrich. How about sanctions?
Director Coats.--couldn't agree with you more.
Senator Heinrich. Would sanctions be an appropriate
response? Because this body passed a law, nearly unanimously,
that required that the President sanction individuals with
financial----
Director Coats. Yeah.
Senator Heinrich.--ties to Russia's defense and
intelligence sectors, or at least waive sanctions by certifying
that Russia has reduced their cyberattacks against the United
States. Both of you told me, a few weeks ago, that the
intelligence community is still seeing activity in the runup to
the 2018 elections. I think your phrase, Director Coats, was,
``The United States is under attack.'' So, why on earth hasn't
the administration found anyone to sanction?
Director Coats. As you've probably seen, 13 individuals
have been named. The Treasury Secretary Mnuchin has indicated
that, very shortly, he will be bringing out a list of sanctions
on those individuals that have been complicit in this.
Senator Heinrich. You're talking about the 13 individuals
who were indicted by the Special Counsel?
Director Coats. Correct. This goes beyond that. This also
goes to others at--I don't know what names are on the list. We
have provided intelligence information to Department of
Treasury for this determination, and I'm told it's coming soon.
Senator Heinrich. So, you were asked, let me make sure I
get this right, to provide analysis to support the Treasury
Department's decision.
Director Coats. I can't say that--well, I don't know that
there was a direction on that. All I do know is, is that we
have been engaged in providing intelligence on this subject
continuously----
Senator Heinrich. When Treasury Department----
Director Coats.--to the various agencies----
Senator Heinrich.--made their initial decision about their
release of names, but they did not choose to sanction any
individuals at that time, were you asked to provide analysis
for them to be able to come up with that decision?
Director Coats. I would have to go back and double check
whether this was just part of our regular ongoing provision of
information or whether there was a specific ask on this. I'd be
happy to get back to you on that question.
Senator Heinrich. Yeah. I would look forward to that.
[The information referred to follows:]
[Deleted.]
Senator Heinrich. We've talked a lot about sanctions
against Iran, a lot about sanctions against North Korea. It
seems like there should be a focus on this.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Inhofe. Senator Cotton.
Senator Cotton. Thank you, gentlemen, for your appearance
today.
The National Security Strategy says that we've returned to
an era of great power competition, which I believe to be true.
Threats of terrorism remain serious, but those threats become
catastrophic primarily when they're supported by a nation-state
in one way or another. There are two main great powers in the
world. We've talked a lot about two of them already, Russia and
China. But, I want to turn to a rogue nation that is perhaps
the most urgent threat, North Korea, and follow up on some of
the conversations we've had today.
Director Coats, you said earlier that we're still
ascertaining exactly what's happened on the Korean Peninsula in
the last few hours between the South Korean delegation that
went to Pyongyang, and what it means. Is it your understanding
that any talks between North Korea, on the one hand, and South
Korea and the United States, on the other hand, would be talks
without any concessions made to North Korea?
Director Coats. My current understanding is that no
concessions were--that that topic was not----
Senator Cotton. Is it due----
Director Coats.--raised.
Senator Cotton. Part of the problem we have with North
Korea, and the reason we got to where we are, is that, in the
past two or three decades, we've consistently granted
concessions, just to get them to sit down and talk to us?
Director Coats. That is correct.
Senator Cotton. It's one thing to sit down and talk with an
adversary. We did that with the Soviet Union throughout the
Cold War. It's another thing to bribe that adversary to sit
down and talk with us.
Director Coats. Talk is cheap.
Senator Cotton. So, we shouldn't play Charlie Brown to
their Lucy once again on that football.
Director Coats. There has been a football, and there have
been a lot of misses.
Senator Cotton. Thank you.
Some people talk about the possibility of deterring North
Korea the way we deterred the Soviet Union. That makes some
assumption about the nature of the North Korean leader and the
North Korean regime. I want to reference a report from The New
York Times last week that cited the U.N. Panel of Experts on
North Korea saying that North Korea is suspected of exporting
large amounts of material to Syria that could be used to
develop chemical weapons, and also missiles that could deliver
those chemical weapons. Do you care to comment on those reports
from last week?
Director Coats. We know, in the past, that there has been a
transfer, historically, between North Korea and Syria. Relative
to what's currently going on, we'd have to discuss that in a
classified session.
Senator Cotton. Okay. Perhaps we will do that. But, that
sounds like the kind of thing that North Korea would do,
doesn't it, given their history?
Director Coats. Given their history, it sounds like it.
Senator Cotton. Yeah. That makes them somewhat different
from the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union, of course, had a
nuclear arsenal that could destroy the American way of life,
but they rarely transferred that kind of weapons of mass
destruction technology to rogue nations like Syria, correct?
Director Coats. I'm not sure I have enough information to
say yes or no on that, but that's----
Senator Cotton. It's a very----
Director Coats. We have----
Senator Cotton.--a risk----
Director Coats.--we have some history, that's for sure.
Senator Cotton. It's very risky to transfer nuclear,
chemical, or biological technology if you care for the
preservation--the long-term preservation of your regime. But,
given the economic and diplomatic situation that North Korea
faces, I think that makes them somewhat different than the
Soviet Union in the Cold War.
General Ashley, let's turn to a brief comment you made, I
think, in exchange with Senator Fischer, about the indirect-
fire systems that North Korea has on or near the DMZ
[demilitarized zone]. Sometimes the North Korean leadership
says they could turn Seoul into--is it a ``lake of fire''? Is
that what they call it?
Lieutenant General Ashley. I'm not sure of the phrase, but
it would be a significant amount of casualties.
Senator Cotton. Something like that, yeah.
You also mentioned that a lot of North Korea's military
weapons are Soviet-era systems. Do we know what percentage of
those mortar rockets and artillery systems in North Korea's
arsenal are Soviet-era systems, which means, by definition, now
at this point at least 27 years old?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Yeah, I would say the majority
of them are. We can give you exact breakdown.
Senator Cotton. Okay.
[The information referred to follows:]
[Deleted.]
Senator Cotton. Of that percentage, do we know how many--
what percentage of those are very well-maintained by the North
Korean military?
Lieutenant General Ashley. My understanding is, the level
of maintenance is pretty good on the systems. Now, there's
going to be a degree of atrophy over time, but our expectation
is, those systems will work.
Senator Cotton. What about the availability of the parts
and the ammunition rounds that all of those systems would need?
Lieutenant General Ashley. That becomes more problematic,
in terms of amount of ammunition and supply parts for
replacements.
Senator Cotton. Because those are not widely available----
Lieutenant General Ashley. Correct.
Senator Cotton.--on the international arms market?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Correct.
Senator Cotton. Then, finally, those systems don't fire
themselves, they need well-trained crews to fire them. Do we
have an assessment of the training level of the North Korean
army's--at the crew level, and how they can operate all those
systems?
Lieutenant General Ashley. We watched their winter--their
training exercises. They've shown a level of discipline and
expertise. I don't know that I can take that all the way down
to the crew level, but I will go back to the comment I made
earlier, that Kim Jong-un, far different from his father in the
level of rigor that they've applied to their training regime to
make sure their crews are ready.
Senator Cotton. Yeah. When you pile up all of those
estimates on top of each other, though, there is some question
about the overall effectiveness of North Korea's indirect-fire
systems, you know, the--probably a little bit less than what
the North Korean leader suggested it might be, but still a
grave threat to South Korea and to Americans troops on the
Peninsula. Is that right?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Still a great threat.
Senator Cotton. Finally, what's the quality of North Korean
air defenses against United States aircraft?
[The information referred to follows:]
[Deleted.]
Lieutenant General Ashley. Let me take that into a closed
session. That's a little more complicated answer.
Senator Cotton. Okay. Thank you.
Appreciate it, gentlemen.
Senator Inhofe. Senator Kaine.
Senator Kaine. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thanks, to our two witnesses.
I want to just, first, begin by applauding your prepared
testimonies. I know you have to summarize very briefly at the
top of this hearing, but both of the prepared sets of testimony
are very strong.
In particular, I noticed both of you focused upon
protracted conflicts, environmental challenges, et cetera,
leading to migration and displacement, and the security
challenges caused by displacement.
General Ashley, you indicate, ``As of October 2017,
protracted conflicts and ethnosectarian violence have increased
global displacement at the highest levels on record, according
to the United Nations.'' I'm going to come back to that in a
second.
Director Coats, you have a strong section on environment
and climate change, at page 16 and 17 of your written
testimonies, that are important. I've been disappointed with
some of the environmental agencies in the administration for
not acknowledging that, scrubbing Web sites, not talking about
it. But, you're very straightforward about the challenges that
are presented in our security environment in this section. I'd
encourage my colleagues to take a look.
Here's a worry that I have. Would you agree with me that--
the title of hearing is Worldwide Threats--would you agree with
me that one of the best ways we deal with worldwide threats is
stronger alliances, more allies?
Director Coats. I agree with that.
Senator Kaine. General?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Senator, I agree.
Senator Kaine. Here is a concern that I have about the
administration. There seems to be a number of areas in which we
are isolating ourselves from allies. It could be the failure to
nominate ambassadors. Senator Reed talked about that. It could
be proposals to reduce dramatically the budget of the State
Department and USAID [United States Agency for International
Development]. That's ongoing. It could be the pulling out of
the United States of international accords, whether it's
pulling out of the Paris Accord, stepping back from the U.N.
Compact on Global Migration, threatening to step out of an Iran
deal, threatening to pull out of a Korean trade deal,
threatening to pull out of NAFTA [North American Free Trade
Agreement], starting tariffs, which could suggest trade wars
with allies, even tweets about allies and adversaries and even
our own diplomats. I worry very, very much about an--sort of,
an isolationist attitude if one of our immune-system strengths
in dealing with worldwide threats is strengthening alliances.
I'm very nervous about this right now.
Let me ask you about two things that concern me:
First, since you both focused upon the displacement and
refugee challenges--and, Director Coats, you actually, in your
own testimony, near the end, talked about this as a significant
phenomenon, whether it's war, violence, natural disasters,
weather events, droughts, corruption, causing migrations of
population. We've seen the challenges that Syrian migrants have
compounded in Europe, for example. In December, the U.S.
announced that it, alone among nations of the world, was going
to pull out of the U.N. Compact on Global Migration, which was
a voluntary agreement by nations in the U.N., a unanimous
agreement in September of 2016, to sit down and start to talk
about new best practices for dealing with migrants and
refugees. Completely voluntary, no incursion into the sovereign
ability of any nation to make their own immigration decisions.
But, the Trump administration announced, in early December,
that the U.S. was pulling out of the discussions, citing
sovereignty as a reason, which was a non sequitur, since the
entire idea around the Global Compact was that no nation would
give up their sovereign ability to do anything, but that we
would have a dialogue about how to deal with this significant
security threat that you each identify in your written and,
Director Coats, in your oral testimony. Why is it a good idea
for the United States to pull out of a global discussion about
the way to deal with the human displacement problem that you
each identify in your testimony?
Director Coats. Oh, Senator, I am not familiar with that
particular decision, why that decision was made. In the larger
sense, relative to what you are talking about it's easy to look
at the way we've conventionally done things, but it's also easy
to see that they haven't always worked. I think there is--we've
seen potential upsides to some decisions that have been made
that have caused nations that we have either been adversaries
or allies to change their position. But, look at NATO. The
criticism that came to the President for criticizing NATO has
resulted in the fact that many nations now have come in line
and agreed, and said, ``Look, yeah, you're right, we haven't
held to our commitments, we haven't treated NATO as something
that is necessary.'' There are a number of nations that now
have changed their position on that----
Senator Kaine. And just----
Director Coats.--relative to trade, other benefits that
have come from--in decisions that have been positive. So, just
going back to the conventional ``let's always do it the way
we've always done it'' really hasn't worked very well.
Senator Kaine. I just want to comment this, and I'll have
one question for the record.
I get that. Questioning existing institutions, could they
be better? That's one thing. This was an initiative that was
just being started. There was no history, there was no bad
action. It was a decision by every nation in the world to meet,
beginning in Mexico in December of 2017, to talk about the
human displacement problem that you each testified to as
achieving real gravitas and significance. And the nation--and
the world needs to figure out how to deal with it. The U.S.
decided they did not even want to be at the table for the first
discussion. It wasn't a critique of what was being done. It was
a unilateral decision that the U.S. would be a nonparticipant.
I can't see how that would benefit either the United States or
the world, given your own testimony about the seriousness of
the problem.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Inhofe. Senator Graham.
Senator Graham. Thank you both. Dan, thank you for serving
in the role you're serving in, your great counsel to the
President. General, thank you for your service.
Let's see if I can sort of go over some highlights here.
North Korea. Is it still the policy of the United States to
deny the North Korean regime the ability to hit America with a
nuclear-tipped ICBM [Intercontinental Ballistic Missile]?
Director Coats. Absolutely.
Senator Graham. Is that true, General? Do you agree with
that?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Yes, sir.
Senator Graham. All right. Denial, then, is different than
containment. We've rejected the idea of giving them the
capability and trying to contain it. Is that true, Mr.--Senator
Coats?
Director Coats. Yes.
Senator Graham. The reason is, if they get a bunch of
capability, they are likely to sell it or share it. We've seen
a history of that. Is that accurate?
Director Coats. Yes, we have.
Senator Graham. Okay. Let's move to--and to follow that
concept through: as a last resort, military action is on the
table.
Director Coats. It is on the table.
Senator Graham. Okay.
Iran. When it comes to the Iranian involvement in Syria
aligning with Russia, do you believe we have a sufficient
strategy to contain the Russian-Iranian threat in Syria?
Director Coats. We certainly are working on one. And it is
of constant discussion, in terms of how we see that problem.
We--it clearly is a major issue that needs to be addressed.
Senator Graham. Okay. Well, I want to congratulate you on
the fight against ISIS. I think you've done a great job in the
results on the ground, but the sooner you could come up with a
counter-Iran strategy in Syria and other places, the better.
I just got back from a trip to Israel. I was informed by
the IDF [Israel Defense Forces] that, basically, there are
thousands of missiles and rockets in southern Lebanon pointed
at Israel. Do you have any reason to doubt that in the hands of
Hezbollah?
Director Coats. No reason to doubt that. In response to
your previous question, there is a strategy in place relative
to the Iranian engagements throughout the--this very difficult
part of the world, and what Iran has been doing.
Senator Graham. Maybe in a different setting, we can----
Director Coats. I'd be happy----
Senator Graham.--talk about that.
Director Coats.--I'd be happy to do that.
Senator Graham. Because I'll just be honest with you,
Director Coats, I got back in--from Israel and Jordan. It's not
bearing fruit.
Do you agree with the idea that the United Nations Interim
Force Lebanon has failed when it comes to protecting Israel's
interests in southern Lebanon?
Director Coats. I would agree with that.
Senator Graham. You agree with that, General Ashley?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Sir, I don't think that's my
place to make that assessment.
Senator Graham. Okay, fair enough.
So, Israel told us, our delegation, they need more
ammunition and backing from the United States if they have to
go into southern Lebanon, because the Hezbollah rockets and
missiles are integrated within apartment complexes, schools,
and hospitals. They have made civilian targets in play,
Hezbollah has. Does that make sense to you? Do you--can you
confirm that?
Director Coats. Given the sources of--obviously, we would
like to talk about that in detail in a closed session.
Senator Graham. Right.
Director Coats. But, yes, publicly, that has been----
Senator Graham. Yeah.
Director Coats.--been pretty clear.
Senator Graham. Well, I just want to let the Committee
know, it's just a matter of time before Israel has to act.
They're actually making precision-guided weapons inside of
southern Lebanon, Hezbollah is, and they couldn't do it without
Iran.
The Iranian nuclear agreement, is it still the policy of
the President that we need a better deal in Iran?
Director Coats. Yes, it is.
Senator Graham. One of the concerns of the current deal is
the sunset clause.
Director Coats. That is correct.
Senator Graham. Under the sunset clause, the mere passage
of time, Iran can enrich and reprocess without limitation. Is
that correct?
Director Coats. I believe that's correct.
Senator Graham. General Ashley--and I think the policy of
the United States is that anytime they get within near
breakout, we should reimpose sanctions. Do you understand that
to be the President's position?
Lieutenant General Ashley. I understand at the point they
can start to re---enrich beyond 3.67, that it would take about
a year to put a weapon together.
Senator Graham. Well, I totally support the President's
belief that we need a better deal, replacing the sunset clause
with something better.
Do you agree with me, Director Coats, that if--the Arabs
are going to just assume Iran gets a nuclear weapon over time
unless something changes, under the current agreement?
Director Coats. I think that's a reasonable assumption.
Senator Graham. Yeah, that's what they've told me, is that
they're going to respond in kind.
As to Russia's interference in our election, I have
legislation, with Senator Gillibrand, that sets up a 9/11-style
commission to look forward, where people from the private
sector can come forward to give us recommendations about how to
harden our infrastructure regarding the 2018 election. Can I
send that to you? And would you give me some feedback if you
could support it?
Director Coats. I would be happy to do that.
[The information referred to follows:]
[Deleted.]
Senator Graham. General?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Sir.
Senator Graham. How likely is it the 2018 election's going
to be compromised by Russia?
Director Coats. We have not seen evidence of a robust
effort yet on the part of Russia. But, we know their malign
activities continue to exist.
Senator Graham. If the past is any indication of the
future, it's highly likely. Would you agree with that?
Director Coats. It's highly likely that they will be doing
something. We just don't know how much and when/where.
Senator Graham. Do you agree with that, General?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Senator, I agree.
Senator Graham. Okay. We have a policy of mutual assured
destruction. If we're attacked by nuclear weapons, we will wipe
out the country who attacked us. Do we have anything like that
in the cyber arena?
Director Coats. Not to my knowledge.
Senator Graham. Do you think we'd be well-served to let
countries know, ``You attack America through cyberspace at your
own peril''?
Director Coats. Well, I think that message has already been
delivered. But, if it hasn't, it needs to be.
Senator Graham. Thank you both for the job you're doing for
our country.
Lieutenant General Ashley. Thank you, sir.
Senator Inhofe. Senator Peters.
Senator Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And our witnesses today, thank you for your testimony and
your service.
General Ashley, what is your definition of ``political
warfare''? When you heard--hear that term, how would you define
it?
Lieutenant General Ashley. I think of it more in the
information domain, that it is really--I had used the word, you
know, kind of the ``whole-of-government.'' But, it is kind of
``informatation,'' which is kind of how they use some of the
phrases, that it is targeted toward the populace, writ large.
If you look at it in the context--well, I'll use--since we
talked about Russia, they have a thing that's in their
doctrine, and it's been in their doctrine since back in the
1960s, called ``reflexive control.'' And what they do is, they
use a level of influence to try to take you down a path to make
a decision, you think it is your own. That is--that's nothing
new. But, as we look at it in the context of what's evolved
over the last couple of years, it's a ubiquitive communication,
social media and other means, by which you can deliver those
messages. But, that has been integral to their strategy for
probably really since about back in the 1960s.
Senator Peters. Right. So, basically, many of the things
that we've been talking about here could very easily be defined
as ``political warfare.'' Would you agree that we are engaged
with an adversary that is using political warfare against the
United States?
Lieutenant General Ashley. I don't know that there's--I
don't have a doctrinal term, but I can say that it's, you know,
warfare, in the context of warfare. I think it's----
Senator Peters. At least in the context----
General Ashley.--it's information----
Senator Peters.--of the term----
General Ashley.--confrontation, in terms of how the
Russians look at it.
Senator Peters. At least in the context of the term
``political warfare,'' it is consistent with that.
Senator Inhofe. Senator Peters, could I interrupt for just
a moment?
Senator Wicker, presiding.
Thank you.
Senator Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Is that correct, that it is in the context of that?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Well, I'd have to look, you
know, for the exact definition of what ``political warfare''
constitutes, which I can't tell you what that is.
Senator Peters. That's fine, General.
I just--was recently reading a report here from the
Brookings Institution by authors Polyakova and Boyer, and I
found an ``emerging threats'' section in the report,
particularly interesting. I want to read it and get your
comments to it about emerging threats.
They write in the report, ``The future of political warfare
is in the digital domain. The influence tools used by Moscow
against the West are still fairly basic. They rely on
exploiting human gullibility, vulnerabilities in the social
media ecosystem, and lack of awareness among the public, the
media, and policymakers. In the 3-to-5-year term, however,
these tools will become more advanced and difficult to detect.
In particular, technological advancements in artificial
intelligence in cyber capabilities will open opportunities for
malicious actors to undermine democracies more covertly and
effectively than what we have seen so far. In addition,
increasingly sophisticated cyber tools tested primarily by
Russia and eastern Europe have already affected Western
systems, and an attack on Western critical infrastructure seems
inevitable.'' That's end of quote.
General, what do you make of that statement?
Lieutenant General Ashley. I just want to say there's
validity to the statement. Attribution could become more
difficult. But, at the same time, what we've seen transpire in
Europe--you know, had the--the level of influence that the
Russians tried in a number of elections, whether it's in the
Chechnya, whether it's France, Germany, other nations, Norway--
because of the heavyhanded nature in which they did that, it
really kind of illuminated what they were doing. People became
more suspect. But, the more that we talk about this, it's in
the public domain, the more people may question the information
that they see that's out there, so they may question whether or
not this is, in fact, true or it's being used to influence them
toward a particular outcome.
Senator Peters. The point they also make in the report--
although you said that it's easy to see some of it because of
its heavyhandedness--is that, with the very rapid advances in
machine learning and artificial intelligence, it's going to
become extremely difficult to see exactly what's happening.
Would you agree with that?
Lieutenant General Ashley. I think there's an AI
[Artificial Intelligence] application--my now--the NATO
particular piece of that is because it came in the public
domain and we talked about it. Then people started looking for
it, and they started to see it.
Senator Peters. My final question is: A lot of this
misinformation and the tools that are being used and will be
exploited in an increasing fashion in the future are able--or
use big data--basically, the weaponization of big data. How do
you approach that concept, and what are you doing in regards to
that? First off, do you believe that is a significant threat,
the weaponization of big data?
Lieutenant General Ashley. I think it is a threat.
Senator Peters. Part of that threat is to engage our social
media platforms--Facebook, Twitter, other types of platforms
that are engaged in that. Is the intelligence community--to
both of you--is the intelligence community engaged in
conversations with these platforms, understanding that we need
to probably cooperate if we're going to be able to thwart this
threat?
General, you first. Is that necessary? Or Director Coats.
I'm sorry.
Lieutenant General Ashley. I was going to let the Director
take that.
Let me take the context of big data, in terms of our
understanding. As we start seeing what's changing now really in
the character of war, you have speed of decision. There's all
these disparate things that are happening globally, all the
information that's moving around. For us, from the intelligence
standpoint, on a military side, it's being able to see the
indications and warning, being able to see the faint signals of
conflict that may be coming your way. To take all that
disaggregated information and aggregate it in a way where you
can start to see trends, indications, and warning, and it gives
the analyst time to start to think about what he or she is
seeing--for us, that's kind of really one of the big
applications for big data, in terms of sensing the environment.
It is a critical capability that we're focused on.
Senator Peters. Great.
I'm out of time. Thank you.
Senator Wicker [presiding]. Thank you.
Senator McCaskill.
Senator McCaskill. Thank you so much. And thank you for the
indulgence of my colleagues. I haven't voted yet, so they're
letting me do this out of turn so I can quickly try to make a
couple of points.
You know, Director, I liked your analogy about the bear
coming out of hibernation. I think it's a really accurate
description of what's going on with Putin and Russia. As you
described it, the bear is out of hibernation, grabbing
countries and, I would add to that, attacking democracies.
Would you agree?
Director Coats. I would agree.
Senator McCaskill. Okay. But, we're not hunting bears, the
United States. That is by and large because the Commander in
Chief doesn't appear to be interested in hunting bears, which
is very frustrating for all of us. Whether it comes to
sanctions or whether it comes to direct action, Russia is not
feeling the might of the United States of America. Admiral
Rogers was very clear here last week that he is not being
commanded to use the tools he has to go after Russia. As
Senator Graham indicated, those bears are now colluding with
Iran to threaten directly our best ally in a very dangerous
neighborhood, and that's Israel. I wanted to get that on the
record.
I also just wanted to ask you quickly about the security of
our supply chain for our weapon systems. This is something that
really concerns me. And this I would direct to both of you. We
now know that the requirements of China and Russia to review
proprietary information of United States companies in return
for opening their markets to United States companies could
cause real problems down the line. Do either of you support
that we should require United States companies to tell us if
Russia or China is requiring them to open up their proprietary
source code as a condition of doing commerce with those two
countries?
Director Coats. I don't know if that decision has been
made. It has some implications that, you know, would bear some
legal examination of the issue. But, it is--you raised the
right question--I mean, it is a concern. Looking at the supply
chains--and down through--but, whether we're in a position
right now legally or with the authorities to enforce that
against various companies, I don't have the answer for that.
I don't know, General, if you, on the military supply
chain, have taken----
Lieutenant General Ashley. Yeah. So, ma'am----
Director Coats.--actions in that regard.
General Ashley.--I don't know whether we put those laws in
place, but, from a supply-chain risk management, the point you
bring up is critical, in that we have to be really much more
cognizant and less naive about where our technology's coming
from, especially on the acquisition side. When you look at the
components that are brought in--so, for example, if I have a
contract with you for something, and you have a subcontract
with Senator Wicker, who has a subcontract with Senator Warren,
Senator Warren, in this case, may represent Kapersky Labs, and
that is a problem, but it was not written in the contract that
you had to be able to preclude that from happening. We're
getting smarter about supply-chain risk management and doing
more on the counterintelligence forum to be able to uncover
those relationships.
Senator McCaskill. I would really like recommendations from
both of you of what we can do in the NDAA to give you the legal
tools necessary to require U.S. companies to let us know when
they're being required to reveal source code and important
proprietary software that--in order to do business with people
that are not always our friends. Secondly, what we can do to
require more transparencies with subcontractors for our--the
protection of our weapon system supply chains. If both of you
could make us any recommendations, I think that this Committee,
on a bipartisan basis, would be interested in giving you
whatever tools are necessary for that really desperately needed
protections.
[The information referred to follows:]
[Deleted.]
Senator McCaskill. Thank you both.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Wicker. Thank you, Senator McCaskill.
Director Coats, Senator McCaskill made a statement, you
agreed with it, then she made another statement, and I suspect
maybe you didn't agree with that one, but you weren't asked
whether you agreed. Let me see if we can expand on that.
Last week, United States Government approved selling 210
Javelin antitank missiles and 37 launchers to Ukraine. The
Javelins represent the type of defensive lethal aid that
Ukraine has been called--has been calling for from the United
States since Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea. So, in that
sense, we're fighting the bear in that regard. Is that correct,
Director Coats?
Director Coats. Yeah. Probably General Ashley has more
knowledge about the impact of Javelin missiles and weapons that
we sent to Ukraine, but yes, that is a pushback.
Senator Wicker. General Ashley, in that sense, we're
engaging the bear.
Lieutenant General Ashley. Senator, so you're correct. I
think what we're showing also is a good-faith measure toward
our partner in Ukraine, as well.
Senator Wicker. I think one of the most strategic--one of
the most strategic acts in the next few months or in the next
few years is that Russia demonstratively lose in Ukraine. Do
you agree with that, that that's a very strategic objective?
Lieutenant General Ashley. I think that is a strategic
objective, yes.
Senator Wicker. Also, our National Defense Strategy now
states that, for long-term security competitions, our
competition with China and Russia are foremost and the foremost
priority for the Department of Defense. Is that correct?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Sir, that is correct.
Senator Wicker. And so, in that case, I won't ask you, I
would just observe, we are engaging the bear, and doing so in
our very strategy.
General Ashley, you were not quite as optimistic as Senator
Inhofe when this hearing first began, when he asked you about
North Korea. I expect that might be because you've seen this
movie before. Is that correct?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Senator, that's correct. We've
watched this----
Senator Wicker. Would you care to expound on why exactly
you don't share much optimism about the announcement yesterday
from Kim Jong-un?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Yes, sir. Staying at the
unclassified level, everything that I've seen, everything
that's reinforced my opinion, my assessment, albeit there is a
great deal of opaqueness to the decisionmaking of Kim Jong-un,
I have seen nothing to take me down a path to think that he's
about ready to make a hard right turn. But, that possibility is
there. But, I have seen nothing to tell me that there's
sincerity in the talks that are going to--about ready to kick
off.
Senator Wicker. Should we dismiss it out of hand, or would
your advice to the President of the United States be to follow
up, with caution?
Lieutenant General Ashley. I think you follow up, with
caution, you engage.
Senator Wicker. Okay. Now, let me ask one other thing.
There was a RAND study that came out in December, and it--we've
had classified briefings that followed up on that. It was a
public study, and, basically, it was very startling what they
said. They said that, under plausible scenarios, the United
States could actually lose the next war. They listed several
reasons for this, one being that, when we have to fight a war,
we have to fight it so far away from home, but also they said
that our adversaries are catching up with us in technology. Did
you have a chance to look at that RAND study?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Senator, I have not, but I will.
Senator Wicker. Well--okay.
Director Coats, have you looked at that study?
Director Coats. I have not looked at that study, but we've
seen a great deal of intelligence relative to the technological
capabilities now available to nations which didn't have those
capabilities before. There is competition, and there is a race.
The world is changing. Conventional warfare probably changed
when we prevailed in Desert Storm. You don't line--no country's
going to line up tanks or infantry against us, because--given
our capabilities that were demonstrated there. And so, we've
seen a lot of asymmetric types of threats, and the use of
technology to achieve those threats.
So, it's a different kind of warfare that we're engaged in.
I think, you know, we are fully aware of that. Thanks to the
Congress, the budget has been increased significantly to make
up for some stuff that was pretty static for--in the past
administration.
Senator Wicker. That's true, yes. I think we're going to
follow up, on the 23rd of this month, with an omnibus.
Let me get back to you. Understanding, General Ashley, that
you haven't--not read the report, it was stunning, I think, to
many Americans, that a report could say we could conceivably,
under plausible conditions, lose the next war. What do you say
to someone who would make that flat statement?
Lieutenant General Ashley. I would have to look at the
context of the assessment. Is it one particular war? Is it
multiple wars? Is it holding/deterring? I do agree with
everything that Director Coats says, in terms of closing the
gaps in capabilities. Our opponents are going to come at us in
a very asymmetric way. The technology gap is closing. The fact
that we have global commitments, it's hard to posture ourself
everywhere on the globe, so you're always going to have that
time distance, where you're going to have to move, where you
may be out of position when a conflict starts.
Senator Wicker. Okay. Well, General, thank you very much.
Well, I'm going to ask you to take this as a question for
the record. We'll insert it at this point in the record.
[The information referred to follows:]
[Deleted.]
Senator Wicker. Would you look at that, at the unclassified
RAND report--came out about the 4th of January--or not--
actually, I think it came out in December--look at that and
give us a brief response----
Lieutenant General Ashley. Yes, sir.
Senator Wicker.--to the allegations--top-line allegations
made.
[The information referred to follows:]
[Deleted.]
Senator Wicker. Senator King.
Senator King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, Director Coats, I want to compliment you and the
members of your--the community that you represent on the report
that you have supplied to us. It is succinct and clear, and
troubling, in some cases, which is what good intelligence will
always be. Particularly on page 16 is an extraordinary
statement about the effect of climate change on national
security. The impacts of the long-term trends toward a warming
climate--more air pollution, biodiversity loss, and water
scarcity--are likely to fuel economic and social discontent and
possibly upheaval through 2018. Goes on to talk about the risk
of humanitarian disasters, conflict, water and food shortage,
population migration, labor shortfalls, price shocks, power
outages, and a possibility of abrupt climate change. It--the
notes indicate a--the current extinction rate is 100 to 1,000
times the natural extinction rate.
I just want to point that out. This is clearly, as your
report indicates, a serious issue of national security, is it
not?
Director Coats. It is an issue, but it always has been an
issue. What happens to the environment--floods, hurricanes, et
cetera--we're seeing some intensity of that lately.
Senator King. Well, this just isn't--this isn't talking
about general environmental conditions. This is talk--it's,
``The past 115 years''--I'm reading from your report--``have
been the warmest period in the history of modern civilization.
The past few years have been the warmest years on record.''
Then it goes on to state--I would just hope that you would have
the people that prepared this brief the Secretary of the EPA
[Environmental Protection Agency], because I think this
information is important. It's important to national security.
We often talk about the risk of climate change in the context
of environmentalism, but, according to your analysis, it is
also an issue that affects national security. It will increase
migration patterns, conflict, famine, and the like, which is
often how wars start.
Another part of the report, on page 7, talks about Iran and
the Iran nuclear agreement. There's an interesting phrase that
says, ``Iran's implementation of the JCPOA [Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action] has extended the amount of time Iran would need
to produce enough fissile material for a nuclear weapon from a
few months to about one year, provided Iran continues to adhere
to the deal's major provisions.'' Is it the judgment of the
intelligence community that Iran has, thus far, adhered to the
deal's major provisions?
Director Coats. Yes. It has been--the judgment is there's
been no material breach of the agreement.
Senator King. ``And the JCPOA''--I'm again reading from
your report--``has also enhanced the transparency of Iran's
nuclear activities, mainly by fostering improved access to
those nuclear facilities for the IAEA [International Atomic
Energy Agency] and the authorities under the additional
protocol.'' If the Iran agreement were abrogated, we would lose
that visibility into the Iran nuclear enterprise, is that not
correct?
Director Coats. Well, we've built a number of capacities
relative to that, even since the agreement. So, I--to say
``lose that'' would--I don't think would be accurate. I----
Senator King. Diminish?
Director Coats. It potentially could diminish.
Senator King. I think you can do better than that. It would
diminish, would it not? The IAEA would certainly not have the
access that they currently have.
Director Coats. No, they may not. On the other hand, we
have provided other means, and we've significantly upped our
game in terms of our verification procedures.
Senator King. In your assessment on page 18, you talk about
China. Again, interesting language. It talks about China's
security interests with regard to the South China Sea, the East
China Sea, and Taiwan. It uses the language--I'm sorry--it uses
language of national security in those regards. Sovereignty
claims, the East China Sea, South China Sea, and Taiwan. But,
then it goes on to talk about its efforts aimed at fulfilling
the Belt and Road Initiative to expand China's economic reach
and political influence.
My question is, What is the intelligence community's
assessment of what China wants? Is China want--or do they--are
they moving toward military aggression and enlargement of their
territory, or are they looking more toward political and
economic influence in the region?
Director Coats. It appears to be the latter. While China is
modernizing its military, is increasing its spending, most of
it appears to be done for a deterrence purpose rather than
aggressive purpose. They have--clearly have a strategy of using
credit and loans to countries around the world, particularly in
geostrategic places, and then combining it with some military
capacity--South China Seas, their new base in Djibouti. We see
that. China is seeking, I think, to become a world power with
great influence on a global basis, and they're using a number
of techniques that are far more than just the typical military
land grab that we see more likely with Russia rather than
China.
Senator King. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Wicker. Thank you, Senator King.
Senator Sullivan.
Senator Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, gentlemen, good to see you again. Thanks for your
wonderful service.
Wanted to just comment. I saw my colleague, Senator Kaine,
making some comments on some of his concerns, particularly as
it relates to alliances and how we're focusing on those, or
not. I think it's a good point. I agree with him on it. But,
one thing he actually didn't mention was the unprecedented
delay of the confirmation of many of the people that the
President has put forward, in terms of the national security/
foreign policy area. You don't have to comment on that, but I
certainly wish, if we're talking about challenges, that we can
agree to expeditiously move some of these nominees, as opposed
to delay, delay, delay.
I wanted to ask about China with regard to--there's been a
lot of press recently about some of these--I don't know if you
would call it soft power, but Confucius Institutes on campuses
throughout the United States and how, kind of, the dollar
diplomacy in some of our top universities is really having--
starting to have an impact, and people are starting to--
wondering what these Confucius Institutes are really up to.
First of all, Director Coats, do you think that China would
allow for, kind of, the equivalent? Let's say we had the United
States Government trying to put forward James Madison
Institutes or Alexander Hamilton Institutes about freedom,
liberty, free speech, the rule of law, on Chinese campuses? Do
you think China would allow that?
Director Coats. We certainly don't have any assessment that
I could give you. Given China's control over what is done in
China through its institutions, both public and private, it
would likely be a harder hurdle to cross than it would be per--
--
Senator Sullivan. Probably very unlikely, wouldn't it?
Director Coats. Probably very unlikely.
Senator Sullivan. What do you think these--well, have you
looked at what these Confucius Institutes on our--on some of
our top campuses are trying to achieve, and what their goals
are? Are they actually spying on Chinese students in
university? Do we know what's going on? There's--like I said,
there's been a number of articles, just in the last few months,
on these.
Director Coats. Yeah, what--there has been significant
interest in this. In fact, we have some studies going on, and
some investigations going on relative to what China is doing
and what their real intent is, and how much of it is linked to
the Chinese government policies rather than just students
wanting to come to get a good education here. So, we take that
very seriously. In assessing where China is and where China is
going, this is part of the effort.
Senator Sullivan. Well, it would be good to be able to see
those reports and brief the Congress on it, because I think
there's a lot of us on both sides of the aisle that are
interested in that.
Let me--I know you've had a lot of questions on North
Korea. Let me try to be more specific. I'd like to get a sense
of your confidence in the intelligence estimates with regard to
the critical issue of North Korea's capability for long-range
nuclear missiles that can hit all of the continental United
States or just the western States or--I have a particular
interest in the noncontiguous states, Alaska and Hawaii. What
are your estimates right now of Kim Jong-un's ability to range
all three of those geographic areas in our country?
Director Coats. Well, we know China has tested the ability
to--with ICBMs and--intercontinental ballistic missiles. They
have the power to reach all parts of the United States. We know
they've tested the high-yield nuclear device. We assess they
will continue to do these testings. Specifics of what you are
asking, I think is better moved to a closed session rather than
here.
Senator Sullivan. The President has put forward what I
would consider a red line, in terms of U.S. policy. I think
you, in one of your hearings recently, agreed with that, that
he's saying, ``We're not going to allow the North Koreans to
have the capability to have an intercontinental ballistic
nuclear missile that can hit the United States.'' That would
include my State of Alaska, which is a little closer. Has North
Korea crossed that red line yet?
Director Coats. I don't believe they've crossed that red
line yet, but I think that policy is still in place.
Senator Sullivan. Do you think they're going to cross that
red line within the year, 2018?
Director Coats. I--you know, we do everything we can to
assess what Kim Jong-un is thinking and what the regime might
do, but it's been unpredictable, as you know, so that's just a
matter--the message has been loud and clear.
Senator Sullivan. Is it likely that they'll cross that red
line this year?
Director Coats. I cannot assess that they would--well, when
you describe--define ``red line,'' are you talking about----
Senator Sullivan. I'm talking about----
Director Coats.--their capabilities or their----
Senator Sullivan.--the capability to fire an
intercontinental ballistic nuclear missile that can range any
State in America, including----
Director Coats. Well, we know they're----
Senator Sullivan.--Alaska and Hawaii.
Director Coats.--we know they're pursuing their capability.
Whether they exercise that capability, or not, that would cross
that red line is--we don't know.
Senator Sullivan. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Wicker. Thank you, Senator Sullivan.
Senator Warren.
Senator Warren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States,
CFIUS, reviews acquisitions by foreign companies to ensure that
they don't threaten our national security. The Director of
National Intelligence investigates the national security risks
proposed by proposed foreign investment transactions. Director
Coats, your threat assessment observed that China and others
are using legal ways to acquire American early-stage
technologies, and that these foreign acquisitions erode our
competitive advantage. So, I'd like to explore that just a
little bit.
General Ashley, as head of the Defense Intelligence Agency,
you look at foreign acquisitions of U.S. technology through the
lens of national security risks to the supply chain for our
government and our military.
I want to pick up on this where Senator McCaskill left off.
Given that China and others will continue efforts to acquire
our technologies, how well are we identifying emerging
technologies that are critical to maintaining our military
advantage over our adversaries, both in the near future and
beyond?
Lieutenant General Ashley. What I can speak to are the
technologies that are coming out and what we do to go through
the supply chain, risk management, counterintelligence, how we
examine those that are tied into the Department----
Senator Warren. I--if I can, General, let me just narrow
the question up. The question I'm asking is, Are we doing a
good job of identifying all of the critical technologies that
are subject to the Chinese? That's the first part. You've got
to know that it's within your lens to take a look at.
Lieutenant General Ashley. Yeah. I can't speak to the
totality of everything that's out there that would be examined.
But, when you talk about how they acquire, some of it's legal,
some of it is illegal, and some of it is--they're starting to
build their own technology now.
Senator Warren. Okay, that's--I understand that. I'm a
little concerned, though, about our ability to monitor this in
advance. I'm very concerned.
Let me ask this, General Ashley. Do you believe that
government investment in basic scientific research is critical
to developing those technologies that maintain our military
advantage?
Lieutenant General Ashley. I do.
Senator Warren. Good. You know, I think it's important for
us to be proactive in identifying emerging technologies that
foreign adversaries will try to poach, and to continue
investing in the research that strengthens our economy and our
national security. So, that's the point I'd like to underline
today.
I also have another question I want to ask. I want to pick
up where Senator Heinrich left off. One of the tools we have to
hold Russia accountable is sanctions. Congress overwhelmingly
passed a law last year requiring sanctions on anyone that
engages in cyberattacks on behalf of the Russians. The Trump
administration has not imposed these required sanctions, even
though Russia will continue trying to interfere in our
elections. Last week, I asked the NSA Director what message it
sends to Vladimir Putin when the Trump administration does not
implement mandatory sanctions to counter Russian cyberattacks.
Admiral Rogers said--and I will quote him--``I believe that
President Putin has clearly come to the conclusion that there's
little price to pay here, and that, therefore, I can continue
this activity.'' And he concluded by saying, ``Clearly, what
we've done hasn't been enough.''
Director Coats, do you agree with Admiral Rogers?
Director Coats. I do believe what we've done has not done
enough. Sanctions are under consideration. Secretary of
Treasury has indicated, I think as early as next week, he may
be listing some of those sanctions. Clearly, we have not
successfully countered, in an offensive way rather than
defensive way, how to deal with some of the cyberattacks----
Senator Warren. Okay. So----
Director Coats.--that are coming.
Senator Warren.--so you agree that we have not done enough.
How about Admiral Rogers' statement when he says, ``I believe
that President Putin has clearly come to the conclusion that
there's little price to pay here,'' meaning for Russian
cyberattacks, ``and that he can, therefore, continue this
activity''? Do you agree with the Admiral on that?
Director Coats. I think they have seen some successes. I
don't know to what extent they believe that the success they
wanted to achieve. I do support what has been discussed
relative to the transparency and informing the American people.
And----
Senator Warren. So, is that----
Director Coats.--our job, as intelligence community, is to
inform the American people of this so that they take more--
exercise better judgment as--in terms of what is real news and
fake news.
Senator Warren. Wait. You think our job is only to inform
the American people? I think our job is to----
Director Coats. I didn't say it was the only----
Senator Warren.--take some countermeasures.
Director Coats. I did not say that's our only job. I said
that's one of the things that we do----
Senator Warren. It's one of the things----
Director Coats.--as an intelligence community.
Senator Warren.--we did.
Director Coats. That's correct.
Senator Warren. Did you agree with Admiral Rogers'
statement, or not? I didn't hear whether there was a yes or no
in there.
Director Coats. I said I think--I'd agree that there was
more that we can do, and it's under consideration.
Senator Warren. I--you know, I don't care if you're a
Democrat or a Republican, as Americans we should all be
appalled that Vladimir Putin thinks he gets to play a role in
the outcome of our elections.
Director Coats. I couldn't agree more.
Senator Warren. Good. We need to prevent that from ever
happening again.
Director Coats. And that's why part----
Senator Warren. But----
Director Coats.--transparency is really part of the
effort----
Senator Warren. Well, I'm----
Director Coats.--of engaging.
Senator Warren.--all for transparency, but, if the Trump
administration doesn't implement sanctions, as required by
Congress, then we are not using every tool we can to
effectively deter Russia from undermining our democracy----
Director Coats. As I've said, Secretary Mnuchin's going to
be announcing those, I believe, within a week.
Senator Warren. Eventually.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Inhofe [presiding]. Senator Cruz.
Senator Cruz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you for your service, thank you for being
here today.
Director Coats, in your written testimony, you said, ``Iran
remains the most prominent state sponsor of terrorism,
providing financial aid, advanced weapons and tactics, and
direction to militant and terrorist groups across the Middle
East, and cultivating a network of operatives across the globe
as a contingency to enable potential terrorist attacks.'' As
you know, as part of the Obama nuclear deal, billions of
dollars flowed into Iran, including $1.7 billion in unmarked
cash delivered in pallets in the dark of night.
In your judgment, have--has some of those billions of
dollars--has some of that money been used to finance terrorist
operations?
Director Coats. Likely.
Senator Cruz. What do--in your judgment, is the greatest
terrorist threat posed by Iran?
Director Coats. Iran has a lot of malign activities going
on right now, but seems to me that the greatest current threat
is the support for Hezbollah and Hezbollah's positioning itself
against Israel. That has turned into a hotspot, and Iran has
made this possible for Hezbollah to move into Syrian territory
very closed to Israel and arm themselves to the point where it
could turn into a major conflict.
Senator Cruz. Well, and indeed, in recent weeks, we saw,
for the first time ever, an Iranian drone crossing into Israeli
airspace, piloted by Iranians. What do you see as the
consequences that Iran now feels strong enough, belligerent
enough to be directly leading attacks on Israel with Iranian
weapons, by Iranians?
Director Coats. Well, it could have very serious
conflicts--conflict result from all of that. We know Israel
will not be able to tolerate that kind of threat directly on
their border. And so, it's--I think it's a situation of
significant concern.
Senator Cruz. Is Iran continuing its research and
development and testing of ICBM technology?
Director Coats. They continue to develop and test their
missiles. They claim it's not for that purpose. But, there
appears to be violations of U.N. Security Resolutions relative
to what they're doing. That is one of the malign activities
that we're very concerned about.
Senator Cruz. The missiles they're testing, they're not
merely short-range missiles that might strike Israel, but they
also include ICBMs that could reach the United States of
America.
Director Coats. I'd like General Ashley to----
Lieutenant General Ashley. Yeah, so what----
Director Coats.--discuss it.
General Ashley.--so, what they have in their inventory are
short-range ballistic and medium-range ballistic missiles. They
do have a space-launch vehicle, the Simorgh, which they've
tested a couple of times. The reliability is not there. Today
if you were to ask me, Does Iran have an ICBM capability?--they
do not. Is that aspirational? Yes. Could they take that space-
launch vehicle and start working that toward an ICBM
capability? They could, but that is many years out.
Senator Cruz. Do we see indications of North Korea sharing
their ICBM research and development with Iran?
Lieutenant General Ashley. From an Iranian standpoint in
their ballistic missile program, really the seed corn of their
ballistic missile program started back in the 1980s, in the
Iran-Iraq War. It was the Scud technology. Really where Iran
wants to be right now is self-sufficient, so they want to have
the ability not to depend on North Korea, like they did back in
the 1980s, so they are self-sufficient in terms of how they're
developing their program.
Senator Cruz. Let's shift for a minute to North Korea. In
January 2018, Kim Jong-un publicly called for, ``contact travel
and cooperation between North and South Korea.'' And then
yesterday, Kim Jong-un hosted a ten-member delegation of South
Korean officials in Pyongyang. According to President Moon's
national security advisor, who led the delegation, North Korea
signaled a, ``clear intent to pursue denuclearization, and is
willing to hold talks with the U.S.''
Director Coats, do we have any reason to believe that Kim
Jong-un would be willing to give up nuclear weapons?
Director Coats. He has repeatedly stated that he would not
give that up. He sees that as existential to his regime's
survival and to his own survival. I've--we have seen nothing to
indicate otherwise, that he would be willing to give up those
weapons.
Senator Cruz. What do you make of these statements to the
contrary? Is this simply propaganda? Is this--what's your
assessment of it?
Director Coats. Well, I think it's too early to make a
clear assessment. We need to hear from our interlocutors, who
will be coming here, as well as South Koreans, to discuss what
they have discussed. I spoke earlier about my history, here, of
watching this movie a couple of times before with both
Republican and Democrat administrations, the frustration of
getting into talks with North Korea and not succeeding, buying
them time to do what they want to do.
I have very, very low confidence in what their intent
might--to be--if their intent is for denuclearizing. We have
seen no evidence to that point--to that decision at this point.
Senator Cruz. General, do you have a view on this question?
Lieutenant General Ashley. I agree with the Director. I
mean, everything we've seen leads us down a path that really
the preservation of the regime from any kind of external threat
is central to that weapons program. And the lessons he's taken
away from the likes of Gaddafi that have given up programs puts
him at risk. It was surprising to see that in the paper this
morning, and we'll see where the talks go.
Senator Cruz. Thank you.
Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Senator Cruz.
Let me make a comment about that, because--I'm glad you
brought that up, Senator Cruz. We talked about this earlier.
And General Ashley and I had a disagreement about this. Let me
tell you why I feel a little differently than both of you.
I, too, have been here while you've been here, Dan, and
we've listened to this, and we've seen this movie before, and
all that. But, you've got to keep in mind that Kim Jong-un just
came off of eight years with someone in, I say, a policy of
appeasement from the Obama administration. Then all of a
sudden, when the response came on pressing the button, and he
responded in a very, very straightforward way--he, being our
President--then all of a sudden, the phone call went down to
South Korea, ``Yeah, we want to participate with you in the
Winter Olympics.'' I was watching this, because I was there at
the time--not at the Winter Olympics, but I was in the South
China Sea. And I thought, you know, that happening, and then,
of course, what happened last night is something that is kind
of unprecedented in coming forth and saying, under some
conditions, he would follow the denuclearization.
I've--I'm a little more--or more optimistic than your
``hope springs eternal,'' Dan, but I do think, and I want to
think, that this aggressive behavior of our President is going
to have a positive effect on him.
Director Coats. I think we would all like to think that.
And I hope that that's the case. I just think we should go into
this eyes wide open, and look at the history of what has
happened before, before we get too excited about this.
Senator Inhofe. Yeah, well--and I agree with that. I agree
with that.
Any further comments, Senator Reed?
All right. We're going to go ahead, before someone else
comes in, and release this crowd.
Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:57 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[Questions for the record with answers supplied follow:]
Questions Submitted by Senator Ben Sasse (R-NE)
cyber war policy
1. Senator Sasse. Director Coats, you said that the U.S. does not
have a clear policy or strategy for cyber war. How do the 17 agencies
in the Intelligence Community make recommendations to policy makers if
there is no strategy or policy to follow?
Director Coats. [Deleted.]
cyber deterrence
2. Senator Sasse. Director Coats and LTG Ashley, is our failure to
deter Russian and Chinese cyber-attacks one of intelligence, will, or
technical ability?
Director Coats. [Deleted.]
Lieutenant General Ashley. [Deleted.]
__________
Questions Submitted by Senator Tim Scott (R-SC)
russian nuclear capabilities
3. Senator Scott. LTG Ashley, the Nuclear Posture Review recently
released by the Department of Defense stated ``Russia is elevating the
role of nuclear weapons, expanding and modernizing its nuclear forces,
violating arms control treaties, and engaging in aggressive behavior.''
Then late last week, Russian president Vladimir Putin personally
announced Russia's development of several new weapons, including a
``nuclear powered and nuclear armed cruise missile.'' I understand some
of what Mr. Putin announced had already been in development, while
other systems are far more outlandish and unlikely to be feasible.
What is your public assessment of the weapons systems announced by
Mr. Putin?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Russia has a number of developmental
programs intended to improve the capabilities of its Strategic Rocket
Forces against U.S. missile defenses. These systems are technically
feasible, and Putin's highlighting them to the Duma indicates Russia
will probably devote the resources to complete their development.
Several of these systems may already have undergone some testing. DIA
can provide more information in a classified forum.
Russian President Putin revealed a nuclear-powered and
nuclear-armed cruise missile in his address. He described the missile
as having ``practically unlimited range'' allowing it to approach to
the United States via unconventional routes not protected by
traditional missile defenses. He also claimed it ``was successfully
launched at the central test range of the Russian Federation at the end
of 2017.'' During the speech, a video depicted the missile leaving
Russia at very low altitude in a mountainous terrain, transiting the
Atlantic Ocean while avoiding a number of missile defense radars from
the Arctic Circle to the southernmost tip of South America, and
traveling northwards in the Pacific Ocean uninhibited. This is the
first known public revelation of this system.
Putin discussed a nuclear-powered and nuclear-armed
unmanned underwater vehicle (UUV). He indicated it was a long-range
system capable of carrying a nuclear warhead. Russia first revealed a
system like this, known as ``Status-6,'' in a disclosure to the Russian
press in 2015. According to the 2015 disclosure the Status-6 is a
``robotic minisubmarine'' capable of 100 knots with a range of 5,400
nautical miles. The 2015 disclosure also indicated it is intended to
``destroy important economic installations of the enemy in coastal
areas and cause guaranteed, devastating damage to the country's
territory by creating wide areas of radioactive contamination,
rendering them unusable for military, economic, or other activity for a
long time.'' A video played during the speech depicted the UUV
attacking an aircraft carrier.
Putin also revealed ``a heavy intercontinental missile''
called Sarmat. He claimed it would be ``equipped with a broad range of
powerful nuclear warheads, including hypersonic'' and would have the
ability to ``attack targets both via the North and South poles.'' Putin
claimed the Defense Ministry is ``in the active phase of testing'' this
system. A video played during the speech depicted a missile emerging
from a silo, followed by a simulated ballistic trajectory flying over
the South Pole toward the United States.
Putin publicized a ``high-precision hypersonic aircraft
missile system'' known as Kinzhal, which he claimed is ``capable of
delivering nuclear and conventional warheads in a range of over 2,000
kilometers and 10 times the speed of sound.'' Putin indicated that
successful tests of the system have been completed, and that the system
is able to ``maneuver at all phases of its flight trajectory''.
Putin discussed the Avangard gliding wing unit, capable
of speeds ``in excess of Mach 20'' with the ability to perform
intensive lateral and vertical maneuvers. A video played during the
speech depicted the system launching atop a silo-based missile and
maneuvering around air-defense locations.
4. Senator Scott. Director Coats, do you believe Mr. Putin's
announcement makes the world a more dangerous place for Americans?
Director Coats. [Deleted.]
russia's low-yield nuclear weapons
5. Senator Scott. LTG Ashley, last week General Scaparrotti
described to me a Russian strategy of ``escalate to dominate,'' where
Russia could seek to make permanent any territorial seizure by
threatening to use low-yield nuclear weapons to defend those gains.
This strategy would seek to deter NATO or the U.S. from acting to
reverse those gains. This would appear to be a dramatic decrease in the
threshold for using nuclear weapons, and incredibly destabilizing.
What can you publicly tell this Committee about Russia's
development of a new generation of nuclear weapons, including these
low-yield devices?
Lieutenant General Ashley. Public statements by Russian scientists
and officials since the early 1990s indicate that low-yield devices
have been part of Russia's nuclear stockpile. Very-low-yield nuclear
weapons reportedly could be used to head off a major conflict and avoid
full-scale nuclear war. Vladimir Putin in a 2013 interview discussed
their destabilizing effects including how low-yield nuclear weapons
could lower the threshold for conducting a nuclear strike in a
conflict.
Russian media cited experts suggesting the Avangard
hypersonic winged glider unit will be equipped with a low-yield warhead
but maintain higher effectiveness with improved accuracy.
In a 2007 interview with a Russian news agency, Colonel-
General Vladimir Verkhovtsev, chief of the Ministry of Defense 12th
Main Directorate addressed Russia's NSNW strategy. He indicated that
``for Russia, tactical nuclear weapons are a deterrent factor against
aggressive pressures against it.''
6. Senator Scott. Director Coats, do you believe Russia's actions
with its nuclear arsenal signal the start of a new nuclear arms race?
Director Coats. [Deleted.]
russian activities in the middle east
7. Senator Scott. Director Coats, as the situation in the Middle
East grows increasingly complex, I am concerned about Russia's role in
the region. Ties between Russia and Turkey, a member of NATO, appear to
be growing and solidifying. Russian mercenaries are fighting alongside
Syrian troops, while Russian aircraft support them in the skies. Syria
and its president, Bashar Assad, are Russia's only remaining ally in
the Arab world. It is clear to me that Putin and Russia are investing a
great deal in Syria and the Assad regime's survival, including the
blood of Russian citizens. The Washington Post reported on February
22nd that the Russian Foreign Ministry acknowledged ``several dozen''
Russians were killed when they attacked a position held by the US and
its allies.
Senator Scott. How far will Russia go to defend the Assad regime
and ensure its survival?
Director Coats. [Deleted.]
8. Senator Scott. Director Coats, should we be concerned about
Russia implementing its ``escalate to dominate'' strategy in Syria and
threatening the use of low-yield nuclear weapons to protect its
interests there?
Director Coats. [Deleted.]
9. Senator Scott. LTG Ashley, if Russia does pursue its ``escalate
to dominate'' strategy in the Middle East, how you think Israel will
respond?
Lieutenant General Ashley. [Deleted.]
__________
Questions Submitted by Senator Richard Blumenthal
white house clearances and foreign influence
10. Senator Blumenthal. Director Coats, it was recently reported
that foreign officials in at least four countries discussed how to
influence Jared Kushner through his business arrangements, financial
difficulties, and lack of foreign policy experience. Kushner's access
to highly sensitive, classified information should have been not just
downgraded, but eliminated long ago. Did you provide advice to Chief of
Staff John Kelly regarding his newly-issued policy on interim
clearances?
Director Coats. Under Executive Order 12968, where official
functions must be performed, temporary eligibility for access to
classified information may be granted. While the DNI has oversight
responsibilities of personnel security programs, agency heads are
responsible for establishing and maintaining an effective program to
ensure that access to classified information by personnel is clearly
consistent with the interest of national security.
11. Senator Blumenthal. Director Coats, do you agree that there is
no reasonable justification for a yearlong policy that allowed people
who may have very harmful secrets in their own backgrounds to have
access to our nation's secrets?
Director Coats. Background Investigation (BI) or adjudication
timeframes can vary depending upon many factors, so there is no
categorical ``yes'' or ``no'' response that can be provided for this
question. Agency heads are responsible to ensure that access to
classified information by personnel is clearly consistent with the
interest of national security. Part of this responsibility includes
making the decision to grant an interim clearance until a final
clearance determination has been rendered. I believe it is imperative
to take every step necessary to resolve the current security clearance
backlog to largely obviate the need for interim clearances.
12. Senator Blumenthal. Director Coats, do you agree that having
individuals who are not properly cleared involved in White House
decision making processes can pose a threat to national security?
Director Coats. It is important that all steps be taken to fully
clear any individual who will have access to classified information.
From time to time, an Agency head can grant temporary access to
classified information to an individual consistent with the interests
of national security. When that happens, the individual is fully
briefed on the responsibility and obligation to protect classified
information.
13. Senator Blumenthal. Director Coats, are you aware of attempts
by foreign governments to leverage the business interests of the Trump
Administration to influence policy decisions? Have you discussed with
your colleagues concerns about risks of business interests being used
as leverage with advisors to the President?
Director Coats. [Deleted.]
14. Senator Blumenthal. Director Coats, you stated in your
testimony, ``US allies' and partners' uncertainty about the willingness
and capability of the United States to maintain its international
commitments may drive them to consider reorienting their policies...''
Can you please describe more what you mean by this statement? What
commitments are you most concerned about?
Director Coats. [Deleted.]
russia
15. Senator Blumenthal. Director Coats, in January 2017, your
predecessor James Clapper released the declassified report entitled,
``Assessing Russian Activities and Intentions in Recent US Elections.''
Over a year has passed since this report was first published and the
threat has only increased. The report noted, ``Moscow will apply
lessons learned from its Putin-ordered campaign aimed at the US
presidential election to future influence efforts worldwide, including
against US allies and their election processes.'' Will you commit to
issuing an updated report to provide an accurate and updated threat
assessment that can inform our government's ability to address
vulnerabilities in our election system so that we do not further erode
public faith in our democracy?
Director Coats. [Deleted.]
16. Senator Blumenthal. Director Coats, you stated in your
testimony, ``We assess that the Russian intelligence services will
continue their efforts to disseminate false information via Russian
state-controlled media and covert online personas about US activities
to encourage anti-US political views.'' Would you agree with me that
our response to Russia has been inadequate?
Director Coats. [Deleted.]
17. Senator Blumenthal. Director Coats, you noted in your
testimony: ``Foreign elections are critical inflection points that
offer opportunities for Russia to advance its interests both overtly
and covertly. The 2018 US mid-term elections are a potential target for
Russian influence operations. At a minimum, we expect Russia to
continue using propaganda, social media, false-flag personas,
sympathetic spokespeople, and other means of influence to try to
exacerbate social and political fissures in the United States.'' What
changes in Russian activity have you seen in the last year? Would you
assess that our lack of action has failed to deter the Russians,
meaning they have not been forced to change their course of action?
Director Coats. [Deleted.]
cyberattacks
18. Senator Blumenthal. Director Coats, last June, Russia's
military launched the NotPetya ransomware cyberattacks against Ukraine,
but it was not until last month that the United States and U.K.
attributed the attack. Yet this delay in attribution is nothing new, as
the United States only attributed the May 2017 WannaCry cyberattack to
North Korea in December 2017. Attribution is an important step, but
must come far sooner and be followed by swift action. Why are the
sources of these attacks not identified to the public sooner? What are
you doing to connect the dots at a more rapid pace?
Director Coats. [Deleted.]
19. Senator Blumenthal. Director Coats, your testimony noted,
``Russia, China, Iran, and North Korea will pose the greatest cyber
threats to the United States during the next year. These states are
using cyber operations as a low-cost tool of statecraft, and we assess
that they will work to use cyber operations to achieve strategic
objectives unless they face clear repercussions for their cyber
operations.'' It sounds like you would agree with me that our actions
thus far have not made them pay a steep enough price to realize that
they have more to lose than gain with their behavior?
Director Coats. [Deleted.]
__________
Questions Submitted by Senator Martin Heinrich
russian ballistic missile defense capabilities
20. Senator Heinrich. LTG Ashley, last week Vladimir Putin boasted
about his nuclear arsenal saying that it was ``invincible,'' claiming
it can overcome our missile defenses. I want to turn that proposition
on its head. How would you assess the effectiveness and reliability of
Russia's ballistic missile defense?
Lieutenant General Ashley. [Deleted.]
21. Senator Heinrich. LTG Ashley, would you say Russia's ballistic
missile defenses are 100 percent effective?
Lieutenant General Ashley. [Deleted.]
22. Senator Heinrich. LTG Ashley, would you assess that Russian
ballistic missile defenses make them ``invincible'' against our nuclear
delivery systems?
Lieutenant General Ashley. [Deleted.]