- [H.A.S.C. No. 115-84]
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.A.S.C. No. 115-84]
____________
HEARING
ON
NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
AND
OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES HEARING
ON
DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE
FISCAL YEAR 2019 BUDGET REQUEST FOR SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES
__________
HEARING HELD
MARCH 14, 2018
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
_________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
29-462
WASHINGTON : 2019
SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia, Chairman
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas
JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama, Vice Chair
JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
JOHN GARAMENDI, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
PAUL COOK, California
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma
COLLEEN HANABUSA, Hawaii
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
Bruce Johnson, Professional Staff Member
Phil MacNaughton, Professional Staff Member
Megan Handal, Clerk
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
Courtney, Hon. Joe, a Representative from Connecticut, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.........
3
Wittman, Hon. Robert J., a Representative from Virginia,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.......
1
WITNESSES
Roper, Hon. William B., Jr., Assistant Secretary of the Air Force
for Acquisition, Headquarters U.S. Air Force; Lt Gen Jerry D.
Harris, Jr., USAF, Deputy Chief of Staff for Strategic Plans
and Programs, Headquarters U.S. Air Force; and Lt Gen Mark C.
Nowland, USAF, Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations, Plans and
Requirements, Headquarters U.S. Air Force......................
4
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Roper, Hon. William B., Jr., joint with Lt Gen Jerry D.
Harris, Jr., and Lt Gen Mark C. Nowland....................
33
Courtney, Hon. Joe...........................................
31
Wittman, Hon. Robert J.......................................
29
Documents Submitted for the Record:
[There were no Documents submitted.]
Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:
Mr. Garamendi................................................
53
Mrs. Hartzler................................................
53
Mr. Norcross.................................................
53
Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:
[There were no Questions submitted post hearing.]
DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE FISCAL YEAR 2019 BUDGET REQUEST FOR
SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES
----------
House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, March 14, 2018.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:00 p.m. in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Robert J.
Wittman (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT J. WITTMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM VIRGINIA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES
Mr. Wittman. The House Armed Services Subcommittee on
Seapower and Projection Forces. Today the subcommittee convenes
to receive testimony on the fiscal year 2019 Air Force budget
request regarding bomber, tanker, and airlift acquisition
programs.
The distinguished panel of Air Force leaders testifying
before us today are the Honorable Dr. William Roper, Assistant
Secretary of the Air Force for Acquisition; Lieutenant General
Jerry D. Harris, U.S. Air Force Deputy Chief of Staff for
Strategic Plans and Programs; and Lieutenant General Mark C.
Nowland, U.S. Air Force Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations,
Plans, and Requirements.
Gentlemen, thank you so much for being here with us today.
The fiscal year 2019 budget request for projection forces
continues to modernize and recapitalize critical Air Force
weapons systems. I am pleased to see increasing investments in
the B-21 Raider bomber, and the high-visibility VC-25B
Presidential Aircraft Recapitalization effort.
Also, this budget proposes funding to continue modernizing
the legacy Guard and Reserve C-130H tactical airlift fleet.
Throughout the past year, in testimony to Congress, Air
Force senior leadership indicated that the Air Force is one of
the busiest, smallest, and oldest, and least ready fleets in
our history. It is my firm conviction, in light of the threats
posed by China, Russia, North Korea, and Iran, that we must
provide the Air Force the resources it needs to fully support
critical recapitalization programs.
With regard to bombers, the Air Force outlined its plan for
its bomber fleet in the fiscal year 2019 budget submission.
Under this plan, the B-52, the oldest bomber in the fleet, will
remain on duty for the next few decades, while the newest B-2
and B-1 bombers will be retired.
As I have said, the B-52 is the workhorse of the fleet, and
we understand too what it is capable of doing. And doing some
service life extension on it will make it an aircraft that will
take us many years into the future.
I am interested to hear from the witnesses today about
factors being used to make the bomber vector decisions in
retiring the B-1 and B-2.
As for the B-21, I fully support this critical program and
am pleased to see that we are moving forward with the project.
The B-21 will be needed for projecting power over long
distances into denied environments in the future of warfare as
it faces us in the era of great power competition. Timely
delivery of the B-21 is necessary to ensure our national
security. And while I believe that Northrop Grumman is doing a
very good job at managing the risk across the entire portfolio,
I look forward to assessing in better detail the B-21 program
to ensure sufficient progress on both design and construction.
With regard to tankers, I am concerned that continued
forecast delays for KC-46A deliveries, coupled with the Air
Force's plan to begin retiring 47 KC-10A aircraft across the
FYDP [Future Years Defense Program] beginning in fiscal year
2019, may add unacceptable risk to combatant commanders'
ability to execute war plans.
In General McDew's testimony to my subcommittee last week
he indicated ``we already know the convergence of an aging air
refueling fleet with protracted KC-46 production puts the joint
force's ability to effectively execute war plans at risk.'' He
went on to say ``it is clear, the tanker fleet's end strength
will require careful synchronization between KC-10 and KC-135
retirements, and KC-46 production and delivery to sustained
current force projection capabilities.''
I look forward to hearing your thoughts on this program and
how the Air Force intends to manage the transition from KC-10A
and KC-135 aircraft to the KC-46A. Furthermore, I look forward
to hearing why Air Force believes robust investment into KC-46A
is warranted considering continued delays in the program.
I am encouraged with the Air Force's sustained effort to
ensure that its mobility aircraft will comply with the FAA-
mandated [Federal Aviation Administration] NextGen [Next
Generation] air traffic management standards by July 1, 2020,
with the exception of a few aircraft that will be undergoing
depot modifications. But I am becoming increasingly concerned
about other military equities that may be impacted as we move
to support the FAA mandate.
While I support the migration of our tankers and airlift
assets to NextGen, I do worry about the lack of security
protections associated with the bomber and fighter force
structures. We need to carefully monitor this transition.
While I believe that the Air Force's fiscal year 2019
budget request continues to make up lost ground, I remain
concerned about the Air Force's ability to fulfill combatant
commander requirements given the shortfalls in strategic
airlift, aerial refueling, and the increased risk posed by the
complexities of managing the tanker and bomber transitions.
In the words of the immortal air power theorist General
Giulio Douhet, ``In order to assure an adequate national
defense, it is necessary and sufficient to be in a position in
case of war to conquer the command of air.'' Like Douhet, it is
my firm conviction that we need a strong Air Force equipped
with the most capable aircraft that enable our highly skilled
and motivated airmen to defend our great Nation.
Once again, I want to thank our witnesses for participating
in our hearing this afternoon, and I look forward to discussing
these important topics.
With that, I turn to my good friend and colleague, the
ranking member of our subcommittee, Joe Courtney.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wittman can be found in the
Appendix on page 29.]
STATEMENT OF HON. JOE COURTNEY, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CONNECTICUT, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses for testifying today at the Seapower and Projection
Forces Subcommittee.
We are obviously here today on the projection part of our
portfolio. And again, we welcome the opportunity to discuss
with Air Force leadership the bomber, tanker, and airlift
platforms that ensure that we can respond anywhere at any time
around the world.
The 2019 budget request for these programs reflects the
challenging balancing act facing Air Force and the Congress.
For instance, the budget continues significant investment in
major replacement programs like the B-21 bomber and the KC-46
tanker. At the same time, a large portion of the request also
covers a range of modernization efforts aimed at keeping older
legacy bombers and tankers operational and relevant for years
to come.
This is not an easy balance to maintain, and your input
today will help our subcommittee evaluate whether we have--what
we have right in this year's defense bill.
With that in mind, I want to quickly highlight a few areas
of focus.
As I noted earlier, the 2019 budget continues significant
and needed investment in the KC-46 tanker replacement. However,
I remain concerned about additional delays in this high-
priority program. Just last week, the Air Force announced the
delivery of the first operational tankers may not occur until
next year. I hope our witnesses today will explain how the Air
Force is working to address the program's schedule and the
impact of delays on the rest of the tanker fleet.
Another area of ongoing concern and bipartisan interest in
our subcommittee is the modernization of our C-130H fleet. This
subcommittee has led the way in moving upgrades like the
Avionics Modernization Program, AMP, forward after years of
delay. And I appreciate the Air Force's continued support for
AMP in the 2019 budget.
However, I am disappointed that the budget does not fund
other needed upgrades like new high-efficiency propellers and
engines for this fleet. I look forward to exploring this issue
more in our session today.
And lastly, I also hope that our witnesses will provide
additional clarity into recent developments on the Air Force
One replacement program. There have been very public and high-
level pronouncements about a deal to save $1 billion on the new
aircraft. Unfortunately, to date very little detail has been
provided to our subcommittee or the American public about this
arrangement.
At the same time, the Air Force is moving forward on costly
sole-source contracts to sustain and upgrade the current
Presidential aircraft. I believe our subcommittee deserves
greater insight into what is happening with this program, as
well as begin our work on this year's defense bill.
I have additional remarks but, again, time is the enemy
here with votes about to take place. So I am just going to ask
those be submitted for the record.
And again, thank you to the witnesses for being here today.
We look forward to your testimony and questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Courtney can be found in the
Appendix on page 31.]
Mr. Wittman. Without objection.
Dr. Roper, we will go to you. I understand that you will be
giving the opening statement for the panel, and we turn now to
you.
STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM B. ROPER, JR., ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
THE AIR FORCE FOR ACQUISITION, HEADQUARTERS U.S. AIR FORCE; LT
GEN JERRY D. HARRIS, JR., DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF FOR STRATEGIC
PLANS AND PROGRAMS, HEADQUARTERS U.S. AIR FORCE; AND LT GEN
MARK C. NOWLAND, USAF, DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF FOR OPERATIONS,
PLANS AND REQUIREMENTS, HEADQUARTERS U.S. AIR FORCE
Dr. Roper. Thank you, Chairman Wittman and Ranking Member
Courtney and distinguished members of the subcommittee. We want
to start by thanking you for the opportunity to be here, and
for your support of U.S. Air Force, our airmen, and their
families. It is much appreciated.
General Harris, General Nowland, and I have submitted a
joint statement that we would like to be entered into the
record. And I will provide a few brief opening remarks so that
we can turn our focus to your questions later on.
Throughout our 70-year history in the Air Force, we have
conceived, acquired, and operationalized some of the world's
most high-tech systems. From jet engines to ICBMs
[intercontinental ballistic missiles], to stealth, to
satellite-guided bombs, to remotely piloted planes, and many
things we cannot name, we have made science and technology the
whetstone of the world's most lethal air force.
But despite our current lethality, 27 years of continuous
combat operations have done more than just take a toll on
airmen and equipment. It has allowed the national security
environment to change, while our time, talent, and treasure
were otherwise engaged.
I know the committee is well aware that many capabilities
developed decades ago have been studied, copied, and, in many
cases, exploited by adversaries. The new National Defense
Strategy makes it clear we must pick up the gauntlet and
modernize the force. We are committed to this task, and to
doing it cost effectively.
I know the subcommittee is also aware of the warfighting
and deterrence advantages that unmatched bombers, tankers, and
airlift bring to the joint force. This is an awesome portfolio
of capabilities, giving commanders global options at the speed
of need.
Let me give you a few supporting facts. Last year our
bombers flew 650 missions in the Indo-Pacific and European
theaters, strengthening security and assuring allies and
partners during troubling times. We transported and delivered
nearly 1 million personnel, 738 million pounds of warfighting
equipment and humanitarian supplies, and over 1 billion pounds
of fuel in-flight.
The military implication of these numbers speaks for
itself. To maintain this advantage, the fiscal year 2019 budget
submission is a balance between readiness and needed
modernization. This is no easy task, being ready for today's
war, while preparing for tomorrow's. But we look forward to
sharing steps we are taking.
We also applaud your recent efforts to lift the
sequestration caps for fiscal year 2019 and fiscal year 2018.
Stable and timely budgets devoid of continuing resolutions and
budget caps are absolutely necessary to build, sustain, and
operate the Air Force this country needs and deserves.
Thank you again for your continued support of your Air
Force, and we look forward to your questions today.
[The joint prepared statement of Dr. Roper, General Harris,
and General Nowland can be found in the Appendix on page 33.]
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Dr. Roper. I am going to yield. I
will provide my questions a little bit later, I will yield to
my colleague, Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And again, I
will be brief because I know we have a lot of members here.
Again, I would like to just go back for a second to the C-
130H program, which--again, this subcommittee, over the last
two or three NDAAs [National Defense Authorization Acts] has
been very deeply involved, in terms of trying to balance all of
the different stakeholders in terms of that and, again, on a
very bipartisan basis.
Again, just for the record, last year Air Force officials
testified that the first part of the Avionics Modernization
Program was on track to be in compliance with FAA and
international airspace requirements before the 2020 deadline. I
was just wondering, again, for the record, just want to confirm
that we are still moving forward in terms of achieving that
goal.
General Harris. We are.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you. Okay. The second part of AMP was
to be focused on longer-term cockpit upgrades. And again, there
is about $400 million in the budget to conduct research and
development before beginning that procurement.
Last week, Dr. Roper, you came over and testified, you
know, about the fact that, you know, we, as part of acquisition
reform, should be using available technology and open new
opportunities for the Air Force to leverage commercial
technology at commercial speed.
I mean I am not sure how much you have had a chance to sort
of, you know, dig into this program, but it does seem like the
AMP 2 upgrade in the cockpits is a perfect example of a place
where we could maybe accelerate that process, and probably save
some money, as opposed to sort of what is in the budget here
today. You know, we are talking about upgrades that, again, are
happening in, you know, commercial areas, as well as, you know,
other parts of the world.
And I was wondering if you could sort of comment on that.
Dr. Roper. Of course, Congressman. I think what you are
seeing in the modernization efforts is we have got planes with
good bones, but it is time to work on the innards, on the
networking, on the enablers that allow them to be so potent.
Whenever you are dealing with sensing technology or
networking technology, you really are playing into commercial
technologies that can be a large contributor. And so, it is
going to be a major role for me in this position to make sure
that we are adopting the best of breed from commercial tech.
And I think these programs are no exception.
I think the general caution--something we are going to have
to learn across the Air Force--is how do we use commercial tech
safely. We can't put people up in airplanes if there is a cyber
vulnerability, or something that might be compromised on the
battlefield. I don't think that is insurmountable. I don't
think it should be cold water on the issue. It is just a
different kind of design philosophy, to figure out how to use
something that you didn't control during its whole life. And
that is not just going to be part of the airlift or the bomber
portfolio; I think that is going to be across the Air Force,
including the space portfolio. So just general lessons to
learn, sir.
Mr. Courtney. Good. And, you know, as I think we discussed
offline earlier, I mean, this subcommittee is very willing to
embrace, you know, ways to create authorities, to promote more
efficiencies and, you know, save speed, in terms of programs. I
think this is one that you really should maybe put on the dance
card, in terms of, you know, possibilities where you can
achieve those goals that you articulated, again, last week.
The last question I have is on KC-46. As I mentioned, you
know, we are looking at another sort of delay that seems to be
sort of causing--being caused by the testing part of the
pipeline that is there. And I mean it seems like the production
side of it is moving along, nonetheless.
And I just wonder if you could sort of comment in terms of
how we can--whether or not we can sort of get this centipede
sort of moving along, rather than having a--sort of it bunched
up, you know, after the planes are coming out of the factory.
Dr. Roper. Yes, sir. I have been spending a lot of time on
KC-46. And I share your concern. This is an important year for
the program. And even though it is a fixed-price contract, and
any of the delays and issues that we see are not things that
the taxpayer is paying for, we are still taking time away from
warfighters if we delay.
The big thing on any program like this is you have got to
be out testing. And so, the delays in getting FAA
certifications, the supplemental certification and then the
military certification, is a concern to me. Because having
those certifications will allow us to do more aggressive flight
testing. And if you have ever done an engineering program,
stuff is going to go wrong, that is just the nature of the
beast. You tackle that by testing early, putting your finger on
problems, and being able to retire them.
So the fact that there are issues in the program is less
concerning to me. What will concern me during this year, if
issues don't get retired quickly--so it is the speed at which
they get retired that is going to be a key metric for me.
If you step back from the program, though, there are a lot
of requirements that have to be met. I think it is 738. We are
about 30 percent through them, roughly, to date. So there is a
lot that has to happen this year to deliver on time. We have a
great team working it.
You asked earlier what is the government doing to help. We
are trying to make every flexibility available, so that Boeing,
which is being a great partner for us, they are committed to
the program--we are trying to give them the flexibility to
prioritize task in the program, so that they can tackle the
biggest risk as early as possible. So risk burn-down-driven
program. So that is something that we can do on the government
side, and we are doing.
And there will be more to follow on this program. So I
expect to stay in close connection with this committee on how
we are doing.
Mr. Courtney. Great, thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Courtney. We will now go to Mr.
Byrne.
Mr. Byrne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is a question for
the two generals.
The Nuclear Posture Review states the necessity of
maintaining the nuclear triad, and our bomber fleet remains a
key element of that plan.
In this year's Presidential budget request, the Air Force
outlined its plan that calls for the retention of the B-52 and
eventual retirement of the B-1 and B-2 bombers.
Can you both explain the logic associated with B-1 and B-2
retirement, and what factors led the Air Force to the decision
to retain the service's oldest bomber, the B-52?
General Harris. Yes, sir. If you don't mind, I will start
with that.
Mr. Byrne. Sure.
General Harris. So thank you, that is a great question. And
we actually get that one a lot, based on the age of the
platform.
But we based that decision on independent studies, and then
multiple factors when it came to why we got to the selection of
keeping the B-52. Those factors include our maintenance and our
sustainment capabilities and the metrics that are associated
with those, such as aircraft availability, downtime for
maintenance, or downtime for supply, and the cost in terms of
maintenance man-hours per flight hour. And the B-52 was the
leading candidate for the keeping of the current fleet that we
have.
So as we look forward into B-21 production and deliveries,
you will see a phase-out between the B-1s and the B-2s to
associate us keeping roughly 175 to 170-ish type bombers,
between the B-21 and the B-52.
General Nowland. Yes, if I may add?
Mr. Byrne. Yes.
General Nowland. It is a great question. The future of the
Air Force is a combination of penetrating, non-penetrating,
manned, unmanned, stand-off, penetrate, and drop from above. So
the combination of the strategy of a B-52 with stand-off
munitions and its capacity with a B-21 for the future gives us
the warfighting punch that we think we will need, as we look to
the future against China and Russia and the threats that we
need to prepare for.
Mr. Byrne. Well, let me just follow up on that for a
second. I know all of us are re-evaluating things in light of
changes in what we have seen as the posture by both China and
Russia. And I don't want you to go into anything that is
classified, but was that in part what was driving your
decision?
General Harris. It was. That was definitely a part of it.
And we allowed the National Defense Strategy that was recently
published to help drive that.
Mr. Byrne. I see that, and I appreciate your explanation.
That does remove just a source of curiosity for me to
understand it.
Dr. Roper, just a quick comment to you. It was 10 years ago
last month that the tanker project was originally awarded to
another company other than Boeing. We have American aircraft
that are being refueled by that company's tankers. We are 10
years later, and the tanker we awarded to Boeing can't refuel
our tankers yet.
So I have concerns that this is going to continue to be a
problem, that the assurances we have gotten before about ``No,
it is going to be this time, no, it is going to be this time''
are just going to continue. Relieve me of my concerns, please,
sir.
Dr. Roper. Congressman, I wanted to start by saying we
really appreciate the acquisition reforms that this committee
and others in Congress have championed, and I think they will
go a long way to help get control of acquisition.
Just to give you a little bit of insight to what running a
program would be like in the past is you would have the rein of
the horse, and then there would be 100 other people in the
Pentagon holding the other. And the idea that you could somehow
drive that horse straight to destination is just really hard to
imagine.
By giving authority back to the Air Force, you really are
able to hold people accountable again, look at me and say why
is this program not on track.
Now, I wish we had a time machine and could go back in time
and fix some of the program issues that we have had. And we are
going to do our very best to fix it forward and play the ball
as it lies. But I think on the new programs that we are
starting to use these authorities on, we are going to see a lot
more prototyping, which is a big thing for me. Don't let risks
snowball. Go out and start building early. Put your finger on
hard-to-do things.
The Air Force has a great history of doing that. Back
during its experimental plane heyday, built a lot of advanced
technology, and it had the discipline to only put one new hard
thing in each new plane. And if you couldn't do it, then you
needed to keep focusing on that thing because that is where
your risk was.
So I think that is--that discipline is going to come back,
because you have given us the authority to implement it again,
that scale.
Mr. Byrne. Well, I appreciate your comments. I certainly
look forward--you can't go back in a time machine, I get that.
But you can learn from your past mistakes and make sure you
don't replicate them in the future.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Byrne. We will now go to Ms.
Bordallo. And after Ms. Bordallo finishes with her line of
questioning, we will adjourn for votes and then return.
Ms. Bordallo. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I only have
one question, so I guess I will meet the deadline.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Bordallo. Gentlemen, thank you all for being here
today, and thank you for your service.
We have been told that the current U.S. TRANSCOM [United
States Transportation Command] requirements for air refueling
tankers is 567 aircraft. But the service is only fielding 455
tankers to meet the warfighting requirements.
So, in lieu of the results of the command's mobility
capabilities requirement study, can one of you speak to the
service's plan to balance KC-46 production with the retirement
of the KC-135s to meet mission requirements? And furthermore,
how do you intend to work through the basing requirements for a
larger fleet?
General Harris. Yes, ma'am. I would be happy to start with
that and see if my colleagues have more to add. So thank you.
We are looking at the study for the KC-46 and what it
brings to us, and we have determined that the best platform for
us to retire is actually the KC-10. And our--you are correct,
we do have 455 of the tankers in the fleet now, and our intent
is to grow to 479. So you will see that, as the KC-46s that Dr.
Roper has been talking about add to our fleet, we will stand
down KC-10s, but we will actually grow our 135s.
So as we replace the 135s initially, they will move to
other units, and we will preserve those tankers to actually
grow our fleet, adding 25 to that capability.
When it comes to TRANSCOM and the requirements, we look at
this fleet as one of the things that separates us from other
countries' air forces, and it allows us to be that
expeditionary force and take the fight to our adversaries. And
they are extremely important to what we do, but we are
comfortable with the moderate-level risk, once we grow that 479
with a mix of KC-46As and 135Rs, that we will have the fleet we
need to meet the combatant commanders' intent.
Ms. Bordallo. Any other----
General Nowland. Congresswoman Bordallo, hafa adai.
Ms. Bordallo. Hafa adai.
General Nowland. It is a great question, particularly from
Guam. As you know, power projection, our tankers, are key
towards this. We give three million pounds of gas a day right
now in the Central Command area of responsibility.
The key to it, though, is managing the requirements,
working the--what we call the schedule. And we have actually
made some advancements with that. DIUx [Defense Innovation
Unit-Experimental] created a tanker tool for us that allows us
to schedule a little bit more efficiently.
And then the other reality, ma'am, is manning those
airplanes. You can have all those airplanes, but because of the
nature of our fleet, if we were going to have to use all of
those--which they surge to do, but over a sustained period of
time--would probably require--would require a partial
mobilization to be able to do all of that at one time.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you, and hafa adai to you, too. And I
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Ms. Bordallo. We will recess for
the votes.
I would ask members, after the third vote, to return back
here, and we will resume the line of questioning.
[Recess.]
Mr. Wittman. We are going to reconvene and continue our
line of questioning. And we will go to Mr. Norcross.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman. I want to follow up on
the discussion that two or three other members have already
talked about, and that is our tankers.
The original date that we expected the delivery to start,
when this began, what year?
Dr. Roper. So, Congressman, I will take that one for the
record. I know we are behind, but I want to get you the precise
date.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 53.]
Mr. Norcross. Give me a year.
Dr. Roper. We are years behind.
Mr. Norcross. Give me a decade?
Dr. Roper. I mean it is one of the many programs where we
have been delayed, sir. So yes, it is years of time. And I will
get you the precise number for the record, sir.
Mr. Norcross. So you went through a discussion on how we
used to embrace change, but at some point you made a decision
to go with a program the way it is, no major changes.
As I understand it, with the new tanker, the boom camera
system seems to be top of the issue board. Would you agree to
that?
Dr. Roper. Yes, sir. We are having both issues with the
centerline drogue, as well as the remote visual system, which
is what allows the operator to determine if the drogue or the
boom is working. If you can't see, then you can't control it
properly. So that is correct, sir.
Mr. Norcross. When was that spec changed to go from the
original camera system?
Dr. Roper. So, sir, the requirements, to my knowledge, the
requirements have not changed. As the E&D [engineering and
design] contract with Boeing was let, it had requirements.
There are 738, to my knowledge, that have to be met. They
include all aspects of operation, including allowing the
operator to be able to see appropriately, allowing the drogue
to be employed appropriately. And so it is the development
testing that is proving that some of the choices that have been
made in the program are not meeting those requirements.
I mentioned a little earlier in testimony, issues and
programs don't give me concern, per se. Most programs have
issues. What I am going to be tracking very carefully as I
start this job is how long does it take issues to be retired.
If you are designing correctly, if you are doing good
engineering, you find something, you should be able to fix it
quickly because you have designed for it.
And so, these new issues that have appeared, I am tracking
them. And what I am going to be very focused on is how long do
they persist. And if they persist for a long time, then that is
indicative of a problem with the program, sir.
Mr. Norcross. So when they finally come through the
delivery date, are you going to have the personnel to fly them,
maintain them, and the construction done?
And--because as I go out to two of the bases, they are not
ready for it.
General Harris. Sir, I will take that one. We are not
starting this as a new fleet. So the KC-46, as it comes on,
will replace current squadrons. So the initial ones going to
the trainers, once we are done with the testing of these, they
will start to work their way through probably a normal contract
type of initial training, and then start to do the--the formal
training unit themself will pick that up, and then we will work
through it.
Because these are all replacements, it will take us a
while, but they will replace squadrons of KC-10s and KC-135s,
and we do have those people onboard already. Yes, sir.
Mr. Norcross. Trained in the KC-46s?
General Harris. No, sir, they are not--that is what I am
saying. When we get the first one to start that training, we
will start with our formal training unit, our schoolhouse.
Mr. Norcross. Right.
General Harris. They will build up, and then they will
become the instructors with an assist from the contract team,
as it is written----
Mr. Norcross. So you have adjusted your schedule--the
construction of the new facilities and the personnel to
reflect----
General Harris. We are staying on time with those, because
if the airplanes come to us we don't want to be late with those
facilities. So we are continuing to push forward with the
MILCON [military construction] and the people that will be
used--or put into the effort.
Dr. Roper. Congressman, you are right to point out that the
delivery of the tankers alone impacts a lot of other things. It
impacts training. It also impacts how long we have to keep the
KC-10 and the KC-35s flying, right?
So there are a lot of coupled factors that touch that
tanker. So it is high priority, and I think, for me, if these
new deficiencies are not retired quickly, then it is going to
make me be very concerned about hitting our delivery date this
year. This is a very critical year for the tanker.
Mr. Norcross. I agree. I yield back the balance.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Norcross. We will now go to Mr.
Conaway.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Air Force's 2019 budget called for the retention of B-
52s and ultimate retirements of B-1s, B-2s, once the B-21 is in
base. Can you talk to us about the mechanics for how that
decision came about, in terms of the retirements of the B-1s
and B-2s?
And then have basing decisions been made as to where the B-
21s are going to be based?
General Harris. Sir, I will start with that, if you don't
mind. The B-52 was selected based on a lot of factors and an
independent study done within our Air Force A9 [Studies,
Analysis and Assessments] team. And those factors looked at the
maintenance and sustainment metrics of the platforms themself,
the aircraft availability, the maintenance availability versus
supply rates, and the B-52 was the winner of that.
So that was the selection that, when we applied what the
airplane can do in the near future, when we looked at the B-2,
the B-1, and the B-52, as paired with the B-21, and then
applied the National Defense Strategy to this, it was the clear
winner for us.
Mr. Conaway. So can you talk to us, though, about you--you
know, the basing decisions on the B-21? Are you just going to
simply replace the B-1s, B-2s with B-21s in its place? You
going to move around the world? What are you going to do with
them?
General Harris. Yes, sir. Based on the strategic
capabilities of the bomber, they are all continental-based. So
we have them forward-deployed, but for temporary status.
So I would expect that, if you are flying bombers now, a B-
1 or a B-2, in the future you will probably----
Mr. Conaway. Say out of Dyess Air Force Base.
General Harris [continuing]. B-21s, yes, sir.
Mr. Conaway. Okay.
General Harris. And that is where the school is for one of
those platforms.
Mr. Conaway. Right.
General Harris. We will probably start there. But we are
working through the strategic basing decision, and we have not
released any of those locations. We are just looking at it from
those are the locations currently flying bombers, have the
facilities to support bombers.
Mr. Conaway. All right, thank you, yield back.
General Harris. Yes, sir.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Conaway.
I want to get the panelists' perspective on both the new
national defense study and then some of the comments made by
General McDew. If you combine those two together, it appears as
though the Air Force is looking to increase its airlift
capacity and its tanking capacity over that which you have
today. So, additional aircraft over which you have today.
And I know the mobility capability requirements study is
going to come out this fall to look at what the requirement
would be into the future, and what you need for the entire
demand signal that is going to come your way.
In looking at where that is, it appears to me as though the
place where you will find yourself is increased airlift and
tanker force structure. That is, a larger number of aircraft.
So the question then becomes, with the projected numbers of
tankers that you will build, and lift capacity that you will
build, it seems like your number--if you completely retire
existing aircraft, it seems like your number is going to be
lower, rather than higher.
So how do you reconcile where you end up with total force
structure for lift and for tanker based on where the build ends
up, and completely retiring both KC-10, KC-135 aircraft, as
well as transitioning to the--both the tactical lift we have in
C-130s, but also C-17 line is done, you know, we have some
demand going on out there, we have some C-5s that are at the
boneyard.
So the question then becomes, with the demand signal
increasing, and with the era of great power competition, give
us your perspective on what appears to be a demand signal for
increased lift and tanker force structure.
General Harris. Yes, sir. That is a very good question
that--it will take a couple of us to answer that, I suspect. If
you don't mind----
Mr. Wittman. Sure.
General Harris [continuing]. We will do that. Let me start
with the tankers.
We are not retiring all of the KC-135s. When we have the
complete fleet of KC-46As, we will have retired all of the KC-
10s and some of the 135s. So we will have a fleet of 300 135s
and 179 KC-46s. That gets us to our fleet of 479, as compared
to today 455. So that tanker fleet is growing.
To help us with that, we are also reducing the
requirements. Because as we go through and modernize the B-52,
the new engines will actually require a significant--the
improvements we are getting out of the new technology will
significantly reduce the fuel required for that platform to
fly. So while we grow the platforms and the tankers, we will
also decrease the requirement, which helps us solve some of
those issues.
From a bomber perspective, retiring the B-1 and the--
actually, you didn't talk bombers, you--STRAT [strategic] lift,
I am sorry, so C-5s. To help us with our C-5 lift, we had--
initially, for budget reasons, we had moved 8 C-5s into BAI
[backup-aircraft inventory] status, which means we still had
the airplanes flyable on the flight line, but we didn't have
the ops maintenance and the money behind them to fly them. We
just rotated them through.
We are pulling two out last year, two again this year with
our fiscal year 2019 proposal, and we intend to do two each of
the next 2 years--basically, have an additional squadron push
back out into the force to have additional C-5s, which is one
of our best airlifters.
Mr. Wittman. Yes.
General Harris. We will marry that up with the C-17 fleet--
we have 222 aircraft--and then a smaller C-130 fleet, which
should meet our TAC [tactical] lift.
Mr. Wittman. Yes.
General Harris. So, at this point, when we look at what we
are doing with our strategic lift, we are fairly comfortable
with where we are headed on the operations plan, but we do have
a study that is--the mobility capabilities and requirements
study is ongoing and we will address through that, if we need
to, when it completes here in several months.
Mr. Wittman. Got it.
General.
General Nowland. Sir, if I may add, you know, as the
operations, we are always looking at our plans. And you are
absolutely correct, there is always stress on our mobility and
our tanker fleet.
Mr. Wittman. Yes.
General Nowland. Because as we look at the National Defense
Strategy, everybody wants it quicker and sooner and more rapid,
so concepts of operation are super important, as we think about
how we mix the future force mix. And as General Harris said,
modernization reduces some, but then you are still going to get
other people that want to fill in with other capability.
So, working with TRANSCOM and General Everhart, who is our
Air Mobility Command commander, is really looking at this hard,
because command and controlling this and scheduling it really
becomes the secret sauce of how you do it, because there is
going to be a lot of friction as you think about the distances
that we have to cover in a new National Defense Strategy [NDS].
Mr. Wittman. It certainly seems like the demand signal is
going to continue to increase, especially based on NDS. Give me
this perspective: The KC-10As are scheduled--a group of them
are scheduled for retirement in fiscal year 2019. As KC-46A
moves to the right, it seems like you are going to have a gap
there.
So tell me what the scheduling happens if KC-46A gets
pushed to the right, and what the scheduling is for retirement
of KC-10s.
General Harris. Sir, we had that study ongoing, but I fully
expect the requirements levied on us by the TRANSCOM commander
will force us to readdress our retirement schedule. If we are
late on delivery, I would expect we would have a similar delay
in retirement of the aircraft, so that we stay at our min
[minimum] that we have now, but we intend to grow the fleet,
rather than actually get smaller in that fleet.
Mr. Wittman. And in your plan, too, do you address the
issue of attrition? We all talk about our fighting platforms in
the air and on the sea, operating in contested environments.
And the days of us being able to go in and gain air superiority
in a day or two and then fly unimpeded in that airspace is a
thing of the past.
So if our lift is going to be operating in contested
airspace, if our tankers are going to be operating in contested
airspace, being able to put it--be put at risk at long
distances, how do you factor for attrition, and how do you
factor for support for those aircraft? Because, again, that is
the critical link to be able to fight your way in.
So give me that perspective about how the plan considers
that.
General Harris. So, expect each one of us to bounce through
on this question, also.
Mr. Wittman. Yes, please.
General Harris. But certainly, Chairman, there is risk
associated with this. We have BAI, or battlefield
interdiction--or attrition aircraft within each of the
squadrons.
Mr. Wittman. Okay.
General Harris. It is normally about a 10 percent level. So
we have some initially.
As you are aware, in our boneyard and different types of
storage, we also have C-5s. We have other aircraft that are
there. Part of our concern for our strategic lifters, other
than what we have in the boneyard, we don't have an open line.
And we hear that regularly as a concern: You are not buying any
cargo aircraft right now.
Well, to be honest, in a way, we are. The KC-46 is a dual-
role aircraft. We intend to use them fully as a tanker, but
with a dual-role capability. They do bring to us a capability
to have strict cargo, if necessary. And that is an open line.
So that is one of the things that we can look at.
And we are also working on the fighter--I am sorry, the
next-generation air dominance portion to be able to make sure
that we can operate and survive in that contested airspace, as
you talked about, before we bring those aircraft forward.
Mr. Wittman. Good, very good. Thank you.
Dr. Roper. Congressman, I think the point about having
enough aircraft available is extremely important. And as a
mathematician coming into this job, the number that we so often
talk about are the number of aircraft. But the one that
concerns me the most are the availability.
Mr. Wittman. Yes.
Dr. Roper. So I am starting to read aircraft availability
reports. And, you know, it is shocking to see some of the
issues that we are having, in getting planes up in the air.
So the questions I have been asking as an acquisition
person is where is our investment in research and development
to go after sustainment and maintenance, where we are spending
most of our budget. I think it is an area that we can improve
on in the Air Force. We are spending most of our money there.
There are many commercial practices that could be applied that
we should be applying.
Mr. Wittman. Yes.
Mr. Roper. I brought a 3D printed part from a C-5 today,
which shuts off a valve on the outside of the plane. I am
seeing little efforts like this across the Air Force, but I
don't see the enterprise effort. And so that is one of the
areas that I am going to be interested to work with Air Force
leadership and go after that part of the aircraft availability
equation.
Mr. Wittman. Yes, I think that is key.
Lieutenant General Nowland.
General Nowland. Back to concepts of operation, one of the
advantages of the KC-46, our chief says the future battlefield
we need to be networked, we need to share, and we need to
learn.
So as we look at our fleet, some of the capabilities that
we will bring on a KC-46 will enhance the situational awareness
of the overall joint force commander, which will then allow us
to adjust our concept a little bit so that when we get into
that contested environment we are sharing greater information
to improve the survivability and the resiliency of our
operation.
Mr. Wittman. Sure. I think those are all important points
as we look at, you know, how we operate in the future in both a
strategically challenging environment, but also a resource-
challenged environment, to do all that we can there.
I think the sustainability idea, too, and looking at life-
cycle costs, looking at best value in purchasing--not low
price, technically acceptable--and, as you know, we made a big
change last year in how acquisition takes place with that, and
really minimizing the classes where we use LPTA [lowest price
technically acceptable].
Listen, LPTA may be great for buying jet fuel and toilet
paper, but for advanced systems in service, it is probably not
the best way to go about it. So I appreciate you all doing
that, because there are certainly some models out there--the
airlines are tremendously effective in sustaining operations
and making sure that they don't miss a minute of avoidable
flight time, because when that aircraft is on the ground it is
not generating revenue. And if we look at it the same way in
seeing if our aircraft aren't generating sortie capability or
mission capability, then we are missing out on what we have
invested in. So I think that is the right way to look at it.
Gentlemen, thank you. We will now go to Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And gentlemen,
thank you very much for the testimony thus far. I want to
follow up on some of this KC-10 issues. And specifically,
this--the chairman was talking about attrition. And I think you
said BAI, which was a new term for me. But I think I understand
what it is.
The Air Force intends to recapitalize the KC-10 fleet as
part of its legacy tanker recapitalization strategy, with
retirements beginning in 2019. Representing Travis Air Force
Base, I have a long-time interest in this issue.
Can you explain what that sentence means?
General Harris. Yes, sir. Congressman, had the KC-46A been
delivering on time, we would have retired KC-10s just in time
to receive the KC-46s at that base from the selection that has
been made. Now that we are seeing the delays in those
deliveries, we fully expect to actually slow down our
retirement plans. We are going through a study to make sure
that it is going to tell us--but 455 tankers with the throw
weight that they can get, number of booms downrange, along with
the number of gas, KC-10 is one of our best airplanes for that.
And we intend to make sure that we are not just retiring it,
but we are replacing it with KC-46As.
Mr. Garamendi. Given your testimony, given that it is
public, I expect I am going to get a question from Fairfield,
California. Has the beddown of the 46 timing changed at all?
General Harris. The timing beddown has changed only based
on the delivery, sir. So if we don't have the aircraft to bed
them down, then yes, it will have changed. But we are still
working through the actual timing, as it slips.
Mr. Garamendi. I agree with one thing that--with all that
you are saying. But obviously, concerns about the KC-46 and its
availability, or its arrival.
The KC-10 is a spectacular airplane. And it seems as though
the recapitalization means that this airplane is going to be
around somewhere, not in a boneyard, but somewhere probably
waiting to be deployed. Is that a strategy that is going to
carry forward for the--assuming the KC-46 comes on, KC-10s go
somewhere?
General Harris. No, sir. We do intend to retire the KC-10.
We are one of the--there is only two other organizations in the
world still flying that aircraft, and the parts availability
are extremely hard to get. And the operating cost and the
maintenance cost are not in our best interest. So----
Mr. Garamendi. Dr. Roper has his additive machine there.
[Laughter.]
General Harris. Yes, sir. He does.
Mr. Garamendi. It might be the only way. Okay. I appreciate
that.
What is the range of the B-21?
Dr. Roper. Congressman, we would be happy to discuss the B-
21 with you in a closed session. But for any of its performance
characteristics, they are just not things we can discuss in an
open hearing.
Mr. Garamendi. Fair enough. I probably have other
questions, but I will yield back at this point.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Garamendi. We will now go to
Mrs. Hartzler.
Mrs. Hartzler. Good afternoon, gentlemen. It is good to see
you again. As you know, I have the privilege of representing
the Whiteman Air Force Base, home of the B-2 stealth bomber,
which is the only bomber with the A2/AD [anti-access/area
denial] capability, as well as the most flexible leg in our
nuclear triad.
And the Air Force's fiscal year 2019 budget proposal
eliminated funding for the B-2 Advanced Extremely High
Frequency [AEHF] satellite communications program, which would
have provided the B-2 two-way, high-speed survivable
communications during A2/AD operations. And while I fully
support the recapitalization of the bomber fleet with the B-21
bomber, the B-2 must also continue to be modernized to mitigate
capability and capacity gaps in the near to mid-term.
So, in light of the termination of the B-2 AEHF program,
what is the Air Force doing to ensure communications with the
B-2 remain viable in A2/AD environments?
General Harris. Ma'am, if you don't mind, I will start with
that. Great question, and clearly you are tied in with your
community.
The B-2 is an awesome aircraft that is capable of doing
that penetration support. This particular radio is still a long
way away, and our concern is, had we continued funding it the
way it was, it would not have delivered until 2026 to 2028
timeframe with our bomber vector that we were planning to
retire it just a few years later.
In accordance with the National Defense Strategy that was
just published, this is one of the areas that we looked to take
some risk on communications, because we will continue to modify
the aircraft to make sure that it has the survivability it
needs to be fully viable through that period. And we do have
survivable radio connectivity using different system
appropriate on that airplane that we didn't think a second one
that delivered so late in its life span would be the right
effect for us.
Mrs. Hartzler. And that was going to be my follow-up
question. Can you expound on that a little bit?
So you have an alternative secure communication solution to
replace that to help it go ahead and carry out to the end of
its life?
General Harris. Yes, ma'am. This--the radio you are talking
about is the secure EHF [extremely high frequency]. That would
have been the second one to deliver. The first one we are
looking at is an LF/VLF [low frequency/very low frequency]
system that will deliver before, and actually give the
capability that we have been missing for a while.
So when we looked at it from a risk perspective, having at
least one assured com in there so that we can have the
communications required for this in a nuclear role that is
survivable in that type of an environment we think will be
sufficient for the life span of that aircraft.
Mrs. Hartzler. And when will this LF/VLF be added?
Dr. Roper. So, ma'am, I will get you a firm date on the
fielding date. The first money for it comes in place in our
fiscal year 2019 budget.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 53.]
Dr. Roper. And just to speak a little more broadly about B-
2 and the 2019 budget, it is an important system. It is going
to be an important system for us until the B-21 fields. And so
the big workhorse in our budget regarding the B-2 is the
defense management system, which is a large program about $1.3
billion over the FYDP, and it is meant to ensure that the B-2
maintains its ability to go into the most denied spaces of the
world and be able to do its power projection mission.
So it is not neglected, we are just focusing on the things
that we think are most relevant in the interim period between
now and the B-21 fielding.
Mrs. Hartzler. Yes, that is good to know. I was pleased to
see the new start in the fiscal year 2019 proposal for the
radar-aided targeting system, or RATS, software upgrade. What
is the timeline for the RATS upgrade? And when can we expect to
see it fielded in the B-2?
Dr. Roper. So, ma'am, the RATS has about $43 million in our
fiscal year 2019 budget. Again, I will get you the firm date
for the record, but I believe it is a 2- or 3-year program. But
expect a firm date from me on that. It is an important part of
the modernization effort to make sure the B-2 maintains its
penetration capabilities, communication capabilities, and
sensing capabilities into the future.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 53.]
Mrs. Hartzler. Yes, very, very important aircraft. I very
much appreciate your acknowledgment of that and the steps that
you are taking to keep it viable as long as possible, because
our Nation may need it at any point.
General Nowland, when you testified before the Readiness
Subcommittee I asked a question about the bomber vector, and
you assured me that the Air Force is working to avoid a bomber
dip, or a capability gap with the fleet. Can you discuss more
about the Air Force's decision to re-engine the B-52, and what
would happen to the overall bomber fleet if we do not move
forward with the plans to re-engine the aircraft?
General Nowland. Ma'am, a fantastic question. The bombers
are so important towards our overall concept of operations of
how we support the joint fight. The B-52 re-engine is really
good news for the Air Force, in my opinion.
It is going to save us fuel, it is going to give us
increased capability with the sense of that extended range that
you are going to get by the fuel savings. And it is going to
give us more reliability, because the engines, as we move--the
old engines, obviously, are hard to maintain, so hopefully it
will reduce our amount of maintenance, will increase our
mission capable rate, which will get us more sorties as we move
forward.
So it is a really positive story, and I think Dr. Roper has
got a great strategy on how we will prototype, and I will pass
it over to Dr. Roper.
Dr. Roper. So, Congresswoman, it is--the B-52 is a great
example of being able to leverage work in commercial industry
to help us in the military. The airline industry is booming
right now. Engines are a big focus. Fuel efficiency is a big
focus in the commercial world. And, of course, we want to put
back in all of the capability that the current B-52 has.
But as the general has clearly articulated, there is a
chance to do something big on fuel savings, which aren't just
saving money for the Air Force, it is operational flexibility,
it is extended range.
And I would also like to mention, given that we are talking
tankers, it is a lot less time on tanking emissions. So
benefits across the board.
The authorities that Congress has given us gives us a lot
more opportunities to prototype things before we commit to the
full program of record. I think B-52 re-engining is a great
example of an opportunity to get out, to try something, and to
fly before we buy it. And if we are buying it having
demonstrated those fuel efficiencies, then we know we are
making a smart decision for the future.
Mrs. Hartzler. Sounds great. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mrs. Hartzler.
Mr. Garamendi, additional questions?
Mr. Garamendi. To follow up on the B-52, are we developing
a new engine or an engine that exists somewhere out there?
Dr. Roper. So, sir, we have all options on the table. But
my preferred option, moving into our acquisition strategy, is
to leverage commercial. That was a big thrust for me in my
previous job. If it is available in commercial industry, it has
got their research and development in it, then we should begin
by trying to leverage what they have done, as opposed to
rebuild something ourselves.
Mr. Garamendi. And where are you in achieving your goal?
Dr. Roper. So, sir, this will be an important year. We are
still pre-milestone B in the re-engining, so this is the year
that we should move into a formal acquisition strategy. I am
working with the B-52 re-engining team, and I expect to have
them on their acquisition path within the next quarter of this
year.
Mr. Garamendi. I certainly agree with your goal of using a
commercially available engine, if it is at all possible.
Dr. Roper. Yes, sir. I just consider that just ground-rule
acquisition practice, that if you can buy it from industry and
there is not a national security reason why you can't, then you
should.
Mr. Garamendi. And when will you know?
Dr. Roper. So, sir, the team is going through different
engine options as we look through, you know, options for
potential source selection. And so there will be more to follow
on that. But there is a little more work to do to make sure
that we do the right decision and right choice.
Mr. Garamendi. I asked you a four-letter question. When?
Dr. Roper. So, sir, I will come back, I will take that for
the record. But I did my first review with them a few weeks
ago. And so I am expecting them to come back with a recommended
acquisition plan within the next few months. But I will get you
a specific date.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 53.]
Mr. Garamendi. And the approximate cost of re-engining?
Dr. Roper. So, sir, in the fiscal year 2019 budget I
believe we have $1.56 billion laid in to begin this program.
That is to get it started. I believe, over the whole life of
the program, it is in the $7 or $8 billion ballpark.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 53.]
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Garamendi. Gentlemen, I would
like to explore a couple of other areas.
First is the FAA's NextGen air traffic management systems
and the requirements that it places upon the Air Force. The
concern that comes up in my mind is that it is a locational
device, so that air traffic controllers can determine the place
of the aircraft, aside from what they get as far as a radar
signal. So it divulges our location.
So if we are looking at tactical aircraft, whether they are
fighter aircraft or even strategic aircraft like bombers, and
having to divulge that location, to me, that creates a
situation that is, I think, a potential problem for the Air
Force.
So let me ask. Is it the Air Force's intention to comply
with the NextGen requirements by 2020? And if so, how do you
mitigate for what I believe is an increased vulnerability that
is placed on you by now-locational information that is now
transmitted from the aircraft out?
General Nowland. Sir, that is a question right up the A3's
[Air Staff, Operations, Plans and Requirements] alley, so I
would love to----
Mr. Wittman. Yes.
General Nowland. I have my vice, my Senior Executive
Service, is Mr. Wayne Schatz. And he is meeting with the FAA
continually about that. And he sits with the FAA on two
different boards to talk about this issue. We, like you, have
similar concerns. So the answer is we are working a memorandum
of agreement.
By the way, thank you for the question and pointing out the
GAO [Government Accountability Office] report, because I had
not seen it. So the report said it would be due in February. It
is already March. So I have queried. We are close to getting
that, which will work an accommodation between us and the FAA
for our tactical airplanes.
Our large airplanes, where we can comply, we will
absolutely comply to the max [maximum] extent practical. But we
share the same concerns that you have.
Think about an Operation Noble Eagle mission where you have
F-16s that are capping over a city to help protect the
President or protect somebody. If somebody could just go on a--
and find out where they were, if you know where they are then
you know how to avoid them, right? So we share your concerns,
and we are working with the FAA from a national defense and
security strategy--North American Air Command is also involved
about this, Department of Homeland Security, so we are all
working together towards that accommodation.
The other part that we think is super important is there is
cyber vulnerabilities, and we are working with the FAA to talk
about how we mitigate those and how we ensure that we put a
cyber--what I would like to call a defensive counter-air bubble
of protection around our system, so that we don't introduce
vulnerabilities into our systems.
Mr. Wittman. I would agree. I think there is--well, I think
it is both a tactical and strategic question the Air Force has
to deal with. I understand the air safety elements of that, but
there is a national defense dimension to our fighter aircraft
that we have to keep in mind.
It seems like to me the FAA would be willing to provide
some type of exception or exemption for those aircraft to make
sure that you can maintain that tactical superiority. And, you
know, why would you want to provide somebody with a very simple
device to pick up a signal that is fairly easy to pick up, that
is going to be picked up by an air traffic control center, to
give away aircraft location? I couldn't agree with you more.
To me--listen, I understand the air safety element of it.
But I also understand too there is a much larger mission
objective for those fighter aircraft. And hopefully the FAA
will be mindful of your greater mission.
And listen, I understand their mission of air safety, but
your mission is national security, which, to me, provides,
hopefully then, food for thought on what they can do to work
with you.
General Nowland. Mr. Chairman, I think we have a great
relationship with the FAA and the whole interagency--I think
this is a really good-news story for our government, because we
are working together, and they do recognize we have symbiotic
needs here, to be perfectly honest.
Because what we have also discovered, your air data system
broadcast is subject to GPS [Global Positioning System], and
GPS can be jammed. So you can create problems within that
system that they are recognizing also.
And then, finally, the system is based upon everybody who
wants to be part of the system. There is a recognition that you
have non-cooperative people out there who want to do something
for a myriad of different reasons. And from national defense,
from homeland security, from just law enforcement, we need that
capability. So we are working together as a team to come up
with a solution set which meets the timelines.
Mr. Wittman. That is great. I think that is important for
everybody to understand, you know, how to prioritize those
elements of what your mission is and the FAA's mission. So I
appreciate that.
I wanted to ask a question about--go back to airlift
capacity. As I talked about earlier, we understand from
TRANSCOM the demand signal that they see, not only now, but in
the future, the demand from the combatant commanders. We know
the C-17 line is done, so we are not going to build any more of
those aircraft unless we retool and ramp back up, which is not
likely.
But we do have 25 C-5s, as I said, in the boneyard. Would
it make sense to bring those aircraft back? To me, having those
25 aircraft back into operation provides a tremendous amount of
lift capability in our air platforms. And, of course, we are
talking about the sealift side, too. But specifically to you
all we are looking at the full suite of lift. And it seems like
those C-5s, those 25 sitting in the boneyard, is maybe an
opportunity. So----
General Harris. So, Chairman, that is a great question. And
continuing on that line of thought, on our past studies, when
we looked at this based--before we had our National Defense
Strategy that aligned to us--to a new effort and structure, we
did not need those. We were comfortable with holding those
where they were at so that we need--if we needed them, we would
have access to them.
As the ongoing mobility capabilities and requirements study
completes, we will use that to inform, with the National
Defense Strategy and the plans that we have sat in front of us
with, the strategic alignment of our high-end capacity against
our peer adversaries first. If that drives us to say we need to
have additional airlift, that is one of those places we can go.
Or do we need to then work with our team and actually open up a
new strategic lift line? That will be part of that study.
Mr. Wittman. I think it is critical. As you look at the
needs identified in our OPLANs [operation plans], and in
talking with General Dunford about executing those OPLANs,
wherever they may be, but especially in areas that are a
distance, to be able to sustain those operations, the key is
lift. And as you know, the--you know, the first 2 to 3 weeks,
you know, we surge a lot there. We can do that. But the key is
sustaining those operations.
And the limiting factor that elongates the timeframe for us
to fully execute those OPLANs, the single logistical roadblock
to that, is lift, being able to get supplies and folks to the
fight. And especially at distance, that becomes a bigger and
bigger issue.
So I think, you know, as we look at the NDS--and I do agree
that we are in the age of great power competition--you know,
having that capability is going to be key. So I appreciate you
all looking at that and really seriously studying, you know,
what we can do with those particular aircraft.
Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Very useful line of questioning. Those 25 C-
5s that are in the boneyard, what does it take and how long
does it take to bring them back up?
General Harris. That is a great question. It is different
for each aircraft. And we have different types of storage. So
type 1000 is our most restrictive storage, fastest to return to
fly. And aircraft in there, we can generally turn them in a
couple of months. But it is one or two at a time. Our team that
does that is not sufficient in size to have that effort, based
on what we are doing in day-to-day operations, their caretaker
status.
If we run into an attrition event, we would be able to put
more manpower after that to turn those quicker. But some of
these larger airplanes, depending on if they are in type 2000
or type--different types of storage, whether we have been able
to pull parts off them or not, they take up to 3 years to get
them out of that storage and build, which is why the study is
looking at that to say is it better to pull them out, based on
the storage level that they are at, or is it better to go after
new equipment.
And we also haven't talked about our Civil Reserve Air
Fleet [CRAF]. That is another option for us, that if we have a
peer type of a competition, there is probably not a whole lot
of civil aviation going on at the time in that area. And that
may free up big portions of our fleet to activate them.
Mr. Wittman. General Harris, another thing to consider,
too, you know, we all look at CRAF as that flex, or that surge
capability. But, as I said, the thing that concerns me in
looking at that--and, listen, those carriers are key, I think
they can perform a lot of duties, but there is a particular
mission set that strategic lift aircraft can perform that those
commercial carriers cannot. And that is operating that
contested airspace and being able to do that and having systems
on board to sense, to at least counter what may be a threat to
that particular aircraft.
So I would think, within that realm, too--and hopefully the
study will reflect upon that and understand, you know, if we
are going to be executing an OPLAN in a contested area of the
world, especially against one of our adversaries today that
is--may be one that wants to be near peer, that acts badly, you
know, we are going to be in a pretty challenging situation.
So I hope that you all reflect upon that. And like I said,
aircraft carriers do a great job, and there is a role for them,
but also for our strategic lift and--there is a time element in
that, too.
So, anyway, we look forward to working with you. And just
as Ranking Member Courtney said, if there are things that we
can do in this year's NDAA as far as authorization, as far as
direction that you feel that you need with this, please let us
know, because we think this is one of those critical tipping
point times where we are now devoting the resources to
recapitalizing our Air Force, our Navy, our Marine Corps, and
our Army. Getting this right is the key.
And I want to emphasize again that it is an extraordinarily
competitive environment to compete for resources up here to put
into the defense budget. So by every measure we have to make
sure that these programs, which are complex programs--KC-46A,
B-21, F-35--these have to be delivered on budget and on time.
Because if we hiccup with these things, folks up here are going
to say, ``See, I told you,'' you know, ``we put money there,
they couldn't properly put it in place, they couldn't manage
the dollars.''
And then we are back in this scenario where the Congress'
response is what? To either reduce funding--so, say, build
fewer, and we all know what happens when you build fewer. What
happens to unit costs? They go up. We saw that with F-22. Or
what happens, too, is we say, well, we have a limited number of
resources, so build them slower. What happens to the economies
of scale when you build them slower? Unit costs go up.
So we have got a delta that we have to meet. And I know
that you all are focused to do this. So delta we have to meet
on capacity, as well as capability. The capability is within
the aircraft, the capacity is the number that we build. The
only way that we get there is to make sure that these programs
are successful on budget, on time. And if there are things that
we need to do to enable, or things that we need to do to make
sure that we are helping, let us know.
Another thing that we are responsible for is making sure
that we are watching the watchers, so that is to make sure that
we are laser-focused on things that are happening with this
program, both within the Air Force--and I want to give you all
credit. The management part of that has gone, I think, very
well on some pretty complex systems. But also making sure we
place the attention on the primes and the subs in all these
programs, because everybody has to perform.
And I will go back to this. There are three elements of a
successful program. Getting the requirements right and making
sure the requirements are stable. I think, with all of these
platforms they are. And stability and certainty in funding,
that is our job. No more CRs [continuing resolutions], let us
get the job done here so you will have certainty. And then
industry has to execute. Any weakness in those three create the
hiccups in programs, and then we don't have what we need.
So this is a team effort, and we look forward to working
with you. And thank you for taking the time to come in today.
Mr. Garamendi, any other questions?
Very good. Gentlemen, thanks again. We are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:55 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================
A P P E N D I X
March 14, 2018
=======================================================================
=======================================================================
PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
March 14, 2018
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING
THE HEARING
March 14, 2018
=======================================================================
RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. NORCROSS
Dr. Roper. The original Engineering, Manufacturing, and Development
(EMD) contract for the KC-46 was signed in February 2011. It
established the requirement for the delivery of 18 aircraft required
assets available (RAA) in August 2017 (78 months after contract award).
This requirement drove the expectation (not contractual agreement) that
the first aircraft would be delivered in calendar year 2016 in order to
have the 18 aircraft RAA met by August 2017.
[See page 10.]
______
RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MRS. HARTZLER
Dr. Roper. Development of the B-2 VLF/LF capability, known as the
Common Very Low Frequency/Low Frequency (VLF/LF) Receiver Increment 1
(Common Very Low Frequency Receiver Increment 1), began in fiscal year
2013 to provide secure, survivable nuclear command, control and
communication (NC3) capability to the B-2. The production installation
contract was signed January 16, 2017 and the first production
installations completed March 14 2018. The final B-2 VLF/LF
installation is planned for the third quarter of fiscal year 2020.
[See page 18.]
Dr. Roper. The software-only B-2 Radar Aided Targeting System
(RATS) program is a fiscal year 2019 new start effort. The RATS program
provides improved B-2 navigational handoff accuracy in a GPS-denied
environment to digital nuclear weapons such as the B61-12. Final
fielding of the software in the B-2 is expected by the end of fiscal
year 2021.
[See page 18.]
______
RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GARAMENDI
Dr. Roper. The Air Force is exploring a range of options to include
extending the life of the current engines or purchasing commercial
engines. We are planning for an approval of the acquisition strategy in
September 2018 and it will serve as the decision point for engine type
that will be pursued.
[See page 20.]
Dr. Roper. The FY19 PB has requested $64.5M for FY19 and $1.56B
through the FYDP (FY19-23) for RDT&E and Aircraft Procurement Air Force
(APAF). The cost estimate will be completed after the Acquisition
Strategy is finalized.
[See page 20.]