- EXAMINING THE RESPONSE TO LUNG ILLNESS AND RISING YOUTH ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE USE
[Senate Hearing 116-470]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-470
EXAMINING THE RESPONSE TO LUNG
ILLNESS AND RISING YOUTH
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE USE
=======================================================================
HEARING
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION,
LABOR, AND PENSIONS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
ON
EXAMINING THE RESPONSE TO LUNG ILLNESSES AND RISING YOUTH ELECTRONIC
CIGARETTE USE
__________
NOVEMBER 13, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
41-399 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2021
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION, LABOR, AND PENSIONS
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee, Chairman
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming		PATTY MURRAY, Washington
RICHARD BURR, North Carolina		BERNARD SANDERS (I), Vermont
JOHNNY ISAKSON, Georgia			ROBERT P. CASEY, JR., Pennsylvania
RAND PAUL, Kentucky			TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
SUSAN M. COLLINS, Maine			CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
BILL CASSIDY, M.D., Louisiana		ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas			TIM KAINE, Virginia
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska			MARGARET WOOD HASSAN, New Hampshire
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina		TINA SMITH, Minnesota
MITT ROMNEY, Utah			DOUG JONES, Alabama
MIKE BRAUN, Indiana			JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
David P. Cleary, Republican Staff Director
Lindsey Ward Seidman, Republican Deputy Staff Director
Evan Schatz, Minority Staff Director
John Righter, Minority Deputy Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
STATEMENTS
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 13, 2019
Page
Committee Members
Alexander, Hon. Lamar, Chairman, Committee on Health, Education,
Labor, and Pensions, Opening statement.........................
1
Murray, Hon. Patty, Ranking Member, a U.S. Senator from the State
of Washington, Opening statement...............................
4
Witnesses
Zeller, Mitch, Director, Center for Tobacco Products, U.S. Food
and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD.....................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
8
Schuchat, Anne, M.D., Principal Deputy Director, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA....................
14
Prepared statement...........................................
16
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL
Statements, articles, publications, letters, etc.
E-Cigarette Use Among Youth in the United States, 2019.......
53
EXAMINING THE RESPONSE TO LUNG
ILLNESS AND RISING YOUTH
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE USE
----------
Wednesday, November 13, 2019
U.S. Senate
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room SD-430, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lamar
Alexander, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Alexander [presiding], Enzi, Burr, Paul,
Collins, Cassidy, Murkowski, Romney, Murray, Casey, Baldwin,
Murphy, Kaine, Hassan, Smith, Jones, and Rosen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ALEXANDER
The Chairman. Good morning. The Committee on Health,
Education, Labor, and Pensions will please come to order. I
often suggest that Americans look at Washington, DC. as if you
were looking at a split screen television. Today is a good
example. On the one screen, you have the House of
Representatives beginning public impeachment hearings into the
President of the United States while on the other side you have
a bipartisan group of Senators investigating a mysterious
illness tied to e-cigarette use that has harmed more than 2,000
Americans. With 39 of those who have died, at a time when as
many as 1 in 10, Tennessee high school students, and 1 in 4
high school students nationwide are using e-cigarettes, most of
them illegally purchased.
If you walk into a convenience store to buy aspirin you
assume the Food and Drug Administration has said it is safe and
effective. When you pick up a package of peanut butter
crackers, you assume the FDA ensured it was packaged in a clean
space. That is when you go and check out and you grab an apple
from a basket on the counter, you would assume FDA has
established rules for how it was grown. And so when you go to
buy one of these, this is an e-cigarette, you would also assume
that someone says that it is okay to buy it, but you would be
wrong because this is an e-cigarette and the Food and Drug
Administration has not used its authorities to say whether or
not they are okay to be sold.
Not a single e-cigarette or vaping product has been
reviewed and cleared for sale by the Food and Drug
Administration. According to data from FDA and the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, over the last 2 years, 13.5
million Americans, including over 5 million teenagers, have
used e-cigarettes with about 1.6 million teenagers using e-
cigarettes frequently. Remember, e-cigarettes are tobacco
products so legally it is illegal to sell tobacco products to
persons under 18. In Tennessee, about 1 in 20 adults use e-
cigarettes some day or every day, and about 1 in 10 high school
students used an e-cigarette in the last 30 days.
According to CDC and FDA information, as many 1 in 4 high
school students are using e-cigarettes. Over the last 6 months,
there have been 2,051 Americans hurt, 39 have died, including
two in Tennessee, from vaping-related lung illnesses, many from
vaping with THC, the derivative of marijuana that makes people
high. So here is what I would like to learn today. One, what
have FDA and the CDC learned about the more than 2,000
Americans who have gotten hurt from vaping. Second, 3 years
after FDA said it had the authority to regulate e-cigarettes,
why aren't there any rules in effect about what standards e-
cigarettes and vaping products need to meet? Three, what should
FDA be doing to regulate and review these products? Four, there
has been a 700 percent increase in the number of teenagers
vaping since 2013.
What has the FDA and CDC done about this surge of teenagers
vaping? And fifth, how much of the $5.5 billion that the Center
for Tobacco Products at FDA has received in user fees from the
tobacco industry over the last decade has been spent on e-
cigarettes and vaping? These so-called e-cigarettes, which can
turn a liquid containing nicotine into a vapor, can look like a
pen, or a USB flash drive that you plug into your computer, or
a regular cigarette. These are some of the pictures right here.
Those are the devices that can be seen.
Sometimes the liquid has a flavor, a mint or fruit flavor
for example, that can be particularly appealing to younger
people. To make this one work, this one here, there is a
cartridge with liquid containing nicotine derived from tobacco,
and it begins to operate automatically when you inhale it. In
March of this year, doctors began to see patients with
shortness of breath, chest pain, nausea, vomiting, and other
symptoms, with no obvious cause.
The common thread was that all the patients had used e-
cigarettes. On August 1, CDC, in coordination with FDA, began
an investigation into this outbreak of vaping-related
illnesses. While a large number of the cases involve THC, the
derivative of marijuana that makes people high, Americans using
e-cigarettes are inhaling something that is damaging their
lungs and we need to find out what that is. Last Friday, the
Centers for Disease Control announced the discovery of an
additional ``very strong culprit,'' a form of vitamin E called
Vitamin E acetate. According to CDC, inhaling Vitamin E acetate
could harm your lungs. I look forward to hearing more about
what CDC and FDA have found. In the middle of this outbreak of
vaping-related illnesses and a 700 percent increase in the
number of teenagers using e-cigarettes since 2013, I am
concerned that the Center for Tobacco Products has received
almost $5.5 billion in user fees and that there are no rules in
effect yet to regulate e-cigarettes.
This means that more than 8 million adults have used e-
cigarettes, many instead of smoking, that FDA has not said are
okay to be sold. FDA has not always regulated tobacco products.
In 2009, ten years ago, Congress passed the Family Smoking
Prevention and Tobacco Control Act, giving the Center for
Tobacco Products at FDA the authority to regulate tobacco
products. I voted against this bill because I thought it did
the right thing in the wrong way.
I was concerned that FDA was already overwhelmed with
ensuring the safety of our medicines and food supply and did
not need the added burden of regulating tobacco. Nevertheless,
Congress disagreed, and in 2009 Congress and the President gave
the FDA the job of regulating tobacco products--ten years ago.
By 2011, e-cigarettes were becoming widely used products, and
the National Youth Tobacco Survey reported that teenagers were
beginning to use e-cigarettes as well.
Now here is--this shows the increase. So we see, that
starts in 2011, 2009 was when tobacco products were regulated
by the FDA, 2011 began the used survey of tobacco products. In
2016, the FDA said that e-cigarettes were a part of tobacco
products, regulated in the same way. And you can see in the red
line at the top, the FDA and CDC figures that suggest that as
many as 1 in 4 of high school students are using e-cigarettes.
So it wasn't until 2016, 5 years after e-cigarettes were
becoming widely used, that FDA announced it would begin
regulating e-cigarettes as tobacco products. As a result, it
has been illegal under Federal law to sell e-cigarettes to
anyone under 18 since 2016.
Despite the fact that FDA has been in charge of tobacco
since 2009, has been tracking youth use of e-cigarettes since
2011, declared it would begin to regulate e-cigarettes in 2016,
there are no rules in effect for manufacturers of those vaping
products. It was just earlier this year that FDA took the first
step, the Agency proposed a rule in April and a second in
September, to give manufacturers direction on what information
FDA would need to review and authorize e-cigarettes. FDA needs
to make these rules final so that manufacturers have clear
standards and so consumers know that the e-cigarettes they are
buying have met certain qualifications. The only reason e-
cigarettes are allowed to be sold at the convenience store is
because FDA has decided to allow them to be sold while the
Agency sets those standards.
In addition, because it is already illegal to sell e-
cigarettes to those under 18. FDA has the authority to prevent
online shops and stores from selling to teenagers. But parents,
teachers, and principals are overwhelmed by the number of
teenagers vaping--more than 5 million teenagers reported using
an e-cigarette in the last 30 days, according to a recent
National Youth Tobacco Survey.
In just one year, 2013 to 2014, youth use of e-cigarettes
tripled. Since 2014, the number of high school students using
these products has more than doubled. I know the administration
has been concerned about the number teenagers using e-
cigarettes and is working on a proposal to address flavored e-
cigarettes. A step Congress could take would be to pass
Senators McConnell and Kaine's provision in our Lower Health
Care Costs Act, which raises the minimum age for purchasing any
tobacco product, including e-cigarettes, from 18 to 21.
In conclusion, this is the reality, 13.5 million Americans,
including more than 5 million teenagers, have reported using e-
cigarettes, with 1.6 million teenagers vaping regularly, and
these products have not yet met any FDA rules or standards. And
over the last 6 months, more than 2,000 Americans have gotten
sick, and 39 have died, from lung illness related to vaping.
This is an unacceptable situation that demands our attention
and I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today.
Senator Murray.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR MURRAY
Senator Murray. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having
this hearing and thank you to our witnesses for joining us
today. Right now, families across the country are worried about
the epidemic of lung injuries that are associated with e-
cigarettes or vaping products that, as the Chairman has said,
has struck over 2,000 people, including 14 in Washington State,
and claimed 39 lives. My heart goes out to all the victims and
their families.
I know all of my colleagues agree this is an urgent issue,
and we are all very interested in what our witnesses today have
to tell us about this crisis, and what steps we can take to
stop it in its tracks and prevent similar outbreaks in the
future. And beyond this new illness, families across the
country are also deeply concerned about the continuing uptick
in youth e-cigarette use. Again as the Chairman said, the
latest data is showing us that 1 in 4 high school students and
1 in 10 middle school students are using e-cigarettes. That is
a really alarming increase and is fueled by companies' efforts
to appeal to kids, threatens decades of work, and puts a
generation of children at risk of nicotine addiction.
For years, popular e-cigarette brands, like Juul, the brand
we know most kids use, have appealed to kids through flavors
like mint, menthol, and creme brulee and youth-savvy
advertising, like campaigns with influencer personalities,
among other tactics. While the communities across the country
are treating nicotine addiction among kids like a public health
crisis, e-cigarette companies have been treating it like a
business plan. In fact, Juul reportedly not only knew how
addictive and appealing its product would be for kids but used
the addictiveness to market the product to retailers. One Juul
pod can have as much nicotine as a pack of cigarettes and many
kids don't even realize it. This crisis is spiraling out of
control and it requires swift, bold action.
For years, President Trump and his team have shown little
interest in taking on the tobacco industry behind this epidemic
and fighting for our children. His advisor Kellyanne Conway,
recently and wrongly said the FDA has no jurisdiction over
vaping and vape shops. Another of President Trump's leading
voices on health care policy said he doesn't believe the FDA
should even be regulating tobacco products and that the FDA's
regulation of tobacco is, believe it or not, a ``huge waste of
time.'' That is not merely alarming, it is dead wrong. But it
is not just the Trump administration's words that should make
families skeptical, it is putting our children's best interests
ahead of tobacco companies' products and profits, it is the
administration's actions.
In 2017, the Trump administration delayed FDA oversight of
existing e-cigarette products by four years. The decision,
which former FDA Commissioner Gottlieb has since admitted was a
mistake and a court has since ruled was unlawful, was a victory
for companies like Juul, which were able to continue targeting
our Nation's youth and selling flavored products that appealed
to kids. In the years since the Trump administration decided to
hit the snooze button on making sure e-cigarettes meet even the
most basic standards, youth tobacco use has skyrocketed, driven
by e-cigarette use which has more than doubled among high
school students since 2017, and more than tripled among middle
school students.
While the Trump administration's decision to delay
oversight of products already on the market has allowed this
crisis to grow, its lackluster enforcement against new products
coming to market illegally, has allowed it to fester, creating
a wild west of vape products that are unregulated, and that can
be incredibly dangerous in all sorts of ways, something the
current epidemic of vaping-related illness has made all too
clear. Between the crisis of rising youth tobacco use, and the
alarming outbreak of vaping related illnesses, families are
counting on us to act quickly and keep them safe.
Washington State is one of several states that has already
taken action by passing an emergency rule to ban flavored e-
cigarettes and raising the purchasing age for tobacco to 21.
This Committee has also advanced legislation to raise the
purchasing age to 21 nationally, but while we push for that
step, there is still much more that needs to be done, including
immediately clearing the market of all flavored e-cigarettes
that have not undergone FDA review. Unfortunately, despite
President Trump's recent promise to clear the market of non-
tobacco flavored e-cigarettes nationally, a promise that, for
the first time, seemed to indicate this administration was
taking the youth vaping epidemic seriously, reporting now
suggests he may be walking away from that proposal altogether,
or planning to bow to tobacco industry pressure with a watered-
down policy that could carve out vape shops, and leave menthol,
a huge category of incredibly popular e-cigarette flavors,
unaddressed. That would be a massive loophole, and absolutely
unacceptable.
In fact, new data released just last week showed us that
youth use of mint and menthol e-cigarettes dramatically
increased over the last year alone. We need swift, bold action,
not delays and half-steps. And that doesn't just go for e-
cigarettes, but also for cigars, including kid-appealing
flavored cigars, cigarettes, including menthol cigarettes, and
other tobacco products. We need to continue investing in public
health programs and preventive measures through CDC. And we
need real progress on reducing the levels of nicotine in
cigarettes, another policy the Trump administration promised
but I am going to keep pushing for. And I am absolutely going
to be pushing President Trump's new nominee to lead the FDA
about his plans to fight tobacco use as well.
Because our communities, our kids, cannot wait for the
Trump administration to get its act together. Back in my home
State of Washington, the La Conner school district recently
filed a lawsuit against Juul for its role in the epidemic of
youth tobacco use. Meanwhile, students at Jackson high school
are encouraging their peers to take a pledge against vaping.
And earlier this year, Madison, a young student from Ridgefield
High School, testified in front of the state legislature about
her own experience with e-cigarette addiction, and encouraged
our lawmakers to take action.
Leaders and advocates across the country are doing
everything they can to respond to this crisis, and they deserve
to know that we are doing everything we can too. That is why I
am going to keep pushing for action on e-cigarettes and vaping,
and I know there are Members on both sides of the aisle that
want us to do more on this as well. So I hope we can take what
we learn from this hearing and use it to continue working
together, in a bipartisan way, on common sense steps to keep
our kids, and our communities, safe.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Murray. We have good
attendance today. I am glad to see that. We have a vote at 11
a.m., but we will continue the hearing right through the votes
and we will alternate chairing the hearing so every Senator
will have a chance to ask questions that they would like to
ask. We appreciate our witnesses coming today and thank you for
your willingness to serve our country in such important roles.
We would ask you each to summarize your comments in about five
minutes, which will allow more time for back and forth between
you and Senators.
First, we will hear from Mitch Zeller. Mr. Zeller is
Director of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration Center for
Tobacco Products. In this role, he leads FDA's effort to reduce
tobacco related death and disease through research and
regulation. He has worked on FDA related issues for more than
30 years, joined the Agency in 1993, when he was the first
Associate Commissioner and Director of the Office of Tobacco
programs. He left FDA in 2000 and returned to lead the Center
for Tobacco Products in 2013. He is a graduate of Dartmouth and
has a J.D. from American University.
Our second witness is Dr. Anne Schuchat. She is the
Principal Deputy Director for the Center for Disease, Control
and Prevention. She has held a variety of leadership roles
there, including Acting Director, Director of the National
Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, and Chief of
the Respiratory Diseases branch. Since joining CDC as an
Epidemic Intelligence Service Officer in 1998, she has played
key roles in its public health emergency responses, including
the 2009 pandemic influenza response, the 2003 SARS outbreak,
and the 2001 Anthrax attack.
In 2008, she retired from the Commission Corps of the
United States Public Health Service at the rank of Rear Admiral
completing 30 years of service. She is a graduate of Swarthmore
and received her M.D. from Dartmouth. We welcome both
witnesses. Mr. Zeller let us begin with you.
STATEMENT OF MITCH ZELLER, DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR TOBACCO
PRODUCTS, U.S. FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, SILVER SPRING, MD
Mr. Zeller. Good morning, Chairman Alexander, Ranking
Member Murray, Members of the Committee, and thank you for the
opportunity to be here today. I want to assure the Committee of
the seriousness with which FDA takes its responsibilities on
the public health issues that the Chairman and Ranking Member
have already discussed.
I am here today representing hundreds of staff at FDA who
are working tirelessly to both prevent kids from starting to
use any tobacco product, including e-cigarettes, and in
collaboration with our colleagues at CDC, to get to the bottom
through an investigation of what is causing these lung
injuries. I will begin by discussing e-cigarette regulation and
then provide an update on the lung injury investigation.
FDA's initial efforts to regulate e-cigarettes began more
than a decade ago, long before the rise in youth use and the
multi-state lung injury outbreak. Between 2008 and 2010, FDA
attempted to regulate e-cigarettes as unapproved drug device
combination products. Our actions were challenged and
ultimately overturned in court. In the decade since the Tobacco
Control Act was passed, FDA has established a science-based
approach to the regulation of tobacco products, vigorously
enforced our authorities to target manufacturers and retailers
that violate the law and designed innovative campaigns to
educate youth on the dangers of tobacco use.
The Tobacco Control Act provided FDA the authority to
regulate e-cigarettes as tobacco products. Publication of the
final deeming rule brought e-cigarettes under FDA's regulatory
authority on August 8th, 2016. Let me highlight some of the
actions that we have taken to address the epidemic of kids' use
of e-cigarettes. We have issued more than 10,000 warning
letters and filed more than 1,500 civil money penalty
complaints against online and brick and mortar retailers for
the illegal sale of e-cigarettes to kids. We have issued
warning letters to six companies, notifying them of the need to
remove more than 140 illegally marketed products from the
market. We have issued warning letters that have resulted in
the removal of dozens of e-liquid products that resemble kid
friendly foods, like juice boxes, cereal, and candy.
We have issued a warning letter to Juul labs for marketing
unauthorized modified risk tobacco products. Last year, we
launched the Real Cost Youth E-Cigarette Prevention Campaign,
which features hard-hitting advertising on TV and on digital
and social media sites popular among teens, as well as getting
posters with e-cigarette prevention messages placed in every
single public and private high school in the country. Finally,
we joined forces with scholastic to develop educational
resources that have been distributed to more than 1 million
middle school and high school educators. Despite these efforts,
the youth vaping epidemic continues to grow and we need to do
more. As the Committee considers the issues related to e-
cigarette use, it is important to remember that no e-cigarette
in the United States is on the market legally because none have
obtained a marketing authorization from FDA.
When we announced changes to our enforcement discretion
policy in August 2017, at the time nationally representative
data suggested that youth use of e-cigarettes had declined.
However, as the Chairman and the Ranking Member pointed out and
as we all know, last year with the release of the National
Youth Tobacco Survey or NYTS, the results showed that between
2017 and 2018 current e-cigarette use among high school
students increased by 78 percent and by 48 percent among middle
school students. Last week, we released the 2019 NYTS data
showing that current e-cigarette had risen to 27.5 percent
among high school students and 10.5 percent among middle school
students. As in previous years, the 2019 NYTS shows a
disturbing rate of youth use of flavored e-cigarettes.
Among current exclusive e-cigarette users, nearly three-
quarters of those in high school and more than a half of those
in middle school used flavored e-cigarettes. We are committed
to doing everything that we can to prevent kids from using
tobacco products and we will continue to develop a policy
approach that aligns with that concern. Let me now turn to the
lung injuries. FDA is deeply concerned by reports of injuries
and deaths linked to use of vaping products and investigating
this crisis is a top priority. On September 6th we activated an
Incident Management Group or IMG to coordinate the Agency's
investigation. The IMG is comprised of subject matter experts
from across FDA dedicated to better understanding the
relationship between any specific products or substances and
the reported cases.
Our labs have received over 1,000 samples from 25 states
including 850 samples connected to patients. Samples associated
with 69 of these patients have been examined. 80 percent of the
69 linked cases involve THC products. 75 percent of the linked
cases involving THC include products with vitamin E acetate as
a diluent. I want to thank the Committee for the opportunity to
appear today.
We appreciate the Committee's support for the Agency and
for our vital public health mission. And I am happy to answer
any questions that you have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Zeller follows:]
prepared statement of mitch zeller
Introduction
Good morning, Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and
Members of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to be here
today to discuss the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA or the Agency)
regulation of electronic nicotine delivery systems, or ENDS, which
include e-cigarettes, and the Agency's role in the ongoing
investigation into vaping product use associated lung injury. I am
Mitch Zeller, Director of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration's
Center for Tobacco Products.
I appreciate the opportunity to be here today to provide an update
on FDA's regulation of ENDS, and to provide an update on FDA's efforts
to investigate the illnesses associated with the use of vaping
products.
In my testimony I will begin with some background on FDA's tobacco
product regulatory authorities. I will then address the history of our
regulation of e-cigarettes and where we find ourselves today,
confronting the epidemic levels of youth use of e-cigarettes. Finally,
I will discuss FDA's role in the Federal and state investigation of the
cases of lung injury.
Background
Let me start with some background on our tobacco regulatory
authorities.
Tobacco use is the single largest preventable cause of disease and
death in the United States. Each year, more than 480,000 people in the
United States die prematurely from diseases caused by cigarette smoking
and exposure to tobacco smoke. In 2009, Congress passed the Family
Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act (Tobacco Control Act), which
amended the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) to
authorize FDA to oversee the manufacture, marketing, distribution, and
sale of tobacco products and protect the public from the harmful
effects of tobacco product use. This authority gave FDA comprehensive
tools to protect the public from the harmful effects of tobacco use
through science-based tobacco product regulation.
Through premarket review, FDA evaluates new tobacco products based
on applicable public health standards that include, for example, a
consideration of the risks and benefits of the tobacco product to the
population as a whole, including users and non-users. Similarly, when
developing certain regulations such as product standards or
restrictions on tobacco sales and advertising, the law requires FDA to
apply a public health approach that considers the effect of the
regulatory action on the population as a whole, not just on individual
users, taking into account the likelihood of initiation and cessation
of tobacco use.
Under the statute, FDA had immediate authority to regulate
cigarettes, cigarette tobacco, roll-your-own tobacco, and smokeless
tobacco. The Tobacco Control Act also authorized FDA to ``deem'' other
``tobacco products'' (which include ``any product made or derived from
tobacco that is intended for human consumption'' that is not a drug,
device, or combination product under the FD&C Act, ``including any
component, part, or accessory'' of that product) to be subject to the
Agency's regulatory authority in Chapter IX of the FD&C Act.
It's important to note FDA's initial efforts to regulate e-
cigarettes more than a decade ago, long before the rise in youth use
and the multi-state lung injury outbreak. Between 2008 and 2010, FDA
attempted to regulate e-cigarettes as unapproved drug/device
combination products. FDA's action was challenged, and ultimately the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit ruled that while FDA could
choose to regulate e-cigarettes and other products ``made or derived
from tobacco'' under its new tobacco authorities, it could not regulate
these products under FDA's drug and device authority unless they were
marketed for therapeutic purposes. Sottera, Inc. v. Food and Drug
Administration, 627 F.3d 891 (D.C. Cir. 2010).
Publication of the final deeming rule brought e-cigarettes under
FDA's regulatory authority for tobacco products. That rule was issued
on May 10, 2016, deeming additional products that meet the statutory
definition of a ``tobacco product,'' except for accessories of such
products, to be subject to FDA's regulatory authority. Deemed products
include ENDS, cigars, pipe tobacco, nicotine gels, waterpipe (or
hookah) tobacco, and any future tobacco products. The deeming rule, and
FDA's regulation of these products, took effect on August 8, 2016.
Regulatory Requirements for ENDS Products
When the deeming rule took effect in August 2016, many of the
regulatory and legal requirements that had been in place for
manufacturers of cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, cigarette tobacco, and
roll-your-own tobacco since 2009, as well as several new requirements
specific to deemed products, became applicable to makers of e-
cigarettes and other ENDS products. These include:
Registering domestic establishments and submitting
lists of products manufactured at those establishments,
including all labeling and representative samples of
advertisements;
Submitting tobacco health documents;
Submitting ingredient listings;
Marketing new tobacco products only after FDA review;
and
Marketing products with direct or implied claims of
reduced risk only if FDA confirms that scientific evidence
supports the claim and determines that providing a marketing
authorization for the product will, among other things, benefit
the health of the population as a whole.
In addition, under the deeming rule, the following regulatory
provisions also apply to deemed tobacco products, including ENDS
products:
Minimum age restriction (18 years or older) and
identification requirements to prevent sales to underage youth;
Requirements to bear certain health warnings on
packages and advertisements (including certain ENDS components,
such as e-liquids) such as, ``WARNING: This product contains
nicotine. Nicotine is an addictive chemical.'' and
Prohibition of vending machine sales, unless in a
facility that never admits youth.
To provide time for industry to come into compliance with some of
the new regulatory requirements triggered by the final deeming rule,
FDA announced an enforcement policy with staggered timeframes. Some of
the requirements, such as the Federal minimum age of purchase (18 years
or older), were enforced immediately when the deeming rule took effect
on August 8, 2016, while, through an exercise of enforcement
discretion, FDA temporarily deferred enforcement of other provisions
such as premarket review of ``new'' tobacco products.
Premarket Review of ENDS
All deemed products, including ENDS, became subject to the
premarket authorization requirements in the Tobacco Control Act on
August 8, 2016. All ``new tobacco products'' are required to obtain
authorization from FDA before they can be legally marketed. Pursuant to
the Tobacco Control Act, a ``new tobacco product'' is one that was not
commercially marketed as of February 15, 2007, or that was modified
after February 15, 2007.
FDA's initial compliance policy for premarket review stated that
the Agency did not intend to enforce the requirements of premarket
review against manufacturers of newly regulated new tobacco products
that were on the market as of August 8, 2016, as long as they submitted
marketing applications and received authorization within specific
timeframes. As a result, FDA anticipated that many ENDS products would
remain on the market without premarket authorization for up to three
years.
In July 2017, FDA announced a new comprehensive plan for tobacco
and nicotine regulation that would serve as a multi-year roadmap in an
effort to significantly reduce tobacco-related disease and death. The
comprehensive plan was announced in part to afford the Agency time to
explore other meaningful measures, beyond premarket review, to make
combustible tobacco products less toxic, less appealing, and less
addictive. One aspect of the plan involved striking a balance between
conducting reasonable oversight through regulation and encouraging
development of innovative tobacco products that may be less harmful
than cigarettes. The Agency announced that it planned to issue an
updated compliance policy to defer some enforcement timelines described
in the preamble to the final deeming rule.
Since that announcement, FDA has been hard at work on rules,
guidances, and other communications that will help manufacturers
develop higher quality applications, including the issuance of the
following:
Substantial Equivalence pathway proposed rule
Premarket Tobacco Application for ENDS final guidance
Premarket Tobacco Application proposed rule
Vape shops final guidance
Regular meetings with manufacturers to provide
guidance on premarket authorization processes
Regular meetings with retailers on e-cigarette
policies of particular importance for retailers such as efforts
to prevent youth sales and the availability of free educational
resources for retailers to assist them in preventing youth
sales
Draft guidance on Developing Nicotine Replacement
Therapy Drug Products
Draft guidance on Nonclinical Testing of Orally
Inhaled Nicotine-Containing Drug Products Guidance for Industry
The July 2017 announcement led to publication of the August 2017
Compliance Policy, which was later the subject of litigation. In May
2019, a U.S. District Court in Maryland vacated FDA's August 2017
Compliance Policy. In July 2019, the court issued a further order
directing FDA to require that applications for deemed ``new tobacco
products'' such as e-cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, and hookah
tobacco, that were on the market as of August 8, 2016, be filed with
FDA no later than May 12, 2020. The court order also provided for a
one-year period during which products with timely filed applications
might remain on the market pending FDA review, but subsequently
clarified that its order does not restrict the Agency's authority to
enforce the premarket review provisions against deemed products prior
to May 12, 2020, or during the one-year review period.
As the Committee considers the issues related to e-cigarette use
today, it is important to remember that no ENDS product in the United
States is on the market legally. To be legally marketed as a tobacco
product, the product would need to obtain premarket authorization from
the Agency. The product would undergo FDA scientific review, and
(assuming that the product is being reviewed through the Premarket
Tobacco Application pathway) the Agency would have to find that the
product meets the applicable statutory standard for marketing--for
example, that the product is appropriate for the protection of the
public health. Alternatively, an ENDS product that is intended for
therapeutic purposes (e.g., smoking cessation) would need to be
reviewed and approved under FDA's drug authorities to be legally
marketed as a drug. Currently, there is no FDA-authorized or FDA-
approved ENDS product on the market.
FDA's Aggressive Actions to Address the Youth Epidemic of ENDS Product
Use
At the time FDA issued the August 2017 Compliance Policy to modify
the enforcement discretion policies regarding premarket authorization,
nationally representative data suggested that youth use of e-cigarettes
had declined. \1\ While no level of youth use is acceptable, FDA took
this directional data into consideration, along with the potential
benefits some of these products might provide to some addicted
individual adult smokers seeking to make a complete transition away
from combustible cigarettes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Jamal A, Gentzke A, Hu SS, et al. Tobacco Use Among Middle and
High School Students--United States, 2011-2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep 2017;66:597-603. https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/66/wr/
mm6623a1.htm?s_cid=mm6623a1_w. The NYTS defines e-cigarettes as
``battery-powered devices that provide nicotine and other additives to
the user in the form of an aerosol.''
The Agency was engaged in a public health balancing act. Given the
then-existing evidence suggesting a decline in youth use, and with the
potential for FDA to pursue other bold measures, in part by reducing
the addictiveness of combustible cigarettes while temporarily delaying
the likely immediate market exit of newly deemed tobacco products that
could be potentially less harmful to individual users, FDA determined
that the balancing of public health considerations argued in favor of a
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
different comprehensive approach to nicotine and tobacco regulation.
However, only a year after we announced the 2017 comprehensive
plan, the National Youth Tobacco Survey (NYTS) in 2018 showed a new and
significant increase in youth use of e-cigarettes. FDA collaborates
with CDC to administer the survey to middle and high school students
each year. The survey provides important data that allow us to
understand current youth tobacco product use in a larger historical
context.
Between 2017 and 2018, current (past 30-day) e-cigarette use among
high school students increased 78 percent, from 11.7 percent to 20.8
percent. \2\ Current e-cigarette use among middle school students
increased by 48 percent over the same time period, from 3.3 percent to
4.9 percent. \3\ Moreover, evidence demonstrated that youth are
especially attracted to flavored ENDS products. Data from the 2018 NYTS
showed that, in just one year, current use of flavored e-cigarettes
increased substantially among high school students who were current e-
cigarette users, from 60.9 percent in 2017 to 67.8 percent in 2018. \4\
In addition, the proportion of current e-cigarette users in high school
who reported use on 20 or more days of the past 30 days increased from
20.0 percent in 2017 to 27.7 percent in 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Id.
\3\ Id.
\4\ Cullen, K.A., B.K. Ambrose, A.S. Gentzke, et al., ``Notes from
the Field: Increase in e-cigarette use and any tobacco product use
among middle and high school students--United States, 2011-2018,''
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly, 67(45);1276-1277 (2018).
FDA and CDC recently published 2019 NYTS data in the Journal of the
American Medical Association (JAMA). \5\ Unfortunately, the data show
that current e-cigarette use among youth has continued at its alarming
increase, with 27.5 percent of high school students and 10.5 percent of
middle school students reporting current use of e-cigarettes. The data
also showed that more than five million U.S. middle and high school
students are current e-cigarette users. Further, most of those middle
and high school students who exclusively use e-cigarettes are using
flavored products. And the survey shows that 34.2 percent of current
high school e-cigarette users in 2019 are using the product frequently
(use on 20 or more days in the last 30 days). In total, 1.6 million
middle school and high school current e-cigarette users were frequent
users, with nearly one million using e-cigarettes daily.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2755265.
As in previous years, the 2019 NYTS shows a disturbing rate of
youth use of non-tobacco flavored e-cigarettes. In particular, the data
show that among current exclusive e-cigarette users, nearly three
quarters of those in high school and more than half of those in middle
school used flavored e-cigarettes. The most commonly reported flavors
were fruit, menthol or mint (evaluated as a single category), and
candy, desserts, or other sweets. \6\ Importantly, findings from
another study, the 2019 Monitoring the Future (MTF) survey--also
published in JAMA on November 5, 2019--give us a more granular picture
of flavor preferences as they relate to this public health balancing
act. These findings indicate that youth preference for menthol- and
tobacco-flavored products is much lower than that for mint- and fruit-
flavored products. This recent analysis was limited to youth who
indicated they had specifically used the JUUL brand.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Cullen KA, Gentzke AS, Sawdey MD, et al., ``E-Cigarette Use
Among Youth in the United States, 2019,'' JAMA.
We are committed to doing everything we can to prevent kids from
using tobacco products and will continue to develop a policy approach
that aligns with that concern. Additionally, we are taking a number of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
other actions to help address the youth use epidemic:
FDA has been holding retailers and manufacturers
accountable for marketing and sales practices that have led to
increased youth accessibility and appeal of e-cigarettes. For
example, since the effective date of the Deeming Rule in August
2016, FDA has issued more than 10,000 warning letters to, and
filed more than 1,500 civil money penalty complaints against,
retailers, both online and in brick-and-mortar retail stores,
for sales of ENDS and their components to youth.
FDA has sent letters to over 100 companies seeking
information on over 130 brands, including ENDS products, to
determine whether those products were not marketed as of August
8, 2016, and therefore not subject to any previous FDA
compliance policy. To date, FDA has issued warning letters to
six ENDS companies notifying them of the need to remove a
combined total of more than 140 products from the market.
The Agency has issued warning letters, many in
collaboration with the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), that
resulted in the removal of dozens of e-liquid products
resembling kid-friendly foods, such as juice boxes, cereal, and
candy.
On September 9, 2019, FDA issued a warning letter \7\
to JUUL Labs Inc. for marketing unauthorized modified risk
tobacco products by engaging in labeling, advertising, and/or
other activities directed to consumers, including a
presentation given to youth at a school, by marketing it for
reduced risk or harm from using the product compared to
cigarette smoking. Concurrently, the Agency issued a second
letter expressing its concern and requesting additional
information about several issues raised by Congress regarding
JUUL's outreach and marketing practices, including those
targeted at students, tribes, health insurers and employers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ The warning letter is available at: https://www.fda.gov/news-
events/press-announcements/fda-warns-juul-labs-marketing-unauthorized-
modified-risk-tobacco-products-including-outreach-youth.
FDA has also continued to invest in campaigns to
educate youth about the dangers of e-cigarette use. Last year,
FDA launched ``The Real Cost'' Youth E-Cigarette Prevention
Campaign \8\--a comprehensive effort targeting nearly 10.7
million youth, aged 12-17, who have used e-cigarettes or are
open to trying them. The campaign features hard-hitting
advertising on TV, digital and social media sites popular among
teens, as well as posters with e-cigarette prevention messages
in high schools across the Nation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ More information is available at: https://www.fda.gov/tobacco-
products/real-cost-campaign.
FDA joined forces with Scholastic to develop
educational resources for middle and high school teachers and
administrators. These materials have been distributed to more
than 1 million middle and high school educators. Our work with
Scholastic continues and more resources will be made available
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
in Spring 2020.
The Agency also developed posters and resources for
doctors, youth groups, religious institutions, state and local
public health agencies, and others on the dangers of youth e-
cigarette use and has worked to advance discussion and
understanding around how to help those kids who are already
addicted to e-cigarettes quit.
We will continue to take vigorous actions aimed at ensuring e-
cigarettes and other tobacco products are not being marketed or sold to
kids. In addition, we will continue to expand our public education
efforts to get the word out to youth about the harms of e-cigarettes.
Investing in Research to Learn More About the Health Impacts of ENDS
Products
FDA is funding several research projects assessing the health
impact of e-cigarettes, including the FDA and NIH Population Assessment
of Tobacco and Health (PATH) Study. The PATH Study is a national,
longitudinal cohort study of almost 46,000 youth and adults in the
United States that collected its first wave of data in 2013 and is
following study participants over time to learn how and why people
start using tobacco products, quit using them, and start using them
again after they have quit, as well as how different tobacco products
affect health (such as cardiovascular and respiratory health) over
time. The PATH Study is tracking potential behavioral and health
impacts, including collecting biospecimens to analyze for biomarkers of
exposure and harm. \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ More information on the PATH Study can be found at https://
www.fda.gov/tobacco-products/research/fda-and-nih-study-population-
assessment-tobacco-and-health.
In 2016, FDA awarded a contract to National Academy of Sciences,
Engineering and Medicine (NASEM) to ``conduct an in-depth evaluation of
the available evidence of health effects from electronic nicotine
delivery systems (ENDS) and make recommendations for future federally
funded research.'' This work included convening a multi-disciplinary
committee of 13 members that met several times and holding an open
meeting to obtain input from a wide range of stakeholders. The
committee's methodology included: a comprehensive literature search and
review; a quality assessment and evidence synthesis to assess causality
for health effects; and an application of a framework for levels of
evidence. Over 800 peer-reviewed scientific studies were evaluated and
the consensus report, ``Public Health Consequences of E-Cigarettes,''
was released by NASEM in January 2018. \10\ Among the conclusions in
the NASEM report is that teens who experiment with an e-cigarette are
more likely to try conventional cigarettes compared to teens who never
used an e-cigarette.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ More information can be found at http://nationalacademies.org/
hmd/Reports/2018/public-health-consequences-of-e-cigarettes.aspx.
As noted in the NASEM report, assessing the long-term health
effects of e-cigarettes is challenging given the range of devices and
constituents. For example, products can vary widely in terms of device
type, mechanism, ingredients and the characteristics of aerosol
generation. Variables of ENDS that could affect health impact include
factors such as: exposure to metals (including heavy metals), heating
capacity, voltage, e-liquid substrates, nicotine concentration, flavors
and flavoring ingredients, and use of other ingredients or contaminants
with unknown inhalation effects. A specific ENDS product's health
impact is also likely to be significantly affected by user behaviors
(and we know that many ENDS users also use other tobacco products in
addition to e-cigarettes, known as dual use or poly use). Assessing the
short-term health effects is also challenging for these same reasons.
To help understand the individual and population impact of ENDS, FDA is
currently funding more than 115 studies assessing the short- and long-
term health effects of e-cigarettes including nicotine dependence,
cardiovascular and pulmonary toxicity, potential carcinogenesis,
effects of maternal use during pregnancy, and effects in the oral
cavity. \11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ More information can be found on the FDA website at https://
www.fda.gov/tobacco-products/research/ctp-supported-tobacco-regulatory-
research-projects.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Investigation of Severe Respiratory Injury Associated with Vaping
Products
FDA is also deeply concerned by the recent outbreak of severe
respiratory lung injuries and reported deaths that are linked to use of
vaping products. Investigating this crisis is a top priority for FDA,
and the Agency is working very closely with CDC and state officials.
The Agency is committed to taking appropriate actions to protect the
public as the facts emerge. FDA is not pursuing any actions associated
with personal use of any vaping products; our interest is in the supply
chain. Every day we are gathering more information, and every day we
seek to use that information to better understand the relationship
between any specific products or substances and the reported illnesses.
To date, most patients have reported a history of using vaping products
containing tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Many patients have reported
using products containing THC and products containing nicotine. Some
have reported the use of e-cigarette products containing only nicotine.
We are following all potential leads and are doing all we can to move
this complex investigation forward.
In recent months, this outbreak has possibly sickened, by the most
recent CDC data, 2,051 people from 49 states, the District of Columbia,
and one U.S. Territory. Sadly, 39 deaths have been confirmed in 24
states and the District of Columbia. These illnesses do not appear to
be due to infectious diseases, but rather appear to be associated with
a chemical exposure from vaping products. Patients generally report a
gradual start of symptoms including breathing difficulty,
gastrointestinal symptoms, and/or chest pain before hospitalization.
Many patients have reported recent use of vaping products containing
THC. Although these cases seem similar, it is not clear if they have a
common cause, or if they involve different diseases with similar
presentations. The investigation has not identified any specific
product or substance that is linked to all cases.
On September 6, 2019, FDA activated an Incident Management Group
(IMG) to coordinate FDA's activities for the investigation into these
reports. The IMG is comprised of subject matter experts from numerous
FDA centers and offices, such as clinicians, toxicologists,
pharmacologists, epidemiologists, chemists, engineers, consumer safety
and criminal investigators, and computational scientists. FDA is
focused on better understanding whether there is a relationship between
any specific products or substances and the reported cases. It is
important to stress that identifying any compounds present in the
samples is but one piece of the puzzle and will not necessarily answer
questions about causality, which makes our ongoing work critical.
FDA's work includes collecting critical details about the products
or substances involved, where they were purchased and how they were
being used and analyzing product samples. To date, FDA laboratories
have received over 1,000 samples from 25 states for this investigation
with roughly 850 of these samples connected to patients. Overall, 595
of the samples collected from patients have undergone some level of
testing. The Agency is also working to link samples with specific
patients, directly linking 509 samples to 69 patients. Eighty percent
of these include links to THC products and of these 75 percent of cases
included products with vitamin E acetate as a diluent. Connecting the
products and how they were used to specific patients is critically
important to our investigation to determine, to the extent possible,
the cause or causes of these injuries.
FDA continues reaching out directly to the states that have
submitted samples and is providing them high-level aggregate data in
the form of status reports on preliminary analytical findings.
Additionally, as the investigation continues to evolve, FDA and CDC are
ensuring that information is shared seamlessly between the two
agencies. FDA has assigned staff to CDC's Emergency Operations Center.
Likewise, CDC has assigned staff to our IMG to facilitate
collaboration. We continue to work closely on sample collection and
joint testing plans for aerosol and e-liquid. The agencies also
continue to share epidemiologic and product testing data to aid in
linking of case patients to product testing results.
Importantly, last week CDC reported on the first analysis of human
lung fluid in 29 samples from individuals in 10 states. Vitamin E
acetate was found in all 29 samples. THC was found in three samples
from individuals who reported they only used a nicotine-containing
vaping product. More work needs to be done to get to the bottom of what
substance or substances is causing these illnesses and deaths, but
these findings will help us get closer to the answers we and CDC are
seeking.
We are working to communicate with the public when we have
information to share in a frequent and transparent way. FDA has warned
consumers to avoid buying vaping products of any kind ``on the street''
and to refrain from vaping THC or modifying/adding any substances to
products purchased in stores. FDA also encourages the public to submit
detailed reports of any unexpected tobacco- or vaping-related product
issues to FDA via the online Safety Reporting Portal, which can be
found on our website (or at www.safetyreporting.hhs.gov).
Conclusion
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today about FDA's tobacco
product regulatory work and our efforts to investigate vaping product
use associated lung injury. FDA is committed to the evolving
investigation and to protecting and improving the public health.
I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Zeller. Dr. Schuchat, welcome.
STATEMENT OF ANNE SCHUCHAT, M.D., PRINCIPAL DEPUTY DIRECTOR,
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION, ATLANTA, GA
Dr. Schuchat. Thank you, Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member
Murray, and Members of the Committee. I am happy to have the
chance to provide an update on our investigation of lung injury
as well as our concerns related to the youth epidemic of e-
cigarette use. I want to make four key points. First, since we
first learned of these cases of lung injury on August 1st, CDC
has been working 24/7 hand-in-hand with state and local public
health departments as well as the FDA to get to the bottom of
it. Second, our ability to do this kind of investigation relies
on critical underlying public health infrastructure, including
data systems that need modernization and a trained and data
savvy public health workforce.
Third, CDC has made important recommendations to the public
based on the investigation so far. CDC recommends that people
do not use vaping products that contain THC. People should not
acquire products from informal sources or the illicit market
and should not modify further these products beyond what was
intended by the manufacturers. While the investigation is
ongoing, CDC recommends that persons consider refraining from
use of all e-cigarettes or vaping products. Regardless of the
investigation, e-cigarettes or vaping products should never be
used by youth, young adults, or women who are pregnant. Adults
who use e-cigarettes or vaping products because they have quit
cigarette smoking shouldn't return to smoking cigarettes.
Fourth, we must address the broader epidemic of e-cigarette
use among youth. The epidemic of lung injury is striking young
people. More than half of cases are under 25 years, about 15
percent are under 18 years of age. About half of them need to
be cared for in intensive care units. Fortunately, the new
cases appear to be trending downward nationally, although some
states remain hard hit. We continue to find that most patients
report using THC containing products. Lab testing is providing
important new information, but no single product, brand,
substance, or additive has been identified in all of the cases
at this point. It may be that there is one cause or that there
are many problematic substances causing lung injury. And there
may be complex root causes for this outbreak.
CDC is working vigorously with states to respond. We
dispatched our disease detectives to help state and local
public health and we activated our emergency operation center--
our incident manager is coordinating a response. We have been
holding frequent calls with public health, with clinicians, and
briefings for the media in order to keep the public informed.
Last Friday, we issued two key products in our morbidity and
mortality weekly report. The Illinois study showed lung injury
patients were significantly more likely than other people who
vaped with THC to have acquired their products from friends or
social sources, to use THC containing vaping products more than
five times a day, and to use products that were labeled dank
vapes, which is a class of largely counterfeit products of
complex providence.
In a separate report, we shared the results of CDC's
initial lab testing of lung fluid from patients in 10 different
states. That study found vitamin E acetate but no other oily
adulterants were detected in all 29 patients tested. This is
the first detection of a potential toxic chemical of concern in
biologic samples from patients with lung injury. We are working
closely with the FDA on the trace back of products that people
use and on additional laboratory testing. We have made great
progress, but there have been challenges with this response.
State laws vary regarding THC and cannabis use and the
investigation includes gathering information from people about
potentially illicit products.
E-cigarettes or vaping products are part of a complex,
multi factorial marketplace. There are many different product
varieties and different substances can be used with the
devices. Counterfeiting or black market products can make
analysis of some brands unreliable. Public health data
collection for this response relied on antiquated and
fragmented systems that need modernization. The outbreak
unfortunately has moved faster than our data systems and that
has been a barrier to our getting quick answers. Turning
quickly to the epidemic of youth use of e-cigarettes.
Youth are much more likely than adults to use e-cigarettes
and flavors are a key part of that appeal. CDC has been
messaging our concerns about e-cigarette use since 2013 when we
got the initial data about the alarming increase from 2011 to
2012. Recently, released data from 2019 show the problem is
much worse now and continues to be of great concern.
In conclusion, we are dedicated at CDC to working around
the clock together with FDA and state and local health
officials to stop this outbreak, address its root causes, and
continue to focus on the concerning increase in youth use of e-
cigarettes. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Schuchat follows:]
prepared statement of anne schuchat
Introduction
Good morning, Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and
Members of the Committee. I am Dr. Anne Schuchat, the Principal Deputy
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Thank
you for the opportunity to testify before the Committee regarding CDC's
investigation into lung injury associated with using e-cigarettes or
other vaping products, and for your continued commitment to support
CDC's work to protect Americans.
On August 1, 2019, Wisconsin first alerted CDC to a cluster of
pulmonary injury among young adults that began in July 2019. Since that
date, CDC has been putting its scientific expertise to use across
epidemiologic, laboratory, and clinical realms to address this public
health crisis. CDC's response efforts are committed to: identify and
define the risk factors and the sources for e-cigarettes or other
vaping product use associated lung injury (EVALI); detect and track
confirmed and probable cases in the United States; communicate
actionable recommendations to state, local, and clinical audiences; and
establish laboratory procedures to assist with public health
investigations and patient care. Throughout this investigation, CDC has
been partnering with colleagues at the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), state and local health departments, and other
public health and clinical stakeholders to gain a comprehensive
understanding of EVALI and the potential cause or causes.
As of November 5, 2019, there are 2051 confirmed and probable cases
of EVALI reported by 49 states, Washington, DC, and the U.S. Virgin
Islands. Most patients reported a gradual onset of difficulty
breathing, shortness of breath, or chest pain before hospitalization.
Some patients reported mild to moderate gastrointestinal illness. This
lung condition is serious. As of November 5, 2019, 39 EVALI deaths have
been confirmed in 24 states and Washington, DC, and we know that
additional deaths remain under investigation by states. These tragic
deaths reinforce the urgency of CDC's efforts, in close coordination
with others, to identify the cause of this illness, provide
recommendations to the public on how to prevent further illnesses and
deaths from occurring, and to assist states to address this public
health outbreak.
EVALI presents our Nation with a new public health crisis. And as
the Nation's health protection agency, CDC is leveraging its cutting-
edge science and expertise in public health preparedness to quickly and
nimbly respond. As we do for other emergency investigations, CDC
implemented an incident management structure in August 2019 and, on
September 16, 2019, activated its Emergency Operations Center. Doing so
has allowed CDC to dedicate more staff and resources to this
investigation. To date, approximately 300 CDC staff have been engaged
in response efforts, including CDC staff who have been deployed to
assist state health departments in investigating lung injuries within
their jurisdictions. We also have stood up an international team that
is maintaining communication with our international public health
partners.
CDC is working 24/7 with FDA and state and local health officials
to get at the root cause or causes of these lung injuries. CDC is in
continuous discussions with states to determine ongoing and additional
needs to assist in gathering data and information to monitor and
identify what is leading to these lung injuries. CDC is collaborating
with a wide range of partners to: facilitate sharing of information
about the illnesses, and behaviors and use of e-cigarettes or other
vaping products between state health departments and clinicians;
analyze and link data to assist in investigations; conduct laboratory
testing; coordinate national communication activities such as updates
on the status of the investigation; provide public health and clinical
recommendations; and provide information to states, healthcare
providers, and the public.
Summary of the Epidemiology
In responding to public health emergencies, CDC's first steps are
to understand what is happening, establish where it is happening, and
collect as rapidly as feasible relevant data to inform our next steps.
For this response in particular, we are aggregating data from our
epidemiologic investigation with findings from our laboratory testing
of clinical and product samples, in collaboration with FDA, to help
identify who is most at risk and the specific substances or ingredients
that may be causing these lung injuries.
The ongoing investigation into the cause or causes of EVALI is
challenging for many reasons. First, the investigation spans almost all
states and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Second, EVALI is a diagnosis of
exclusion since, at present, no specific test or marker exists for its
diagnosis in a patient. Third, this investigation is complicated by the
diversity of the e-cigarettes or other vaping products in the
marketplace. There are hundreds of products, and thousands of e-liquids
used by people who use e-cigarettes or other vaping products. Fourth,
people using these products may not know the ingredients in the liquid
solutions, and chemicals may change when aerosolized in the e-
cigarettes or other vaping products. Moreover, many of the products and
substances themselves can be modified by the distributer or the user.
They can be obtained from brick and mortar stores, online retailers, on
the street, through the internet, or through social sources. In
addition, information about the use of e-cigarettes or other vaping
products relies largely on self-reporting, and interviewees may be
hesitant to share information about their use of substances such as
THC.
National data suggest that THC-containing products are playing an
important role in this outbreak. Previously published reports from
Illinois, Utah, and Wisconsin suggest that patients typically obtained
their THC-containing vaping products through informal sources, such as
friends or illicit in-person and online dealers, although local and
regional differences in illicit THC supply and production seem to
exist. CDC has regularly collected and shared information about the
outbreak. On October 28, 2019, a report published in CDC's Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) provided information on 867 EVALI
patients with available data on substances used. Of these, 86 percent
reported any use of THC-containing products in the three-months
preceding symptom onset, and 64 percent reported any use of nicotine-
containing products in that period. For the same period, 52 percent
reported use of both THC-containing products and nicotine-containing
products, 34 percent reported exclusive use of THC-containing products,
and 11 percent reported exclusive use of nicotine-containing products.
Two percent of patients reported no use of THC- or nicotine-containing
products in that period.
This outbreak continues to disproportionately affect persons under
the age of 35, highlighting the need to communicate the dangers of
using e-cigarettes or other vaping products among youth and young
adults, irrespective of the substances they are using in these
products. In addition to the risk of severe lung injury, use of these
products is also dangerous to young people because THC and nicotine
both can have lasting adverse effects on brain development.
CDC's Collaboration with States
CDC staff from across the agency currently are involved in the
response to coordinate activities, develop resources, and provide
assistance to states, public health partners, and clinicians around the
Nation. In addition to those working on this response from agency
headquarters, CDC staff also have been present on the ground within
different states. As of November 2, 2019, CDC has deployed a total of
22 staff to eight states to assist state health departments, at their
request, in investigating these lung injuries. These staff members are
in addition to the Epidemic Intelligence Service Officers and Career
Epidemiology Field Officers who are already stationed in the state
health departments. CDC also activated the Laboratory Response Network
for Chemical Threats, which is a network of CDC, state, and local
public health laboratories that provide critical laboratory testing
support to the programs and providers who are responding to this
outbreak.
CDC is providing scientific expertise to assist state and local
public health jurisdictions. To enhance collection and analysis of data
about the products, ingredients, and compounds that may be responsible
for this outbreak, early on CDC worked with states and the Council of
State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) to develop a uniform
report form for states to use to collect data on cases, and our agency
has been partnering with states to compile those data. Again
collaborating with states and CSTE, CDC recently revised the national
data collection instrument to provide a more streamlined means for
states to collect and report their data. CDC continues to work closely
with states to explore additional quantitative and qualitative studies
to increase our understanding of this outbreak and product use
behaviors among EVALI patients.
CDC's provision of assistance to states likewise extends to process
improvements for sharing and analyzing case-associated data. For
instance, CDC has implemented a data integration and management
platform called DCIPHER (Data Collation and Integration for Public
Health Event Response) for use in this outbreak response. This platform
enables states to directly enter or import and view their data. In
October 2019, CDC began piloting the use of DCIPHER with a subset of
states and, as of November 2019, this platform is now available for use
across all states.
CDC also is leading outreach to states in collaboration with FDA to
gather information on case-associated devices and substances to help
build a more comprehensive picture of these incidents. CDC is gathering
reports of the types and brands of e-cigarettes or other vaping
products used, the substances used, any modifications of the products,
and where the products and liquids were obtained.
In October 2019, CDC expanded its laboratory testing in support of
the lung injury outbreak to conduct analyses of aerosol emissions from
case-associated e-cigarettes and other vaping products. Aerosol
emissions testing will be conducted by CDC's Division of Laboratory
Sciences, which will apply its over decade-long experience
characterizing e-cigarette aerosol emissions to products associated
with this outbreak. CDC's aerosol emissions testing complements FDA's
testing of the case-associated e-liquids. When combined with
epidemiologic and clinical laboratory data, the results found by
testing case-associated product samples may provide insight into the
nature of the chemical exposure or exposures contributing to EVALI.
In addition, CDC continues to offer testing of states' pathologic
specimens, including lung biopsy or autopsy specimens, associated with
patients, as well as testing of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BAL), and
any blood or urine samples that are paired with BAL fluid. CDC also
expanded its laboratory testing to include cannabinoids, including THC,
in case-associated urine samples. CDC developed and published clear
guidance documents to assist public health laboratories, healthcare
providers, pathologists, and others with specimen collection, storage,
and submission to CDC for testing, which is posted on our website.
Because of the variety of chemicals that are present in e-cigarette
or other vaping product liquids and that may be added to these liquids,
as well as the diversity of products in circulation, laboratory
analyses are complex. Thus, despite CDC's enhanced laboratory capacity
to assist in this outbreak, the identification of the cause or causes
for EVALI may take considerable time and continuing effort.
CDC's Outreach
CDC ensures that the findings from the investigation are provided
in a timely manner to the public, healthcare providers, and others.
These findings are then translated into evidence-based recommendations.
CDC communicates regularly with consumers, clinicians, and public
health professionals through scientific publications, web products,
social media, traditional media, and other channels. As of November 1,
2019, CDC has hosted seven national media telebriefings on the
outbreak, joined by colleagues from the FDA and selected state health
department investigators.
Throughout this investigation, CDC has been dedicated to providing
guidance and targeted communications to healthcare providers. On August
16, 2019, CDC released a Clinician Outreach and Communication Activity
(COCA) Clinical Action Alert describing this investigation and asking
providers to report possible cases of EVALI to their state health
departments. This was followed by a Health Alert Network (HAN) Health
Advisory on August 30, 2019, with specific recommendations for
clinicians, health officials, and the public. On September 6, 2019, CDC
released additional information through several reports in the MMWR,
including a summary from clinicians in North Carolina of clinical
characteristics and e-cigarette or other vaping product use exposures
among five cases in that state, as well as CDC guidance for public
health officials, clinical providers, and the public about prevention,
case identification, and reporting. On September 19, 2019, CDC
conducted a follow-up COCA call with more than 2,500 clinicians in
attendance, where we reviewed clinical features reported among cases,
and provided CDC's recommendations for clinicians. On October 25, 2019,
CDC published a factsheet for healthcare providers regarding evaluating
and caring for patients with suspected EVALI.
CDC's Lung Injury website houses information specifically for
healthcare providers that is updated on a continual basis. For
instance, we recently included information for healthcare providers
that specifically relates to influenza. As noted on our website, during
flu season, CDC recommends that healthcare providers should consider
flu in all patients with suspected EVALI. We also note that antivirals
should be considered in accordance with established guidelines and that
decisions on initiation or discontinuation of treatment should be based
on specific clinical features and, when appropriate, in consultation
with specialists.
Challenges
Despite all momentum gained and promising work underway across CDC,
this investigation has posed a number of challenges. Public health runs
on data. Protecting America's health requires reliable and up-to-date
information to prevent, detect, and respond to health threats. Most
public health data collection and reporting systems are antiquated and
fragmented, making it challenging to assure timely, actionable
information while continuing to safeguard patient privacy. This
investigation is emblematic of a challenge to our agency's overall
work, which requires rapid collection and analysis of public health
data but is often reliant on paper-based systems and fax machines.
Timely surveillance, particularly concerning newly emerging and
rapidly evolving forms of tobacco products and cannabis use other than
smoking (e.g., vaping, dabbing, edibles), in the United States is
nascent. Although there have been contributory efforts to improve
surveillance in recent years, this outbreak, against a background of
limited estimates of baseline rates of use and use behaviors related to
THC use in e-cigarettes or other vaping products highlights that data
collection and analysis efforts have not kept up, either
technologically or with the changing landscape of e-cigarette or other
vaping product use. Another inherent challenge of this investigation is
the complication introduced by the reporting of potentially illicit
drug use from patients. State laws vary regarding THC and cannabis use,
which may make standardized and consistent data collection challenging.
Finally, the marketplace for e-cigarettes or other vaping products
is wide and diverse, with a multitude of substances that can be used
with the devices. This can complicate toxicology testing and the
interpretation of results. Despite these challenges, CDC has taken
positive steps to address the EVALI outbreak while also continuing to
address the ongoing epidemic of e-cigarette use by youth in our Nation.
CDC's Efforts to Address the Epidemic of E-cigarettes
The EVALI outbreak comes at a time of epidemic-levels of e-
cigarette use by young people in the United States. E-cigarettes have
been the most commonly used tobacco product among youth since 2014, and
their significantly increased use has erased earlier progress in
reducing overall tobacco product use among youth. Notably, e-cigarette
use among high school students increased by 77.8 percent from 2017 to
2018. Additionally, preliminary data from the 2019 National Youth
Tobacco Survey (NYTS) demonstrate that more than a quarter of high
school students reported e-cigarette use within the past 30 days.
Flavors are one of many factors associated with youth use of
tobacco. Specifically, flavors can increase the appeal of tobacco
products to youth, promote youth initiation of tobacco products, and
result in lifelong tobacco product use. Recent data published by FDA
and CDC from the NYTS found that in 2018, 67.8 percent of high school
students who reported using e-cigarettes within the past 30 days used
flavored e-cigarettes. These data also indicated that during 2014 to
2018, current use of flavored e-cigarettes increased among high school
students.
CDC is engaged in multi-faceted efforts to prevent and reduce use
of all tobacco products, including e-cigarettes, among young people. In
collaboration with our partners and other Federal agencies, CDC
collects data and conducts research on youth use of tobacco products.
For example, CDC and FDA jointly administer the NYTS, an annual survey
to monitor national trends in the use of tobacco products among U.S.
students in grades 6 through 12. This survey has been essential in
identifying the extent and scope of the current youth e-cigarette
epidemic in this country. CDC also complements its routine surveillance
efforts with novel, rapid response monitoring that captures emerging
trends concerning e-cigarettes, including through the use of sales data
to monitor sub-annual changes in the United States e-cigarette
marketplace. In addition, the Tobacco Laboratory in CDC's Environmental
Health Laboratory provides critical laboratory science, including
measuring harmful and addictive constituents in e-cigarette solutions
and aerosol, and measuring chemicals in the blood and urine of people
who use e-cigarettes or are exposed to secondhand aerosol.
CDC has been at the forefront of this issue for many years. In
2013, CDC published a report highlighting a doubling in youth e-
cigarettes use during 2011-2012, which initiated our efforts to warn
the public, and others, about the health risks of e-cigarette use among
U.S. youth. Since then, CDC has continued those efforts. For example,
in 2016, CDC collaborated with the Surgeon General to release a Surgeon
General's report entitled ``E-Cigarette Use Among Youth and Young
Adults.'' This was the first comprehensive Federal report on e-
cigarettes among young people. Since then, CDC has continued to promote
the findings of the report to educate parents, influencers of youth,
and youth themselves. In response to compelling data about the sales
and increased market share of JUUL, reports of widespread teen use of
this and similar products, and mounting public concerns, CDC launched a
partner initiative to expand the reach of CDC public health warnings.
CDC developed plain-language infographics and social media posts for
public health organizations and consumer audiences about e-cigarettes
and has conducted back-to-school social media campaigns. CDC was the
primary Federal agency that assisted the Office of the Surgeon General
in writing and launching a December 2018 e-cigarette advisory to bring
awareness to relevant audiences (teachers, parents, clinicians) about
e-cigarette use by young people. CDC also developed promotional
materials to support the release of the advisory.
CDC provides funding and technical support to all 50 states, the
District of Columbia, 8 U.S. territories, 12 tribal support
organizations, and 8 national networks representing priority
populations, which are essential for coordinating the public health
response to prevent tobacco initiation among youth and young adults,
promote quitting among youth and adults, eliminate secondhand exposure
to smoke and e-cigarette emissions, and identify and eliminate tobacco-
related disparities. With funding from CDC, state and territorial
health departments have taken a number of approaches to reduce youth
access and exposure to e-cigarettes, including preparing nicotine
health advisories and tobacco-free school toolkits, conducting
surveillance of tobacco product use among youth, and creating and
disseminating evidence-based educational materials to the public
through social media and other mechanisms. CDC has ongoing work to
prevent and reduce tobacco use, including e-cigarettes.
CDC's Efforts to Understand the Harms Associated with Marijuana Use
The exposure to vaping products containing THC in most patients in
this outbreak underscores the need to better understand the health
effects of increasing marijuana use in the United States and the
changing marketplace as states continue to pursue legalization of
marijuana for medical and nonmedical purposes. According to the 2018
National Survey on Drug Use and Health, more than 43 million (16
percent) Americans age 12 years or older reported using marijuana in
the past year. Marijuana use among youth and young adults is
particularly concerning given the potential risks to the developing
brain. In 2018, one in eight youth, aged 12 to 17 years, and one in
three aged 18 to 25 years reported marijuana use. Prolonged heavy
marijuana use has been associated with a broad range of health effects,
and health effects have also been documented in young people, in
particular those that initiated marijuana use at an early age.
CDC data indicate that many youth who use e-cigarettes also report
using marijuana in vaping devices. For example, data from the 2016
National Youth Tobacco Survey found that one-third of U.S. youth who
have ever used an e-cigarette or other vaping product reported using
marijuana in an e-cigarette or other vaping product, including
approximately one-quarter of middle school users.
CDC conducts limited surveillance, monitoring, technical
assistance, and public education related to marijuana. For example, a
small number of questions regarding marijuana use are included in the
Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS) and are being asked in a limited
number of states through the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System
(BRFSS) and the Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System (PRAMS). In
addition, CDC is providing informal technical assistance to state,
local, tribal, and territorial officials when requested, with a focus
on preventing harms, particularly in vulnerable populations such as
youth, young adults, and pregnant women. CDC's marijuana webpage
(www.cdc.gov/marijuana/) provides information on health effects, data
and statistics, and offers resources and tools for the public. Finally,
CDC collaborates with other Federal agencies on scientific workgroups
to address emerging issues and work toward consensus on indicators and
measures to monitor marijuana use and health effects.
CDC Interim Outbreak Recommendations for Providers, States and the
Public
CDC continues to refine recommendations based on data and
scientific findings emerging from this complex outbreak. To date, no
single compound or ingredient has emerged as the cause of EVALI, and
there may be more than one cause. Because most EVALI patients report
using THC-containing products before the onset of symptoms, CDC
recommends that persons should not use e-cigarette, or vaping, products
that contain THC. Persons should not buy any type of e-cigarettes or
other vaping products, particularly those containing THC, off the
street and should not modify or add any substances to e-cigarettes or
other vaping products that are not intended by the manufacturer,
including products purchased through retail establishments. In
addition, because the specific compound or ingredient causing lung
injury is not yet known, and while the investigation continues, persons
should consider refraining from use of all e-cigarettes or other vaping
products. Regardless of this investigation, e-cigarettes or other
vaping products should never be used by youths, young adults, or women
who are pregnant. Adults who are using e-cigarettes or other vaping
products to quit smoking should not return to smoking; they should
weigh all risks and benefits, and consider using FDA-approved
medications. Updated information and recommendations related to this
investigation are available at www.cdc.gov/lunginjury.
Conclusion
CDC's foundation of public health work, including direct relations
to state and local governments, is essential to our Nation's ability to
respond to expected, unexpected, and unimaginable threats. CDC
prioritizes sharing critical information with clinical providers,
public health departments, laboratories, and the public to help prevent
additional EVALI cases and to rapidly identify and treat affected
individuals. We remain fully committed to investigating and analyzing
data as quickly as possible and using cutting-edge science to inform
evidence-based recommendations to protect the public from this health
risk. CDC is working around the clock, together with state and local
health officials and FDA colleagues, to identify the cause or causes of
this outbreak and will continue to keep Congress, and the American
public, up to date on our progress in this rapidly evolving
investigation.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Schuchat. We will now begin a
five-minute rounds of questions. My first question is what
advice should I give Tennesseans? Dr. Schuchat, you repeated
that CDC recommends don't buy any e-cigarette or vaping
products off the street, don't modify--that would be the type
of oil that you mentioned for example--don't modify the
product. But the only way to assure, CDC says, that you are not
at risk while the investigation continues is to consider
refraining from use of all e-cigarettes or vaping. So is CDC's
advice that one should not use e-cigarettes right now during
the investigation?
Dr. Schuchat. We are a data-driven organization and so our
strongest recommendation right now is to avoid using e-
cigarette or vaping products that contain THC, and to avoid
getting such products from informal sources like friends or
dealers or online. But because about 10 percent of the cases of
this very severe lung injury do not have a history of vaping
THC, we continue to suggest that people consider refraining
from use of all e-cigarettes or vaping products.
The Chairman. Mr. Zeller, your--FDA's own website is
similar in the respect that it says FDA warns the public to
stop using THC, the derivative of marijuana that makes you
high, and any vaping products off the street and oils like the
acetate, but you don't go on to say that you should consider
refraining from using any e-cigarettes during this period of
time. And in fact, the FDA allows the sale of these e-
cigarettes because you delayed for several years the
requirement that a manufacturer apply for standards. So which
advice should Tennesseans follow the CDC's or the FDA's?
Mr. Zeller. I believe our website is consistent with the
CDC website and that it contains that second point about,
during the pendency of this investigation, if you are concerned
about any safety issues that you should consider refraining
from using any e-cigarette or vaping product.
The Chairman. Yes, but you said in your testimony that it
was not legal to sell e-cigarettes but in fact, it is only
legal to sell e-cigarettes in a convenience store, for example,
because the FDA hasn't stopped it.
Mr. Zeller. That is correct. That is a separate issue.
These products remain on the market through a continuing
exercise of what is known as enforcement discretion by the
Agency. That is separate and apart from the public health
advice to people concerned about what is going on with
pulmonary illness and on that issue, I believe that our website
is completely consistent with CDC's as is our messaging.
The Chairman. Well, but it is--you are not saying to a
convenience store that their selling e-cigarettes is illegal
right now, right?
Mr. Zeller. These products remain on the market through
enforcement discretion. What is completely illegal is the sale
of these products to anybody under the age of 18. And what I
tried to say in my remarks is that we have been aggressively
enforcing the youth access restrictions for e-cigarettes from
the day that we gained regulatory authority over these
products.
The Chairman. Well, obviously, we are not making much
progress with youth use. You list a number things you are doing
and 1 in 4 of American high schoolers according to your
statistics are using e-cigarettes. How much of the more than $5
billion that you have collected from tobacco companies over the
last 10 years have you used to discourage young people from
using e-cigarettes?
Mr. Zeller. The investment that we made in public education
is a dollar figure that we can separate out for e-cigarettes.
And from late 2017 through the end of next year we will wind up
investing about $150 million in a massive multimedia public
education campaign to get the word out to kids. Kids know that
cigarettes are dangerous. We have made great progress in
reducing kids use of conventional combustible cigarettes.
What we have learned from our research is that most young
people walk around thinking that e-cigarettes are harmless,
that it is just a water vapor. There are surveys that show that
kids don't even know that nicotine is present in the aerosol.
We are working very hard to get the message out through paid
advertising on TVs----
The Chairman. One other, if I may so I could stay within my
time. When do you expect the rules, the two rules that you have
proposed, to be final?
Mr. Zeller. We are going very hard to finalize them. The
second of those rules, the rule for the pre-market tobacco
application process, that is a proposed rule where the common
period is still open through the end of the month but I can
assure the Committee that completing these two final rules are
the highest priorities of the Agency and the Department.
The Chairman. Senator Murray.
Senator Murray. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Zeller, I was
actually shocked that in a hearing that is focused in part on
youthful vaping epidemic, your testimony, both written and oral
here, made no mention of the administration's September 11th
announcement that it intended to clear the market of all
unauthorized non-tobacco flavored vaping products. It was made
with a lot of fanfare and many of us have been publicly urging
you to finalize it. Why is that not included in your testimony?
Mr. Zeller. The only thing I can say, Senator Murray, is
that we are committed to doing everything that we can to
prevent kids from using any tobacco product including e-
cigarettes, and that we are continuing to develop a policy
approach that aligns with that concern.
Senator Murray. I appreciate that but the September 11th
announcement was one we all listened to, we were attentive to,
we have been pushing you on it, and yet here we are talking
about the very topic and you didn't mention it in your remarks.
I don't understand why.
Mr. Zeller. I think that any questions that the Committee
has about the announcement that the White House made and
anything related to what remains a deliberative process on
policy is best referred to the White House itself.
Senator Murray. This is a White House decision?
Mr. Zeller. I would refer the Committee to the White House
if there are any questions about this ongoing deliberative
process.
Senator Murray. Okay. Are you committed to finalizing the
flavor compliance policy that the administration announced, yes
or no?
Mr. Zeller. We are absolutely committed to coming up with a
policy that aligns with this epidemic use of e-cigarettes by
kids and that addresses this fundamental problem.
Senator Murray. What is your timeline, when?
Mr. Zeller. I can't give you a specific timeline, Senator,
other than to say that the deliberative process continues.
Senator Murray. You being told not to do this?
Mr. Zeller. You are asking about the deliberative process
and I really would refer you and the Committee to the White
House to ask specific questions about where we are.
Senator Murray. Okay. Dr. Schuchat, in September shortly
after the administration's announcement, Representative Presley
asked you, ``to be effective, do you agree that the flavor ban
needs to include mint and menthol?'' Your answer was yes, and
since then two things have happened. First, it has been
reported this administration is dramatically weakening the
policies, working on including by carving out those menthol
products and covering only some retailers or walking away from
the policy altogether.
Second, DHARMA published CDC data demonstrating the
increasing popularity of menthol and mint flavored e-cigarettes
among youths while JAMA published data examining differences
between mint and menthol attracting young people. So I want to
ask you Representative Presley's question again. To fully
protect kids, does this administration's ban of unauthorized
flavors need to include mint and menthol products and cover
everywhere that kids currently buy these products?
Dr. Schuchat. We know that flavors are particularly
attractive to youth. The CDC, FDA National Youth Tobacco Survey
didn't differentiate menthol or mint. We don't even know if
kids can differentiate menthol or mint. But the question that
was asked was about menthol or mint and that was a very popular
choice. The use of that flavoring increased after Juul took
away the candy flavors. So the use of--we believe that kids are
likely to use whatever flavor is left.
Senator Murray. Yes. So does CDC's data actually suggest if
a young person's preferred flavor e-cigarette is no longer
available--for example, this administration bans fruit flavor
but leaves menthol products on the market, kids will just
simply switch to another flavor?
Dr. Schuchat. Based on what we saw in 2018 to 2019, that is
what we would expect.
Senator Murray. Okay. Mr. Zeller, I know that FDA and CDC
are working hard to identify the causes of the outbreak of the
vaping related illnesses and contain this crisis. I want to
underscore how important that work is for families everywhere.
I am also very focused on how we could have prevented this
outbreak in the first place because unfortunately the
administration gave e-cigarette companies a free pass for four
years to market many of these products with no FDA review. I
want to ask could the national outbreak that has sickened
thousands have been avoided or minimized if FDA had required
pre-market authorization of e-cigarettes last year as the
Agency originally envisioned?
Mr. Zeller. I can understand why you are asking that
question. I think it is a very difficult question to answer
even in hindsight. Recall that the overwhelming majority of the
cases of illness and death involved the use of THC. We are not
saying that it is only THC related but it certainly seems to be
overwhelmingly THC related.
Senator Murray. I understand that. But do you think that
the market for these vaping devices that are also now being
used for marijuana would have existed in the way it has done
today had it not been for FDA's delay?
Mr. Zeller. I think that even under the original compliance
policy that we had in the final deeming rule from 2016, these
products would have remained on the market well into 2019 and
that was under the original compliance policy. Again, I can't
go back in a time machine and say how things would have been
changed. We are a regulatory Agency that follows the regulatory
science.
As I said in my written and oral remarks, the decision that
we made in 2017 to extend the deadlines was made at a time when
kids use of e-cigarettes was in decline. We immediately
revisited that policy a year later when we saw the spike, as
the Chairman has pointed out in the chart, to revisit what
those deadlines should be.
Senator Murray. I can't help but think that the review of
those products by FDA would have provided consumers with some
pretty critical clarity. So it is--we are where we are, but it
is really disconcerting.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Murray. As I mentioned
earlier, we have votes at 11 a.m., but we will continue the
hearing through the votes so that Senators can have time to ask
their questions. We have very good attendance today. So I would
like to encourage Senators to stay within the five minutes for
questions and answers.
Senator Enzi.
Senator Enzi. Thank you and thank you for holding this
hearing. We are talking about vaping as the new crisis. I am
still concerned about cigarettes. In 2009 when we passed the
bill, I was really concerned to get three amendments. And one
was increased fines. I don't know how that is working because--
the second requirement that I got in there was one that we
would get a report three years after we passed it and every two
years after that to see if we are making progress or not.
We got a report once in 2013. So it makes it hard to know
how we are doing on that and wouldn't give me much confidence
in what we are doing with vaping. Can you commit, Mr. Zeller,
to issuing a new report as soon as possible and meeting your
statutory obligation to report to Congress every two years
going forward?
Mr. Zeller. Absolutely, Senator. We are working hard on
updating and submitting the most recent report. And I can
assure you on the enforcement authorities that you got into the
underlying statute which gave the Agency an authority that it
previously had never had, which is for the ultimate retailer
that continues to break the law and sell to kids, thanks to the
Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act, we now have
the ability for a retailer that has a certain number of
violations in a specified period of time to go before an
administrative law judge to seek something called a note
tobacco sells order. And unfortunately, we have had to do this
over 150 times to prevent retailers from selling any tobacco
products of any kind for a specified period of time.
Senator Enzi. Thank you. I won't take all the time to find
that when that report could come out but I will be submitting
that in writing. Another thing that I got in there was one
where there had to be color graphic warning labels and the
courts of course struck that down. They said that it was taken
to court and the court said that it was an unabashed attempt to
evoke emotion and perhaps embarrassment and browbeat consumers
into quitting rather than purely factual, accurate, or
uncontroversial information. Yes, the purpose of it was to get
people to quit smoking and I think the reason it went to court
is because it was working. So I congratulate you on an attempt
to do color graphic warning labels.
I think these warnings would be a good way to get people to
stop smoking or vaping or never start. Can you explain the
reasoning behind the choice to focus on highlighting the less
known consequences of smoking like diabetes and bladder cancer
rather than enhance awareness and remind smokers of the
association between smoking and lung cancer, heart disease, or
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease?
Mr. Zeller. Thank you for the question, Senator Enzi. And
yes, the focus of the new cigarette health warning proposed
rule that we issued several months ago is focused on some of
the lesser known but still very serious health consequences of
smoking. We took that approach in the aftermath of the court
case that ruled against the original final cigarette health
warning rule, as you described in your statement, taking into
account legal, constitutional, primarily First Amendment
considerations as we researched and then drafted a new proposed
rule that we intend to finalize by March of next year under a
separate court order deadline.
The focus is helping the public, adults and kids,
understand that there are some lesser-known health consequences
with cigarette smoking and that was a deliberate, strategic
move on our part with an eye toward when this rule goes final,
in the event that there is litigation, that this will give us
the best chance of surviving that court challenge.
These are all serious health conditions and they turn out
to be lesser well-known than things like heart disease and lung
cancer. And our research shows that the public is largely
unaware that those can be linked to cigarette smoking.
Senator Enzi. Thank you. I also am interested, of course,
the testing is still ongoing but there is information on THC
that is present in the majority of the samples the FDA has
tested. Does the FDA have jurisdiction over THC products? And
if so, what is the authority?
Mr. Zeller. I think on a case-by-case basis when it comes
down to the fact, if we were to take an action because of the
presence of THC, it would be because the investigation has
continued because we are going after the supply chain here. How
did these products get onto the market in the first place? We
are not looking at possession. We are not looking at personal
use of these products. We have investigators on the ground to
try to get at how did they get into the chain of distribution
and commerce in the first place. If we can identify the
responsible party--because with THC we are talking about an
illicit compound.
It is not like someone is going to step forward and say
yes, I did it. If we can find the responsible party, if we can
do the product analysis that shows that the THC is present with
or without these oils that seem to be making it worse, then in
theory we could use authorities that we have under the Food,
Drug and Cosmetic Act. We are also working in consultation with
the Justice Department and the Drug Enforcement Administration
because THC is a controlled substance and there could be DEA
authorities, but I don't want to speak for DEA. But we could
act depending upon the facts under Food and Drug authorities.
Senator Enzi. Thank you. I apologize for running over.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Enzi.
Senator Baldwin.
[No response.]
The Chairman. Senator Hassan.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Murray for having this hearing and thank you to both of
our witnesses and please pass on our thanks to the men and
women you work with for their dedication to service. As other
Senators have mentioned, recent national youth tobacco survey
data shows an alarming rise in e-cigarette use among middle and
high school students. And according to the CDC Youth Risk
Behavior Survey, my State of New Hampshire has the highest
percentage of high school students in the Nation reporting
daily e-cigarette use. Millions of children are nicotine
dependent because of e-cigarettes and the American Academy of
Pediatrics estimates that only 4 percent of those kids are
going to successfully quit. That is a stunning statistic.
The devastating impact companies like Juul have had on
children must be at the forefront of FDA's review of their pre-
market tobacco product applications in May. So Director Zeller,
I have four questions for you I am hoping to get to in our four
minutes. When the flavor ban was announced in September, Juul
publicly stated that it would not lobby officials or attempt to
influence the policy as it was developed. However, Juul
executives recently told my staff that they have had, ``a
number of conversations with FDA since the September
announcement.'' Were you aware of or part of any of these
conversations? And if so, what was discussed?
Mr. Zeller. I am unaware of any policy related discussions
between Juul and FDA.
Senator Hassan. Any policy related. Have there been
discussions between Juul and FDA that you are aware of?
Mr. Zeller. We have been given a heads-up on personnel
changes and things unrelated to policy.
Senator Hassan. But in terms of policy, you are saying you
are unaware?
Mr. Zeller. I am unaware of any conversation.
Senator Hassan. Okay. Given the importance of this issue.
It is really concerning that you may not be aware of the full
scope of conversations that Juul officials say have occurred
with your staff. So I will follow-up in writing to request that
you provide more information about what has been discussed in
these meetings and with whom. Second question.
A recent study in the Journal of the American Medical
Association found that mint is the most popular e-cigarettes
flavor among high school students. Earlier this month, former
FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb predicted that if menthol is
exempted from the flavor ban, Juul will simply rename their
current mint flavor, which does contain some menthol, and sell
it as menthol. So Director Zeller, how will FDA ensure that
companies like Juul cannot game the flavor ban by, for example,
reclassifying their mint flavor as a menthol product?
Mr. Zeller. Senator, it is really difficult for me to get
into a policy discussion when we remain in the deliberative
process in creating the policy. So let me try this to speak
hypothetically about product name change.
Senator Hassan. Yes.
Mr. Zeller. It turns out that under some litigation that
went against the Agency, it may be possible for companies to
change the names of products. In a world where we--again,
hypothetically, in a world where we had a policy in place that
tried to get at I think what is embedded in your question or
any company to try to simply change the name of a product to be
able to keep a product on the market that would otherwise have
to be removed from the market, I will just say hypothetically
in that situation FDA would be very concerned and would look at
whatever authorities that we had to take action. But that is
only a hypothetical----
Senator Hassan. I understand it is a hypothetical. I
understand the deliberative process argument but let me be
clear what you are hearing from everybody up here is that we
have children who are getting hooked on these products. There
has been a lot of delay. We are looking for a strategy and we
are looking for you guys to move through your deliberations.
You have had plenty of time already and kids and people,
Americans all over this country, are being hurt and they are
going to be--they are addicted. And when the American Academy
of Pediatrics tells me that only 4 percent of the kids who are
now addicted to nicotine are going to be able to quit, your
deliberative process needs to be as fast and strategic as it
can be. The White House announced a policy back in September,
but now we are being told they are still deliberating.
We need you guys to focus on this. I have 25 seconds left
but let me tell you what I want to get at in my last two
questions, which is about the data that you all are collecting.
Juul told my office that they regularly submit data on Juul
purchasers to FDA. Of course, submitting purchaser data rather
than user data means Juul does not submit data on youth e-
cigarette use.
Will FDA require Juul to submit their user data, inclusive
of youth users, rather than just purchase or data as part of
their pre-market tobacco product application? And this also
would be useful to get at the issue of diversion. Who is
purchasing but then who is using?
Mr. Zeller. A couple comments, Senator. First----
The Chairman. Mr. Zeller, I am going to ask you to be
succinct in your answer or give a written answer.
Senator Hassan. Thank you.
Mr. Zeller. Two points and then I will elaborate in
writing. We have an active ongoing investigation of Juul. All
aspects of advertising, marketing, and promotion of their
products. So that is an ongoing investigation. Your question
about the application process is a separate question and it is
clear under the law that Congress wrote that as we review any
application for any product, the impact on initiation, the
impact on the likelihood that any non-user starting with kids
would use the product, is a core component of how we would
review any application for any new tobacco product.
Senator Hassan. Thank you, and thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
your indulgence.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Hassan.
Senator Burr.
Senator Burr. Mr. Chairman, I start with the unanimous
consent request to enter into the record the GMO study that
Senator Hassan just referenced to. And I will note for my
colleagues, this is the first time menthol has been broken out.
They use Juul data to do it. It is referred to as monitoring
the future of which menthol data in eighth graders was 1.7
percent, 10th graders 2.4, 12th graders 3.8.
The Chairman. So ordered.
[The following information can be found on page 52.]
Senator Burr. It is important to distinguish between
menthol because the mint number is huge, the menthol number is
not huge. There is not a mint product in combustibles and Mr.
Zeller I think you will agree that when we did CTP, it was with
the intent to bring less harmful products so that adults could
choose to switch from combustibles to innovative products of
which e-cigarettes were one of them.
To maintain that there is the ability to go from a menthol
combustible to a menthol non-combustible is an important health
advantage to the American people to have reduced harm products.
Now, Ms. Schuchat, I asked HHS for information related to the
CDC's Youth. Tobacco Survey. September 13th, I asked for it to
be a response by September 27th. I have not received it. Your
staffs got that information. Will you promise me today I will
have this next week?
Dr. Schuchat. We have published that data. So that was in
the--you just mentioned the monitoring the future data. The
other report in JAMA of the same issue was the National Youth
Tobacco----
Senator Burr. I have got that JAMA report but specifically
there is some information I have asked of HHS on the youth
access.
Dr. Schuchat. Yes, we will go back and get you that but
just to expand on your comment, the question on the monitoring
the future was, what is the usual--which Juul flavor do you use
most often? So individuals could just give one choice, not
multiple.
Senator Burr. That is correct. April 10th, 2018 CDC made an
initial announcement of an E. coli outbreak with an unknown
source. Eight days later, the Agency determined the outbreak
was linked to a specific product from a specific region,
romaine lettuce, Yuma, Arizona. The CDC determined this link in
part on interviews with those who had fallen ill and found that
of 28 people 93 percent had eaten romaine lettuce in the last
week. CDC acted swiftly and decisively in that.
Now, we are at a point where 80 percent of patients use THC
products and CDC just recently announced a form of vitamin E
calling it a chemical of concern. That is based on CDC's
determination based on 29 samples of similar number to the
romaine lettuce investigation. What additional information does
CDC need to make a determinative cause?
Dr. Schuchat. We are extremely concerned about vitamin E
acetate in the THC containing products but what we cannot say
right now is whether there are other substances. There are
about 10 percent of the patients with this very severe lung
injury who did not use the THC.
Senator Burr. You came to a single conclusion on Ebola--I
mean an E. Coli. In a number of days, specifically with the
same population, and I would only suggest to you that it is
time to take the information you have got. And at least put out
the warning a little more specific than maybe what you have. I
have only got a minute left. I need to go to Mr. Zeller. Has
the FDA inspected vape shops? And when I ask that question, I
separate vape shops from traditional retail outlets.
Mr. Zeller. Yes, we do.
Senator Burr. How many have you inspected?
Mr. Zeller. I will give you the exact number in writing. I
don't know the exact number at the top of my head, but we----
Senator Burr. Does FDA have authority to investigate them?
Mr. Zeller. Yes, we do.
Senator Burr. Okay. And when FDA deemed vapor products as
tobacco products the Agency started to inspect vape shops. As
FDA began to sound the alarm bell on children's use of these
products, from 2017 2018 did CTP invest more money in
inspection of retail facilities?
Mr. Zeller. I will get you the annual numbers in writing.
What we did----
Senator Burr. Let me tell you the number. You actually
decreased inspections from $48.4 million in 2017 to $44.3
million in 2018. Did CTP conduct more inspections of retail
facilities to determine whether they are selling products to
youth?
Mr. Zeller. My recollection is that the relative number of
inspections stayed the same. What we had was a little bit of
efficiency. These are contracts that we have at the state and
local level and there were some efficiencies----
Senator Burr. These are your responses to me. You had
22,000 fewer inspections in 2018 than you did in 2017.
Mr. Zeller. Senator, the point that I am trying to make is,
when we got regulatory authority over e-cigarettes in the
summer of 2016 for the first time, what we did with that
existing contract mechanism was reprioritized where the
inspectors would go to see if retailers would or would not sell
the newly regulated products starting with these e-cigarettes
to kids.
Senator Burr. This one is an easy one. Did you increase or
decrease the education campaign investment from 2017 to 2018?
Mr. Zeller. From 2017 to 2018, our investment in the public
education campaign has gone up considerably. From 2017 through
the end of 2019, we will be investing roughly $65 million in
that campaign and $85 million next year.
Senator Burr. Let me tell you how you responded to me in a
written response. You decreased your public education campaign
investment by $72 million from 2017 to 2018. You can find that
in question 14 of CTP's oversight letter that I received a
response to on January 11th, 2019.
Mr. Zeller. Senator, what I was referring to was the
investment in the public education efforts for e-cigarettes,
which has increased.
Senator Burr. Okay. To my colleagues, it is important for
us to be dealing with the same facts on these issues. I remind
our colleagues, until Congress decides that tobacco is an
illegal product, one of the responsibilities we have as Members
of Congress is to protect the adults choice to use these
products. That decision has not been made that it is an illegal
product and we have done everything we can to try to bring
reduced harm product to the marketplace. I think that is a good
public health issue.
Somebody will probably ask today, why don't more companies
do pre-market tobacco applications? And the fact is that
statutorily it requires CTP to review those in 180 days.
Currently, there are three applications that may have been
resolved but they are at 625 days. Six applications are at 589
days. Four applications at 191 days. So when you ask why aren't
companies willing to go out and do it? It is the lack of
clarity of the pathway and it is the performance with a
statutory requirement of 180 days that it is a black hole that
you fall into.
The Chairman. Senator Burr, we will have a second round of
questions if you----
Senator Burr. I thank the Chairman and I thank the Members
for their indulgences. I yield the balance of my time.
The Chairman. Okay. Thank you, Senator Burr.
Senator Baldwin.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you. Children's Hospital of
Wisconsin was the first in the country to publicly identify
what was at the time a mystery illness connected to vaping
found in 8 teenagers who were hospitalized with seriously
damaged lungs. In response, I requested that the CDC establish
an Emergency Operation Center to investigate the cause of the
outbreak and support states in their response. And I urged this
Committee to hold a hearing on this matter. So I am pleased
that we are here to discuss both the outbreak of this illness
as well as the increasing number of children using e-
cigarettes. It is very clear that our work is far from over.
Now that the CDC has detected one potential chemical of
concern, the Committee I think should also hear from
individuals who are on the front lines who can speak to the
challenges of identifying, containing, and preventing
outbreaks. And I expect we will learn more today that will
indicate further action. At Children's Hospital of Wisconsin,
many of the children with these injuries were hospitalized in
intensive care units and they required supplemental oxygen or
mechanical ventilation to breathe.
Dr. Schuchat, can you tell us what is currently known about
the long-term impact of these injuries, and especially what we
might anticipate in terms of the impact on young people. And
what resources does the Center for Disease Control and
Prevention need to conduct further research on the longer-term
impacts of this illness?
Dr. Schuchat. Yes, thank you. And first just to say, we
really applaud the clinicians in Wisconsin who sounded the
alarm and got us going on the response. This is a very
difficult injury that young people are suffering. You may have
seen reports of the first reported lung transplant in a 17 year
old in Michigan.
Mr. Zeller. Double transplant.
Dr. Schuchat. Double transplant. Thank you. So we know that
some individuals will have very long term damage and not even
be able to breathe without new lungs but we don't have the full
story on the spectrum of illness or injury or how people will
do. We have been working with the pulmonary specialty community
to get guidelines out for follow-up so that everyone who is
discharged from the hospital gets a regular follow-up including
lung pulmonary function tests.
Importantly, we are urging people to make sure that they
focus on cessation and counseling while people are still in the
hospital. There are tragically a few reports of readmission for
worsening after discharge. In terms of the resources needed,
this is a newly recognized syndrome in terms of this outbreak
and so the full scope of research questions exist, not just the
long-term outcome. The best way to treat it, the best way to
track it.
Right now we are using syndromic surveillance to try to
find more automated ways to detect trends. We are worried about
the impact that influenza may have on people who have suffered
from this injury. Whether they are going to be new treatments
needed or new challenges with diagnostics. So I think CDC, FDA,
and NIH together joined in a meeting that tried to lay out a
research agenda for the issue.
Senator Baldwin. Okay. Mr. Zeller, I believe that the
marketing practices of these vaping product makers have played
a role in the popularity of these products, especially among
youth. And a study of Juul's advertising efforts from Stanford
University School of Medicine found that Juul's advertising
imagery in its first six months on the market was patently
youth-oriented, to quote from the article.
That advertising was widely distributed on social media
channels frequented by youth and was amplified by hashtag
extensions and catalyzed by compensated influencers and
affiliates. For too long FDA has failed to take action to crack
down on the marketing aspect of this and advertising targeted
at our Nation's young people. So can you explain why the FDA
did not issue specific marketing guidance to e-cigarette
manufacturers when these products first started coming to the
market?
Mr. Zeller. When e-cigarettes were first on the market, we
didn't have regulatory authority over them. Since we got that
regulatory authority which began in the summer of 2016, we have
used all of our enforcement tools. We have issued warning
letters for e-liquids that resemble kid friendly foods, like
juice boxes, cereal, and candy. We have issued warning letters
for paid social influencers where the connection to the company
wasn't revealed and those statements lacked required warnings.
We have issued a warning letter to Juul for unauthorized
modified risk tobacco product claims. So we have tried to use
all of the available tools that we had once we had the
regulatory authority over these products.
Senator Baldwin. Well, the warning letters are not the same
as sort of a wider marketing guidance. I appreciate hearing you
repeat what you had in your testimony, but the FDA has delayed
taking real action. In September, it was announced that the
administration or by the administration that you would be
clearing the market of unauthorized non-tobacco flavored e-
cigarette products and it has been two months. So where is the
policy?
Mr. Zeller. I think----
The Chairman. Mr. Zeller, I would like to ask you to make
that succinct in writing.
Mr. Zeller. I think any questions about the current state
of policy really needs to be directed to the White House. We
are in a deliberative process. The White House made an
announcement in September and we are working to advance a
policy consistent with taking steps to do everything that we
can to protect kids from these products.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Baldwin.
Senator Paul.
Senator Paul. They say politics is the art of looking for
trouble, finding it everywhere, diagnosing it incorrectly, and
applying the wrong remedies. I am afraid we could get into the
same problem here in this discussion. The problem seems to be,
and I have a great deal of sympathy, I have kids and I have
warned them about, the vaping of illegal products, but it seems
to be primarily deaths and horrific medical problems from
vaping illegal products.
What we are going to do in response to that is make more
vaping illegal. It seems kind of counterintuitive. It seems
like if you make more things illegal, maybe you get more people
vaping illegal products and you have more problems. I think to
have a complete picture here we ought to look at things in
totality and it would have been nice to hear from somebody
testifying about lives saved from vaping. You know, 480,000
people die from smoking each year, 2,000 people are dying from
vaping illegal products, and I don't want to discount that, we
should do something about it, but I am not so sure making
flavors illegal is actually going to make the problem better.
It might make the problem worse. So we have to think about
what we are doing here. And we really ought to ask the question
and seriously look at, are lives being saved from vaping? I
think there are estimates that hundreds of thousands of lives
have been saved over the past 12 years from vaping instead of
smoking. Now, you say well kids, is not a good idea to have
kids vaping, for one reason or another. Yes, that is probably
true, but it is already illegal for kids to vape. If you want
to get more kids not to vape, well we may increase the penalty
on people selling to kids. But to get rid of them, most adults
are using the flavors as well.
If you say well you are more likely to use the vaping
flavors to get off of smoking, maybe you are more likely to
stick with smoking if you ban flavors. So I just think--it is
like so many things, we get off strung out on these things and
we want to react, react, react really quickly, but nobody is
really asking one important question, how many lives are being
saved? The lives from smoking deaths dwarf any of the problem.
It is a terrible problem we are having. I am not discounting it
but it is a problem from illegal THC.
We are going to make more things here legal. So we drive
the flavors to the underground market. Maybe then people are
going to cut the flavors with vitamin E as well. So I really
just think like so many things we get going on this and we are
probably going to end up doing the wrong thing. But if you want
less kids to smoke, I would just increase the penalties on
people selling the kids and you might have less kids smoking.
But banning the flavors, you are going to affect the adult
market also, and as a secondary consequence, you may also
affect the amount of people that are able to convert from
smoking to vaping and saving lives. I don't have a direct
question but thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Paul.
Senator, Kaine.
Senator Kaine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And before I get to
the questions, I was going to ask Mr. Zeller, I was not happy
with your answer to Senator Murray's question about the
pendency of the regulations after the September 11th
announcement. The title of this hearing that we all know,
Examining the Response to Lung Illnesses and Rising Youth
Electronic E-Cigarette Use. You are the Director of the Center
for Tobacco Products at the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
When you were asked by Senator Murray about the
announcement that the administration made in September, you
referred us to the White House. The White House won't send
witnesses here. The White House is instructing witnesses to
ignore subpoenas from Congress about testifying. You knew what
the title was and you have the job. And I think we are entitled
to an answer from you. I am not going to ask you about the
deliberative process or details, but I want to just read this
to you.
This was the announcement that was made by the White House,
September 11th, titled, Trump administration Combating Epidemic
of Youth E-Cigarette Use With Plan to Clean Market of
Unauthorized Non-tobacco Flavored E-Cigarette Products. First
paragraph, today the Trump administration announced that as
part of its ongoing work to tackle the epidemic of youth e-
cigarette use, the FDA intends--the FDA, your Agency--to
finalize a compliance policy in the coming weeks that would
prioritize the Agency's enforcement of the pre-market
authorization requirements for non-tobacco flavored e-
cigarettes, including mint and menthol, clearing the market of
unauthorized non-tobacco flavored e-cigarette products.
A quote from Secretary Azar in this release, ``the Trump
administration is making it clear that we intend to clear the
market of flavored e-cigarettes to reverse the deeply
concerning epidemic of youth e-cigarette use that is impacting
children, families, schools, and communities. We will not stand
idly by as these products become an on-ramp to combustible
cigarettes or nicotine addiction for a generation of youth.''
Is that still the Trump administration's intent to clear
the market of flavored e-cigarettes to reverse the deeply
concerning epidemic of youth e-cigarette use?
Mr. Zeller. I understand your question, Senator Kaine, and
the frustration about my inability to share more detailed
information on----
Senator Kaine. I am not asking about the details. I am not
asking about the plan. I am not asking about the timing. The
administration announced that your Agency, and you are the
chief official over tobacco at this Agency, that it was the
intent of the administration to issue regulations clearing the
market of unauthorized flavored e-cigarettes. Is that still the
intent of the administration?
Mr. Zeller. All I can say Senator is that we are continuing
to advance the policy to address----
Senator Kaine. Let me ask you this. Do you know the answer
to my question?
Mr. Zeller. There is no final answer as of now.
Senator Kaine. There is one of two options, you either
don't know what the Trump administration intends, you don't
know whether they will honor what they said we will do, or you
know what the intent is and you are not telling me. Which is
it? Do you not know or do you know and you are not telling me?
Mr. Zeller. There is no final answer on the policy
question. It is why we continue to have these discussions
internally.
Senator Kaine. That again, there may not be a final answer
but the Trump administration announced its intent it was going
to clear the market of these flavors. Do you have any reason to
believe that the intent is now different?
Mr. Zeller. Well, all I can refer you to Senator is as we
continue to work on the policy to address the problem with
kids' use of e-cigarettes----
Senator Kaine. I am not asking about the total. I am asking
about an announcement that was made about your Agency's actions
and whether the intent that the administration announced is
intent of the administration.
Mr. Zeller. The goal remains----
Senator Kaine. I do not like being playing games with. I do
not like saying get somebody from the White House to answer the
question when the White House will not send two witnesses to
hearings like this. You are the person responsible. You should
know the answer to this question because you knew what the
title of the hearing was and you have the job. Let me move on
now to another topic. I have a lot of folks who have spoken to
me about this issue. I have got a student from Arlington,
Nathan Robinson, who is here with one of his mentors.
I have been told by kids in Virginia that they researched
to see whether their e-cigarettes are harmful and as soon as
they Google to get health information, then they are flooded
with ads from companies trying to sell them e-cigarettes. I
have school administrators who tell me we don't have a lot of
experience in helping 14 year olds break addictions.
The 17 year old that you mentioned, Dr. Schuchat, had a
double lung transplant, the first that has been done for a
vaping illness. The average life expectancy after a double lung
transplant is seven years. That is the average life expectancy.
We should get an answer to this question about whether the
administration is going to honor the policy that they announced
or not.
Let me ask you this as I conclude. There is a proposal on
the floor of the Senate that this Committee voted out as part
of a comprehensive healthcare cost package to raise the age on
all tobacco related products for every population in every
corner of the United States to 21. Would that have a positive
public health effect?
Dr. Schuchat. Yes, we think that would.
Senator Kaine. Thank you very much. I yield.
Senator Collins [presiding]. Thank you, Senator Kaine. The
Chairman has asked me to take over the hearing in his absence
and as luck would have it, I am up next to do the questioning.
And in any event, Mr. Zeller, and I am sorry that we are sort
of blocked by the transcriber here, the dramatic increase that
we are seeing in the use of e-cigarettes by our young people is
threatening strides that we have made to reduce overall tobacco
use.
You quoted in your written testimony a study that was done
by the National Academy of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine
that concludes that teens who experiment with an e-cigarette
are more likely more likely to try conventional cigarettes
compared to teens who had never used e-cigarettes. Hasn't the
rationale that has been given for e-cigarettes is that it will
help people stop smoking and yet here we have a study that
clearly states that teens who began using e-cigarettes are more
likely to start smoking conventional cigarettes. Could you
comment on that?
Mr. Zeller. Sure and thank you for the question, Senator.
It is part of--called the public health balancing act. When we
look at what's going on with kids, any kids' use of any of
these products, whatever the trajectory is going to be, goes on
the negative side of the ledger. But pulmonary delivery of
nicotine in a properly regulated marketplace is something that
could potentially benefit some currently addicted cigarette
smokers but only if they completely switch to the electronic
cigarette. And our job as regulators as we look at
applications, as we look at what is going on in the
marketplace, is to do this public health balancing act. The
imperative from a public health perspective is to not allow
another generation of kids to become addicted to nicotine.
Senator Collins. Well, that is exactly my fear not to
mention the illnesses that we are seeing right now. Let me
follow-up on a couple of other points that you made. In your
written testimony, and again in your oral testimony, you said
that it is important to remember that no e-cigarette product in
the United States is on the market legally and that instead the
FDA is exercising enforcement discretion. Given the harm that
we are seeing and the high percentage of youths who are using
it even in middle school and in high school, 27.5 percent you
said today, why is the FDA exercising discretion?
Mr. Zeller. As soon as we have a policy that we can come
back to the Committee to talk about, we will be able to go into
more detail about what the plans are. But your question is
extremely well taken and we try to be as candid as possible
about the state of the marketplace. From the day that we got
regulatory authority over e-cigarettes starting in the summer
of 2016, there was an exercise of enforcement discretion for
the products currently on the market.
If there is an e-cigarette that is not on the market, they
are subject to the premarket review or if a company tried to
put in these cigarette onto the market after that August 2016
date, well, that is a violation of the law and we have taken
enforcement action. So what we are talking about is the
application of enforcement discretion to the products that were
on the market as of that August 8th, 2016 cutoff date. And that
is the policy that we are working on and when it is finalized,
we would be happy to come back to the Committee and go into
detail on that.
Senator Collins. Given these very serious illnesses that we
have seen in 49 states including Maine, why not ban refillable
e-cigarettes? Wouldn't that help prevent situations where other
teams are putting in oils or other dangerous substances like
THC, or maybe they are not doing it, maybe criminals are doing
it. But why allow them to be refillable?
Mr. Zeller. Ultimately, for the products that have to come
through a premarket review process, there is a court order
deadline where whatever products remain on the market, these
companies are going to have to file applications with the
Agency by May of next year. What Senator Kaine was pressing on
is well, where is the administration's policy now? What is the
administration going to do about it? And what we are looking at
is what are the steps that we can take to best protect kids.
And it is two things. It is the alarming increase overall in
kids use of e-cigarettes at the high school and middle school
level and the increase in the popularity of flavored products.
Senator Collins. My time has expired, but I just want to
say to the Doctor who is representing the CDC that Jennifer
Rhoades in Maine public radio hosted an informational panel in
September on this very issue. And it was very disturbing
because what she shared was her finding that students said,
everyone vapes, that the official statistics are lower than the
reality. It is not something that is certain kind of kid does,
it is everywhere.
Similarly Eileen King at the Maine School Management
Association echoed that sentiment saying that vaping has
exploded exponentially and that the adults, the teachers, the
staff, the principle in general are ten steps behind the kids
and even knowing that it is going on. So for the record, if you
would respond since I am out of time, on what resources
specifically are available to schools to highlight the dangers
of vaping because until this latest spate of terrible
illnesses, I believe based on students and teachers I have
talked to, that they did not believe it was harmful and that is
a real problem.
Dr. Schuchat. We would be happy to submit for the record
the family of materials because I agree with you. I hear
exactly the same thing, that it is much worse than our
statistics are telling us and moving very fast.
Senator Collins. Thank you.
Senator Smith.
Senator Smith. Thank you, Senator Collins, and I am going
to actually follow-up on the question that you just posed. I
think it is a really important one. So in 2018, 1 in 4 11th
graders in Minnesota reported using an e-cigarette in the last
30 days. That is a 54 percent increase from 2018. So the
anxiety and worry that you hear from all of us on this panel
are really reflected in that data. When I asked teachers in
Minnesota what keeps them up at night, they point to two
things. One, the growing concerns about the mental health of
their students as well as the exponential rise in teen vaping.
And I think that these things are related.
Here is a story. Claire Herring is a student at Hopkins
High school in Minnetonka, Minnesota, and she turned to vaping,
she told us, to deal with her mental health concerns. And she
says that this isn't uncommon amongst her peers. In her words,
she said other students are ``lost and they don't know what to
do so they go for drugs and vaping is such an easy drug to
get.'' And she is currently struggling to quit vaping.
Now, Claire is not one of these young people who thinks
that vaping is nothing but flavored water. She understands that
she is addicted. She understands that she has a problem. So to
follow-up on Senator Collins' question, what is the CDC and the
FDA doing to help teens like Claire who are already addicted
and struggling to figure out how to help themselves? Dr.
Schuchat, would you like to go?
Dr. Schuchat. Yes. I can begin and it is a real challenge.
We don't have FDA-approved cessation tools for young people and
it may not be that the things that work in adults work as well
in younger people. We think that behavioral therapy is part of
the picture but that more research is needed. And you know, the
best thing here is to be very aggressive with prevention
because it is so hard for people once they start. And I think
in terms of the mental health issues, we realize that the
Nation is facing a family of challenges for young people. We
have seen rises in suicide in young people and we really need
to do more.
Senator Smith. Yes. That is for sure.
Mr. Zeller. A few points, Senator Smith. First, we are
making a massive investment in paid media and getting the word
out to kids in school. So as I said in my remarks, working with
students against destructive decisions, we got really snarky
posters placed in every single bathroom of every single public
and private high school in the entire country last year.
That is where kids are going to Juul or to vape. We have
also, working with scholastic, gotten much needed information
into the hands of over a million middle school and high school
administrators. But on the question of treatment, I agree with
Dr. Schuchat, there is much more that needs to be done to help
the teen that unfortunately has already become addicted and
there are no FDA-approved drugs to treat nicotine addiction in
teens.
We convened two very important public meetings earlier in
the year. One was a formal hearing to bring in researchers in
the pharmaceutical industry to raise the issue of what role can
drug therapy and counseling play in helping teens. And then we
had a more focused scientific workshop in the spring on the
same issue. But there is a gap here that needs to be addressed
and we are doing everything that we can to do that.
Senator Smith. Where are teens getting this idea that this
is harmless?
Mr. Zeller. Apparently, it is the mindset in the word of
mouth. And that is what we found from our research and that is
why our paid advertising is heavily focused on nicotine
addiction and health consequences to break that, what we call,
cost-free mentality that kids have that it is just a water
vapor and it is harmless. It is anything but.
Senator Smith. This is sort of a--I am having a here we go
again moment because I mean, of course that was a message that
big tobacco put out on cigarettes for many, many decades.
I appreciate--I heard your testimony about the amount,
about the dollars that you are spending on posters and
bathrooms and with scholastic and all of that. And I mean
certainly, that should be helpful. But my understanding is that
Juul spent much, much, much, much more than that in the first 6
months of 2019 to advertise as well. So, I mean I am concerned
that we are just outgunned on this. Dr. Schuchat, do you want
to say something about that?
Dr. Schuchat. Just to say that we believe there has been a
lot of social media marketing, peer influencer marketing, under
the radar kinds of ploy----
Senator Smith. Right. That we can't even tally.
Dr. Schuchat. Yes, and that young people really don't know
or were even surprised that there is nicotine in these e-
cigarettes. So I think there is a lot of work to do there
because the wrong information has sort of set in, in terms of
the understandings.
Senator Smith. Right. I mean, it has been a long time since
I have been a teenager but I remember clearly that I wasn't
reading a lot of posters in the bathrooms. And I am not being
dismissive of--I mean I am trying not to be dismissive but I am
struggling to think about how we are going to combat this
epidemic, as Senator Hassan said, that is going to have
potentially lifelong challenges for these young people that are
15, 16, 17 and becoming addicted to this. And it is very
disheartening. I mean I can only assume that it is the White
House that is pulling back the September 11th rule because it
goes against the data that the FDA and the CDC has about the
safety of these products. So it is very concerning to me.
Senator Collins. Thank you.
Senator Murkowski, and I want to salute you and Senator
Durbin for introducing your legislation, which I was pleased to
co-sponsor.
Senator Murkowski. Well, thank you. It has been a year's
long now to deal with the flavors and so to be sitting here
today and to feel like we have made some headway in reducing
the availability of these flavors out on the market, but then
to have very conflicting signals now coming out from the FDA
and the White House on whether or not menthol and mint are
included in this, I think, is unfortunately an escape.
When we are dealing with children and access to a highly
addictive substance like nicotine for these underage
individuals, the fact that we are even talking about giving
that as a pass just I find mind-boggling and really very
upsetting. You know, we have had some discussion about okay, is
it that the kids really not appreciate that there is nicotine
in these e-cigarettes? I asked, what is the level of labeling
that is on e-cigs or on a vaping product? And I guess it is on
the outside of the label. But if you are if you are that middle
schooler and you are getting a refill in your cartridge or your
pod, there is no label there. And again, the frustration here
is you have kids who have seen advertised very clearly that
these products are a cessation product.
If it can be used to get me off nicotine, then surely it
can't be that bad for me even if there is nicotine in it. So
when we are talking about consistent messages to kids, I think
you got to be pretty upfront and pretty direct. This harms you.
This will addict you. This could ultimately kill you. I don't
think we need to nuance the message here and I am just
frustrated that we are still arguing over whether or not
menthol or mint as a flavor in a nicotine based product is an
attractant to kids or not an attractant.
If it makes it taste that much better, they are going to be
attracted to it. Let me ask a couple questions here because the
statistics that you provided us, Dr. Schuchat, 80 percent of
those that have been tested for the lung illnesses, 80 percent
of those had THC contained within, 70 percent had this vitamin
E. I guess I am a little concerned that if we get to this point
where the sense is that the investigation and the deaths, the
illnesses are linked to THC with the vitamin E additive, that
somehow or other then we say, okay, crisis over, we shouldn't
be putting THC in a vaping product, and certainly shouldn't be
putting vitamin E in a vaping product.
But beyond that, e-cigs and vaping products are not as bad
and they are not going to kill you. Are you worried, and I
guess this is directed to both of you, do you agree that even
if the findings of the investigation do not implicate solely
nicotine, that this should not be a distraction from the public
health epidemic that we are facing which is this drastic rise
in addiction to nicotine and e-cigarettes?
Dr. Schuchat. Agree. There are two very disturbing
epidemics going on. One is an outbreak of lung injury following
e-cigarette or vaping product use that is pointing to THC
containing cartridges in the vast majority. A second is this
incredible skyrocketing rates of youth e-cigarette use and we
know that the brain continues to develop until age 25 and
nicotine is harmful for the developing brain. And the risk of
these individuals being long-term addicted or going on to be
addicted to other substances is very high. Two very, very
disturbing emergencies.
Mr. Zeller. Senator, we completely agree. It is really two
separate issues. Kids should not be using any tobacco product,
inhaling any of this stuff into their lungs. Everything that
you are calling for in terms of the messaging directly to kids
is exactly what we are doing in our paid advertising, talking
directly to them about the presence of nicotine and that it can
be addictive, talking direct directly to them about the
presence of harmful compounds in the aerosol to try to break
through what we call that cost-free mentality. Completely
separate and apart from wherever the investigation takes us on
the lung illnesses.
Senator Murkowski. Just very quickly. Alaska is the one
state where we have not seen illness and death. And that is
good, no reported cases so far. In our state, retail marijuana
is commercialized, it is tested by our state laboratories. So
is the CDC providing any information to state regulatory
bodies, whether it is Alaska or other states that have
legalized on testing these products for these compounds that
are a concern and then are there any barriers preventing
Federal officials from working with our state marijuana labs on
this topic?
Dr. Schuchat. We are in close touch with the state health
departments and their laboratories and are holding frequent
calls and providing guidance. There are some challenges with
shipment of specimens because of the scheduling of drugs.
Senator Murkowski. Is that stopping any of the testing to
your knowledge?
Dr. Schuchat. I think it is just delaying it. I don't
believe it is stopping it at this point, and Mr. Zeller can
probably comment as well.
Mr. Zeller. What I can add to that is, it is up to the
states to send FDA the samples for testing. A number of states
have. And when we complete our analysis, we then go back to
each individual state with the results. So there really has
been no issue in getting the samples to us and at least having
us begin to do the chemistry work to be able to report back to
them on a state-by-state basis. So it is like first in, first
out. The first state that came to us is the first state that
will get the results.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Collins. Thank you.
Senator Rosen.
Senator Rosen. Thank you. And I want to thank you for
holding this timely hearing. I want to thank you for your
efforts on this behalf. You know in Nevada we have had for lung
related illnesses. Of course, greater than 2,000 cases across
the Nation and 39 deaths. We must do something before these
numbers continue to rise. But I want to build a little bit on
what Senator Smith was talking about and talk about secondhand
vaping.
When e-cigarettes first appeared on the market, it wasn't
uncommon, like Senator Smith said, to refer to it just as water
vapor in reference to the puffs released into the air when
exhaling. So according to a number of experts, including
researchers at Nevada's Desert Research Institute, when the
user of a vaping product exhales, they are actually releasing
nicotine and other particulate matter into the air. Of course
this can be especially harmful to children, particularly if
their parent or caregiver believes that there is no negative
impact from secondhand vaping smoke.
Can you please elaborate on what you know about secondhand
smoke in regards to vaping and what are your latest findings?
Dr. Schuchat. The e-cigarette aerosol has a lot of
different products or compounds in it. It can include heavy
metals from the devices, things like lead, organic compounds,
carcinogenic material, nicotine as you mentioned, and then what
we call ultrafine particles that can be found deep in the lung.
We are really at the beginning stage of understanding the
aerosol effect in terms of secondhand smoke and there is a lot
more that needs to be done.
Senator Rosen. Do you think we could extrapolate from what
we know from just regular cigarettes and the effects of second-
hand smoke?
Dr. Schuchat. There are aspects that can be extrapolated
and others that can't be. The combustible tobacco has a lot
more toxins and harmful substance in it. But I think what our
view is that e-cigarette aerosols may have fewer harmful
substances, but that doesn't mean they don't have harmful
substances.
Senator Rosen. Thank you.
Mr. Zeller. The only thing that I would add to that is that
this is a major area of investment in research by both agencies
to better understand both what is in the aerosol and then what
is being delivered to the bystanders. And as soon as we get the
answers to those questions, we will be in a better position to
figure out what the potential harms are, what to say to
consumers, and how to use that for regulatory policy purposes.
Senator Rosen. Well, building on that, speaking about
public health research, again researchers at Nevada's Desert
Research Institute and University of Nevada Reno, they released
information this summer about the aldehydes, right, such as
formaldehyde, how they are absorbed into the lungs during
vaping. These are chemicals widely known to cause cancer. So
given that it appears that users of e-cigarettes assume they
are inhaling some nicotine and flavored water, what is your
understanding of the potential health risks of the aldehydes?
Dr. Schuchat. In terms of the compounds, our principal
message is that e-cigarettes should not be used by youth, young
adults, or women who are pregnant, and the principal used
really was intended to be for adults who are trying to quit
smoking cigarettes. And that is where, the off-ramp
conversation happens. The idea that they are harmless is wrong.
The question about whether the aerosols and the various
compounds cause harm directly or second hand is very much open.
Mr. Zeller. I would add to that is that we have made
formaldehyde the centerpiece of some of our paid advertising
directly aimed at teens to make sure that they understand that
the aerosol can contain formaldehyde which has been shown to be
a cancer-causing agent.
Senator Rosen. I suppose in the interest of time, my last
question is, what in terms of funding for CDC or FDA, what do
we need to help you with in funding or authorization to further
expedite this research on vaping products, on the aldehydes, on
secondhand smoke, on all of it?
Mr. Zeller. I will go first. The administration's Fiscal
Year 2020 request contained a request for $100 million
additional for FDA for tobacco product regulation. And that is
because with the existing dollars that we have had, we have
either had to reallocate or reprioritized to do the right
thing, whether it is compliance and enforcement, research,
public education with the new and novel products like e-
cigarettes. So the administration believes that there is a role
for an increase in budget to expand our programmatic work in
those three critical areas.
Senator Rosen. Thank you.
Dr. Schuchat. There have been House and Senate bills that
talked about increasing CDC's tobacco budget by $40 million and
the public health data issues, the Data Saves Lives, by $100
million per year. Those investments could help both the e-
cigarette epidemic and help us with future threats like this
one where we could get out of the gate a little quicker and not
take so long to understand what is going on. Ideally to predict
a threat instead of react slowly.
Senator Rosen. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman [Presiding]. We have other Senators who would
like to ask questions in a second round. And, let's see,
Senator Cassidy, you may be next if you are ready, and then we
will go to Senator Kaine. Senator Cassidy is always ready. The
witnesses, you have been there for a long time as every--if you
need a break for any reason. I think we will probably go
another not more than half hour so it would be my----
Mr. Zeller. We are good.
The Chairman. Senator Cassidy.
Senator Cassidy. Thank you both for attempting to address
this issue. And I gather as--listening to Burr ask questions,
he seemed to suggest that there has been some delay in
determining what products might be responsible for this. But as
I was reading about vitamin E acetate, it has oil in it, and I
remember from medical school if you inhale oil, you do a lot of
damage to your lungs. And that was mineral oil you were
swallowing to clean out your bowels not a heated solution
dispersing broadly. Do we really need to do a lot of study to
tell people not to heat up oil and to inhale it into their
lungs?
Dr. Schuchat. We don't need to do a lot of studies for that
question but I think there are many questions that remain. We
don't know that there are other substances that are being
either----
Senator Cassidy. Are you imagining that it is non-oil-
based?
Dr. Schuchat. There may be non-oil based. There has been a
report of cobalt for instance from the device. So we think
there is potentially a variety of products but I agree with you
that vitamin E acetate, this oil in products that are being
heated and inhaled is bad news.
Senator Cassidy. Now, I think I remember reading although I
was walking, couldn't find the article, that the British have
really talented the vape to be, the electronic cigarette, to be
a risk mitigation. I think I see something from CDC or I think
from CDC of the risk mitigation aspect of this. Yes, you are
getting nicotine, but you are not getting all these carcinogens
that are associated with cigarette smoking.
Assume that there is two aspects to this consideration, or
at least two. First, the flavored cigarettes which induce young
people to smoke cigarettes, become addicted, and remain as
addicts for the rest of their life. Terrible, shouldn't happen.
The second is what is the risk benefit ratio of using something
which has potential for risk mitigation, reducing the risk of
somebody smoking carcinogenic cigarettes for something which is
less, balanced against the public health risk of people
misusing them and inhaling cobalt and oil and whatever else.
Would you all agree with that assessment?
Dr. Schuchat. Just, briefly. The UK situation is quite
different. They have a lower content of nicotine in the e-
cigarettes that are distributed there and they have a very
aggressive sort of graphic label type of approach to warn the
public. And they don't seem to have the youth epidemic that we
are experiencing.
Senator Cassidy. But that goes back to the youth epidemic
not to the fact that it is risk mitigation.
Dr. Schuchat. Right. They are really focusing the
distribution of this lower nicotine content, e-cigarette, on
adult cessation, but I think Mr. Zeller had more to say.
Mr. Zeller. I agree with you Senator. It is a balancing act
and Congress wrote that balancing act into the law with
mandatory considerations. As we are looking at products on an
application by application basis, we have to account for impact
on initiation. Any initiation by kids goes on the negative side
of the ledger. But to your point, what potential beneficial
role can any of these alternative technologies play and that
would go on the positive side of the ledger, but what we know
with e-cigarettes is that the benefit comes only if you
completely switch from cigarettes to e-cigarettes. The
overwhelming majority of adults who are using e-cigarettes
continue to smoke at least some conventional combustible
cigarettes.
Senator Cassidy. It doesn't make sense to me, I am just
asking I am not arguing, that you have to make a complete
transition because with cigarette smoking, I remember there is
the 20 pack per day--again, I am having to remember this from
school but one pack per day for 20 years however you get there.
A half a pack times 40 years, two packs times 10 years, one
pack times 20, but there is a threshold effect above which the
effects of cigarette smoking and your risk for cancer
escalates. So if we minimize that, it seems as if that would be
risk mitigation, even if someone continues a smoke two real
cigarettes a day.
Mr. Zeller. Well, I will defer to Dr. Schuchat and others
on what the science says about reduction. What we know from the
available epidemiological data is the overwhelming majority of
e-cigarette users continue to smoke cigarettes.
Senator Cassidy. I get that but that is not my point.
Mr. Zeller. I think that the science shows that whatever
the potential public health benefit would be, would be lessened
and reduced in the absence of----
Senator Cassidy. I accept that as well but not entirely
lost. Again, if there is a threshold effect above a certain
point, your risk from cigarette disease increases dramatically,
anything you do to substantially decrease that usage and
therefore keep it below that threshold is beneficial.
Mr. Zeller. I am unaware of the science that shows that we
know the answer on a cigarettes per day basis. It is clear that
duration of use, the length of time that you smoke, whatever
the number of cigarettes, is definitely related to your risk of
disease.
Senator Cassidy. I am out of time. I thank you both. I
yield back.
The Chairman. Senator Kaine.
Senator Kaine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Two items, data
modernization and then the research on smoking cessation just
to follow-up on the discussion that you're just having with
Senator Cassidy. Maybe first, Dr. Schuchat, if you would, what
is the current status of research and I know a number--much of
it is international--but what is the current status of research
on the smoking cessation effect of e-cigarette use among
adults?
Dr. Schuchat. Yes. The research so far is mixed. There have
been three randomized control trials with somewhat different
results. The most recent trial from the UK did find some
benefit from e-cigarette use in adult cessation. It was coupled
with behavioral counseling which we know is important and it
was an earlier generation e-cigarette product.
Senator Kaine. But it was a product that was compliant with
the UK's rules about nicotine. And nicotine threshold in the UK
is about a third of what the nicotine would be in the standard
Juul that is available commercially, correct?
Dr. Schuchat. Yes. That is right.
Senator Kaine. But that one shows some positive effect if
you couple it with behavioral therapy to try to reduce smoking.
What about other studies?
Dr. Schuchat. Well, the other studies didn't find the same
effect. And the important things I don't believe there have
been studies with the current generation of e-cigarette
products that have the nicotine salts, which allows you to--
overcomes the harshness and allows for a much higher dose
exposure. And we do think that higher dose exposure makes
addiction more likely.
Senator Kaine. Dr. Schuchat, I was out to vote. I don't--
did you talk about nicotine salts in the public testimony
already?
Dr. Schuchat. I don't believe so.
Senator Kaine. Nicotine salts are a technological advance
that Juul has put in place that takes the harshness of nicotine
and by altering its pH balance reduces the harshness. And that
together with flavoring is something that is an attractor to
people who are using the product. Isn't that correct?
Dr. Schuchat. Yes. That is right.
Senator Kaine. Mr. Zeller, do you have anything else on the
science of smoking cessation studies, the current state of
affairs?
Mr. Zeller. Two points. Important to emphasize that much of
what has been published is on earlier generation products so
this remains a moving target, but the official position of the
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force is that e-cigarettes are
not recognized as an effective cessation aid. And if there are
cigarette smokers who are concerned about their health and
interested in quitting, what they should be looking at is FDA
approved by the prescription or over-the-counter drugs coupled
with counseling of any kind, because if you couple the drug
with the counseling you can double your chances of success.
Senator Kaine. FDA has approved and number, six or seven if
I remember correctly, of smoking cessation technologies that
can be used----
Mr. Zeller. Yes, including products that don't even require
prescription. Nicotine gum, nicotine patches, nicotine lozenges
available in pharmacies.
Senator Kaine. Great. Thank you. Next issue, data
modernization. The Lowering Health Care Costs Act that the
Committee voted on a couple of months back included a piece of
legislation that I introduced with Senator Isakson and King to
modernize public health data infrastructure. The name of the
piece of legislation was the Saving Lives Through Better Data
Act and it included Section 405 of the Lowering Health Care
Costs Act along with some other items dealing with data. If you
could, and I just talked to Senator Isakson about this and he
wanted me to ask about this, why is better public health data
important to dealing with an epidemic like youth e-cigarette
use?
Dr. Schuchat. You can see how quickly the behaviors
changed. When a new market entered the distribution, this rapid
skyrocketing use of e-cigarettes. Public health has been very
lead-footed both with the epidemic of e-cigarette use and with
this lung injury. The public health departments are getting
faxes and CDs from hospitals of medical records having to enter
data multiple times. The systems between electronic medical
records and the public health are not interoperable yet.
The CDC is trying to integrate information from a variety
of different systems. We think we can get modernization of
public health that will give us more efficient use of people's
time, more effective recognition of problems, and ideally get a
public health workforce that can be predicting instead of
reacting to health threats.
Senator Kaine. Mr. Zeller, would you add anything to that?
Mr. Zeller. Yes. From a regulatory standpoint, we are only
as good as the available regulatory science. And one of our
great challenges if not frustrations is that the research isn't
rapid response enough. So in our grants, in our contracts, we
try to build in a rapid response mechanism as the products
continue to change. I will just say that it remains a work in
progress.
Senator Kaine. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, if I could, I would
like to introduce for the record a letter from the Council on
State and Territorial Epidemiologists focusing attention upon
the data improvement aspects of the Lowering Health Care Costs
Act and supporting those aspects of the bill.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Kaine. Senator Murray and
I hope the Lower Health Care Costs Act becomes law with your
provision in it. We are working to do that.
Senator Romney.
Senator Romney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
for holding this hearing, and thanks to our two witnesses for
being here and testifying today. As you know, this is an issue
that the entire Nation cares about. In particular in my State
of Utah, the rate of vaping illness is of particular concern
because it is six times the national average. And we have
already lost one of our citizens to this vaping related
illness. There are two obviously serious and somewhat related
issues, one is of course the people who are subject to these
terrible illnesses associated with vaping and the other is the
epidemic of addiction among our young people.
How did we get here? What did we get wrong? Because it is
hard for me to imagine that there is a logical setting where we
have what, over 5 million young people now addicted to
nicotine. At the same time we are doing everything we can to
stop smoking and we have been quite successful in reducing
smoking and yet massive increase in addiction. And somehow, we
don't do anything about it.
What did we do wrong? What should we do differently? Is it
your issue or is it our fault, by the way? I know it is
tempting for me to join in blaming you all for not doing
something to stop what happened. But should we have acted? Is
there something we should have done or need to do now so that
this doesn't continue to happen or happen in another way at
another time?
Mr. Zeller. I will start from the FDA and the regulatory
perspective and then ask Dr. Schuchat to add from the CDC
perspective. As I said in my oral remarks, we tried long before
the epidemic of kids use of e-cigarettes and long before the
outbreak of lung injuries to regulate e-cigarettes as
unapproved combination drug device products, and we were sued,
and we lost. And what the court said is in the absence of an e-
cigarette product basically making a drug claim, the only
authority that FDA had to regulate e-cigarettes, because the
nicotine in e-cigarettes is derived from tobacco, is under the
tobacco authorities, the Tobacco Control Act.
We went through a rulemaking process as the statute
requires and didn't begin to have regulatory authority over e-
cigarettes until the summer of 2016, just a little over three
years ago. So you could say that some of the things that had
already been set in motion that led to what we all agree today
is an epidemic level of kids use of e-cigarettes was occurring
at a time when we were calling the marketplace for e-cigarettes
before we got that regulatory authority, the Wild Wild West.
There was absolutely no regulation. Since we have had the
regulatory authority, we have worked very hard to use all the
tools that we have from compliance and enforcement tools to
massive investment in public education and research to get
answers to all the important questions that the Committee is
asking about just the basic product themselves and what is
going on with kids.
I would say it is a confluence of contributing factors,
industry behavior at a time when there was no Federal
regulation of these products, industry behavior that continued
after we got that authority and we have tried to use our
enforcement tools to go after the bad actors, and the mindset
of kids. They walk around thinking that these are harmless
products. A whole bunch of kids don't even know that nicotine
is present. So I would say that it is a confluence of industry
behavior and the mindset of kids and as regulators we are
trying to use all the tools that we have to respond and to
combat that.
Senator Romney. Thank you.
Dr. Schuchat. I agree but I would say there are three key
factors that led us to where we are, that led to this
skyrocketing of teenage use of e-cigarettes. The first is
advertising and it didn't show up the way we are used to on
Billboards or TV ads. It was social media, youth influencers,
under the radar for us adults that really influenced kids to
think it was cool to do this.
The second thing was flavors, candy, fruit, things that
were not at all in young people's minds associated with
cigarettes or nicotine. And then the third is nicotine, one of
the most addictive substances there is and with the newer
generation products, the nicotine salts, the harshness that
nicotine or tobacco products have was gone, and so the
addiction could really take hold. Not addressing those three
factors led us to where we are.
Senator Romney. Thank you. I would note that in the words
of the cartoon Pogo, we met the enemy and the enemy is us. And
I am referring in some respects to those of us on this side of
the room, which is we need to take action to provide authority
for you to be able to regulate effectively these products. And
at this stage as I understand, Senator Murkowski has put in
place legislation or proposed legislation over a year ago to
restrict flavors and yet we don't act. We talk about this
epidemic among young people and wonder why you all haven't done
something about flavors, but why haven't we done something
about flavors.
Senator Berkeley and I put together a piece of legislation
that does four things. One, it makes these flavors illegal.
Number two, it insists on close tanks, a closed system as
opposed to one that people can add THC and other products to.
Three, it puts a lot more money into advertising on social
media and other media sources to go to kids.
Finally, it pays for that advertising by putting an excise
tax on nicotine just like the excise taxes on nicotine in
cigarettes. If that legislation were to pass, my presumption is
we would have a dramatic impact on reducing the number of kids
that get addicted to nicotine. Do you agree? And a one-word
answer is all you have got time for.
Mr. Zeller. All I can say from the FDA perspective is we
would be happy to work with you on that. I think that there is
evidence based for the positive public health impact of the
elements that you are describing there. We would be happy to
work with you.
Dr. Schuchat. Yes, I agree. And just to say that we think
that tobacco control needs to be comprehensive, that Federal,
state, and local efforts are needed, and that there is a
history here of whack a mole that when we take care of a set of
issues other issues emerge. So investment in monitoring that is
modern so we can be on top of new threats that emerge.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Romney.
Senator Baldwin.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
allowing a second round of questions. I had intended to ask
about any expertise that had been developed relating to helping
young people quit smoking, quit vaping, cease using nicotine.
That has already been asked so I want to kind of explore a
little bit further. If we are using adults perhaps as our best
way of guessing, what these folks under 18 will experience,
what percentage of the 5 million youths who are vaping nicotine
products will become addicted to nicotine?
Dr. Schuchat. I don't actually know that statistic. I don't
know if you do?
Mr. Zeller. We don't know that but there is an alarming
trend that could be putting kids on the pathway to addiction
from the annual National Youth Tobacco Survey results, and that
is of the current e-cigarette users who are middle school or
high school students, how many of them are so-called frequent
users?
Frequent uses defined as, did you use on 20 or more of the
past 30 days? And unfortunately, the percentage of current e-
cigarette users in middle school and high school who are
frequent users is rising. It is now a total of 1.6 million
middle and high school kids in the 2019 NYTS data are frequent
users, and almost 1 million of those 1.6 million used e-
cigarettes every single one of those days.
Senator Baldwin. Okay, again using adults as our best
source of information, our experience with adults, an adult who
is trying to stop using nicotine, what information do we have
about how often or how many times they try before they actually
successfully cease using?
Mr. Zeller. I will also from the FDA perspective because
our center for drugs actually puts those products on the market
as smoking cessation aids, but on the tobacco side, we also
have had a paid media campaign called Every Try Counts where we
are putting positive quit messages into gas stations and
convenience stores because 96 percent of all the cigarettes
that are sold in the United States are sold in gas stations and
convenience stores. And what we are trying to do is to get the
health concerned smoker who made a quit attempt in the past 12
months but was unsuccessful to try again.
Typically a smoker has to try, 10 or more times before they
will ultimately succeed. And the real world Effectiveness rate
of the FDA approved over-the-counter products, at least the
nicotine gum, nicotine patches, nicotine lozenge, the real
world effectiveness rate of these products is low. It is in the
single digits.
We need to get more smokers to be serious about making the
quit attempt and we need to get the word out to them that it is
often a matter of trying and trying again, and as Dr. Schuchat
said earlier, then combining whatever drug you use, FDA
approved drug that you use, with counseling of any kind,
online, in person, group counseling because that can more than
double your chances of succeeding.
Senator Baldwin. It sounds like those should be the posters
that are up in the middle school and high school bathrooms.
Mr. Zeller. We need to know what will work with kids and
that is what we are trying to get to the bottom of.
Senator Baldwin. But we don't have a lot of time, right? We
can't do a peer-reviewed study that takes, however long. We
need to offer services to these children now. So support groups
can be in school and that sort of thing.
Mr. Zeller. We are. So there are online--so putting aside
whether there is FDA-approved medications, there are a number
of Government and online resources. And so through our youth
prevention efforts, we have more than doubled the number of
inquiries to an NCI website where kids can go for help in
getting more information about quitting. But we still need to
do more work on what are the products that we know will
actually help them quit.
Senator Baldwin. I am going to submit some additional
questions for the record because the answers just beg other
questions, but one that I will submit for the record, Dr.
Schuchat, is you said in your testimony that the ongoing
investigation into the lung injury presents a number of
challenges to both public health agencies and health care
providers, and I would be interested in getting more detailed
information about what the CDC is sharing with state health
departments and providers on best practices for identifying and
treating the illness.
Dr. Schuchat. I would be happy to submit that.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Baldwin.
Senator Murray.
Senator Murray. Thank you. Mr. Zeller, I want to go back to
you because I really am deeply troubled by the FDA's failure to
complete key actions to protect the public health. We talked
about the delay of the premarket review requirements for e-
cigarettes and the flavor policy but the Agency has dragged its
feet on many other policies, graphic warning labels that
Senator Enzi offered in the Tobacco Control Act, taking actual
action on menthol cigarettes, implementing track and trace, a
mandate that would actually deter illicit trade and bolster
enforcement of key requirements.
When this Committee worked to pass the law more than a
decade ago it ensured the FDA had full authority to
fundamentally remake the tobacco market. Can you tell us why
these and other important provisions from the Tobacco Control
Act have been so significantly delayed or not even started?
Mr. Zeller. I think that a number of the items that you
listed are things that we have been working on and that we
share your concern about how much of a priority that they are.
We have a completely stood up center with active, programmatic
efforts in the major and most important programmatic areas,
compliance and enforcement, public education, product review,
regulatory science research, and then all the operations and
management that goes with all of that. And we are ready for the
applications for these products to come in. I think that the
examples that you gave are important examples and happy to work
with you and your staff to give you status reports on where
each of those stand.
Senator Murray. I appreciate that. But I just have to say,
Mr. Chairman, first of all, thank you for having this hearing
and thank you to both of you for coming and testifying but it
just seems to me we need swift, bold, quick action on
addressing these issues. So I am going to keep pressing the
Trump administration which you have told us we have to talk to,
including through the Acting FDA Commissioner and our new
nominee should he be confirmed as well.
We need to stop these delays and we need to deliver strong
steps that have already been promised and I think that is
critically important for this Committee to go really forcefully
on. And I of course will continue to work with our colleagues
on both sides of the aisle to do what we can to address this
really critical crisis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Murray and I would
emphasize to the witnesses and to the public, this is another
one of our bipartisan hearings and I think you can see in the
questions and attendance today the amount of interest in it.
Let me follow-up with what Senator Romney and Senator Murray--
Senator Romney asked, what authority do you needed that you
didn't have? Senator Murray talked about authority.
Ms. Schuchat talked about three studies, I believe, the
most promising of which in Great Britain showed was due to a
lower level of nicotine in the e-cigarette. Do you agree, Mr.
Zeller, that study suggested that a lower level of nicotine in
the e-cigarette would be more effective in helping people to
stop smoking?
Mr. Zeller. I am not familiar with that study and I can't
make that finding that a lower level of nicotine in the e-
cigarettes in the UK, given all the other factors that are
present there, is a direct contributing factor to what is going
on.
The Chairman. Ms. Schuchat, did I characterize that
correctly?
Dr. Schuchat. Yes. Let me clarify. It was a randomized
control trial comparing 20 milligrams per milliliter e-
cigarette with control. And so it wasn't showing that a lower
was better than a higher, the products they were using were not
as high nicotine content as the products that are in the market
in the U.S.
The Chairman. Well, in terms of authority, let me ask you,
Mr. Zeller, do does the FDA have the authority to require lower
nicotine levels in e-cigarettes?
Mr. Zeller. Armed with the science to support it, yes.
The Chairman. Yes. Does the FDA have the authority to
require the kind of closed cartridge or tamper-proof cartridge
that Senator Romney talked about in his legislation?
Mr. Zeller. Yes. If the evidence was there to support it,
we could use something called the product standard authority to
put those kinds of provisions in place in the marketplace.
The Chairman. Does the FDA have the authority to require a
warning label to be on the device itself?
Mr. Zeller. We already have done that. There is a mandatory
nicotine addiction warning on all these products.
The Chairman. Well, let's see. On this, you can put a
warning label on this?
Mr. Zeller. It would be on the package that product was
sold in.
The Chairman. Well, that is not what we are talking about.
Have you got the authority to put a warning label on this
itself?
Mr. Zeller. That, I will need to get back to you for the
record for something that would be inside the package. But
there is a mandatory nicotine addiction warning on the labeling
and the packaging for that product.
The Chairman. The problem you run into was the First
Amendment problem with your graphic?
Mr. Zeller. That is correct.
The Chairman. Graphic, which is different in the UK. They
don't have a First Amendment if I remember, right?
Mr. Zeller. Correct.
The Chairman. Or much of one. Do you have the authority to
regulate the size of these devices?
Mr. Zeller. What do you mean by size?
The Chairman. Well, some of them are this big, some of them
are small, some--we have got a chart here with a bunch of them
on----
Mr. Zeller. That, I will need to consult with the Agency
and get back to you on. It is possible that could be something
under our products end authority, but I don't know and I don't
want to misspeak so I will get back to you.
The Chairman. Do you have the authority to regulate or ban
certain flavors in e-cigarettes?
Mr. Zeller. Yes, we do.
The Chairman. Do you have the authority to spend more of
the user fees that you get from the tobacco industry on finding
more effective ways to encourage young people not to use e-
cigarettes?
Mr. Zeller. We have done that. We have reallocated a
sizable portion----
The Chairman. But you don't need us to pass a law for you
to do that, right?
Mr. Zeller. No. But my point is that we have already done
that on the public education side.
The Chairman. I know you--but apparently it doesn't work
because we have got 1 out of 4 high school students vaping.
Mr. Zeller. I tried to make it clear that we have more work
to do. But if the question is do, we know have----
The Chairman. But what I am trying to make it clear is, do
you have the authority within that more than $5 billion you
have collected over the last 10 years to spend more of it on
more effective ways to deal with young people?
Mr. Zeller. Yes, we do.
The Chairman. If I go through that level, while you want to
get back to me on a couple of them, you appear to have the
authority to lower nicotine level requirements to deal with
close--to require closed tamper-proof cartridges. You may have
the authority to put a label directly on a device or to
regulate the size. You do have the authority to regulate
flavors and you could spend more than you are currently
spending, although you would have to spend less on something
else, on focusing on more effective ways for young people. So
there is a lot you could do and you could move the proposed
regulations into final status more quickly, correct?
Mr. Zeller. Yes. Yes, sir, and two points. First,
finalizing those proposed rules is a huge priority. Second, how
to use the broad authority that we have to address many of the
product characteristics that you asked about is something that
we are actively considering internally. And that is how to use
the product standard authority which requires going through a
rulemaking process to address various issues related to these.
The Chairman. Well, I think you heard today some
differences of opinion about attitudes toward tobacco, some,
not much but some. I don't think you heard any about the
importance of two things, one is getting to the bottom of this
mysterious illness that you and the CDC are working on as
quickly as we can. And two, dealing with the epidemic of young
Americans, high school students who are vaping.
We hope that the legislation that Senator Kaine and Senator
McConnell, Senator Murray and I and others have, as part of our
Lowering Health Care Costs Act, which passes Committee 20 to 3,
will become law and move the age for the purchase of tobacco
products up to 21. That should help. But in the meantime, it
looks to me like you have a lot of authority to do more about
e-cigarettes, especially for young people and that there is
plenty of support on this Committee for you to do that.
I want to thank both of you for coming today and for your
professionalism. And there are a few follow-up questions as
Senators had, particularly about the amount of spending that
FDA does for young--on trying to persuade young people not to
use vaping. The hearing record will remain open for 10 days.
Members may submit additional information for the record within
that time if they would like.
The Chairman. We will meet again on Wednesday in this
Committee, on November 20th, for hearing on the nomination of
Dr. Stephen Hahn to serve as Commissioner of Food and Drugs. My
guess is this subject will come up then again. Thank you for
being here today.
The Committee will stand adjourned.
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL
E-Cigarette Use Among Youth in the United States, 2019
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[Whereupon, at 12:22 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[all]