- EXAMINING SOCIAL MEDIA COMPANIES' EFFORTS TO COUNTER ON-LINE TERROR CONTENT AND MISINFORMATION
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
EXAMINING SOCIAL MEDIA COMPANIES' EFFORTS TO COUNTER ON-LINE TERROR
CONTENT AND MISINFORMATION
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
JUNE 26, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-30
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
___________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-783 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
__________
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Rogers, Alabama
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Peter T. King, New York
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
John Katko, New York
Kathleen M. Rice, New York
John Ratcliffe, Texas
J. Luis Correa, California
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Xochitl Torres Small, New Mexico
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Max Rose, New York
Debbie Lesko, Arizona
Lauren Underwood, Illinois
Mark Green, Tennessee
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan
Van Taylor, Texas
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri
John Joyce, Pennsylvania
Al Green, Texas
Dan Crenshaw, Texas
Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Michael Guest, Mississippi
Dina Titus, Nevada
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California
Val Butler Demings, Florida
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Chris Vieson, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Statements
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
1
Prepared Statement.............................................
2
The Honorable Mike Rogers, a Representative in Congress From the
State of North Carolina, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
3
Prepared Statement.............................................
4
Witnesses
Ms. Monika Bickert, Head of Global Policy Management, Facebook:
Oral Statement.................................................
5
Prepared Statement.............................................
7
Mr. Nick Pickles, Global Senior Strategist for Public Policy,
Twitter:
Oral Statement.................................................
11
Prepared Statement.............................................
12
Mr. Derek Slater, Global Director of Information Policy, Google:
Oral Statement.................................................
17
Prepared Statement.............................................
19
Ms. Nadine Strossen, John Marshall Harlan II, Professor of Law,
New York Law School:
Oral Statement.................................................
22
Prepared Statement.............................................
23
For the Record
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Letter, October 30, 2017.......................................
74
Letter, February 22, 2018......................................
76
Letter, December 18, 2018......................................
78
Statement of the ADL (Anti-Defamation League)..................
80
Appendix
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Monika Bickert....
91
Questions From Honorable Lauren Underwood for Monika Bickert.....
95
Questions From Ranking Member Mike Rogers for Monika Bickert.....
96
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Nick Pickles......
98
Questions From Ranking Member Mike Rogers for Nick Pickles.......
101
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Derek Slater......
104
Questions From Honorable Lauren Underwood for Derek Slater.......
104
Questions From Ranking Member Mike Rogers for Derek Slater.......
104
Question From Ranking Member Mike Rogers for Nadine Strossen.....
105
EXAMINING SOCIAL MEDIA COMPANIES' EFFORTS TO COUNTER ON-LINE TERROR
CONTENT AND MISINFORMATION
----------
Wednesday, June 26, 2019
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in room
310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Bennie G. Thompson
(Chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Thompson, Jackson Lee, Langevin,
Correa, Torres Small, Rose, Underwood, Slotkin, Cleaver, Green
of Texas, Clarke, Titus, Watson Coleman, Barragan, Demings,
Rogers, King, Katko, Walker, Higgins, Lesko, Green of
Tennessee, Taylor, Joyce, Crenshaw, and Guest.
Chairman Thompson. The Committee on Homeland Security will
come to order.
The committee is meeting today to receive testimony on
``Examining Social Media Companies' Efforts to Counter On-line
Terror Content and Misinformation.''
In March, a white supremacist terrorist killed 51 people
and wounded 49 more at two mosques in Christchurch, New
Zealand. Our thoughts and prayers continue to be with the
victims and their families.
The motive behind the attack is not in question. The
terrorist had written an extensive manifesto outlining his
white supremacist, white nationalist, anti-immigrant, anti-
Muslim, and fascist beliefs. His act was horrifying beyond
words, and it shook the conscience.
Shockingly, the terrorist was able to live-stream the
attack on Facebook, where the video and its gruesome content
went undetected initially. Instead, law enforcement officials
in New Zealand had to contact the company and ask that it be
removed.
When New Zealand authorities called on all social media
companies to remove these videos immediately, they were unable
to comply. Human moderators could not keep up with the volume
of videos being reposted, and their automated systems were
unable to recognize minor changes in the video. So the video
spread on-line and spread around the world.
The fact that this happened nearly 2 years after Facebook,
Twitter, Google, Microsoft, and other major tech companies
established the Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism,
pronounced ``GIF-C-T,'' is troubling to say the least. The
GIFCT was created for tech companies to share technology and
best practices to combat the spread of on-line terrorist
content.
Back in July 2017, representatives of the GIFCT briefed
this committee on this new initiative. At the time, I was
optimistic about its intentions and goals and acknowledged that
its members demonstrated initiative and willingness to engage
on this issue while others have not. But after a white
supremacist terrorist was able to exploit social media
platforms in this way, we all have reason to doubt the
effectiveness of the GIFCT and the companies' efforts more
broadly.
On March 27 of this year, representatives of GIFCT briefed
this committee after the Christchurch massacre. Since then,
myself and other Members of this committee have asked important
questions about the organization and your companies and have
yet to receive satisfactory answers.
Today, I hope to get answers regarding your actual efforts
to keep terrorist content off your platforms. I want to know
how you will prevent content like the New Zealand attack video
from spreading on your platforms again.
This committee will continue to engage social media
companies about the challenges they face in addressing terror
content on their platforms. In addition to terror content, I
want to hear from our panel about how they are working to keep
hate speech and harmful misinformation off their platforms.
I want to be very clear: Democrats respect the free-speech
rights enshrined in the First Amendment. But much of the
content I am referring to is either not protected speech or
violates the social media companies' own terms of service.
We have seen time and time again that social media
platforms are vulnerable to being exploited by bad actors,
including those working at the behest of foreign governments,
who seek to sow discord by spreading misinformation. This
problem will only become more acute as we approach the 2020
elections. We want to understand how companies can strengthen
their efforts to deal with this persistent problem.
At a fundamental level, today's hearing is about
transparency. We want to get an understanding of whether and to
what extent social media companies are incorporating questions
of National security, public safety, and integrity of our
domestic institutions into their business models. I look
forward to having that conversation with the witnesses here
today and to our on-going dialog on behalf of the American
people.
I thank the witnesses for joining us and the Members for
their participation.
With that, I now recognize the Ranking Member of the full
committee, the gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Rogers, for 5
minutes for the purpose of an opening statement.
[The statement of Chairman Thompson follows:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
June 26, 2019
In March, a white supremacist terrorist killed 51 people and
wounded 49 more at 2 mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand. Our thoughts
and prayers continue to be with the victims and their families. The
motive behind the attack is not in question--the terrorist had written
an extensive manifesto outlining his white supremacist, white
nationalist, anti-immigrant, anti-Muslim, and fascist beliefs. His act
was horrifying beyond words, and it shook the conscience. Shockingly,
the terrorist was able to live-stream the attack on Facebook, where the
video and its gruesome content went undetected initially. Instead, law
enforcement officials in New Zealand had to contact the company and ask
that it be removed. When New Zealand authorities called on all social
media companies to remove these videos immediately, they were unable to
comply. Human moderators could not keep up with the volume of videos
being reposted, and their automated systems were unable to recognize
minor changes to the video. So, the video spread on-line spread around
the world.
The fact that this happened nearly 2 years after Facebook, Twitter,
Google, Microsoft, and other major tech companies established the
Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism, or GIFCT, is troubling to
say the least. The GIFCT was created for tech companies to share
technology and best practices to combat the spread of on-line terrorist
content. Back in July 2017, representatives from GIFCT briefed this
committee on this new initiative. At the time, I was optimistic about
its intentions and goals, and acknowledged that its members
demonstrated initiative and willingness to engage on this issue while
others have not. But after a white supremacist terrorist was able to
exploit social media platforms in this way, we all have reason to doubt
the effectiveness of the GIFCT and the companies' efforts more broadly.
On March 27 of this year, representatives of GIFCT briefed this
committee after the Christchurch massacre. Since then, myself and other
Members of this committee have asked important questions about the
organization and your companies, and we have yet to receive
satisfactory answers.
Today, I hope to get answers regarding your actual efforts to keep
terrorist content off your platforms. I want to know how you will
prevent content like the New Zealand attack video from spreading on
your platforms again. This committee will continue to engage social
media companies about the challenges they face in addressing terror
content on their platforms. In addition to terror content, I want to
hear from our panel about how they are working to keep hate speech and
harmful misinformation off their platforms. I want to be very clear--
Democrats respect the free speech rights enshrined in the First
Amendment, but much of the content I am referring to is either not
protected speech or violates the social media companies' own terms of
service.
We have seen time and time again that social media platforms are
vulnerable to being exploited by bad actors, including those working at
the behest of foreign governments, who seek to sow discord by spreading
misinformation. This problem will only become more acute as we approach
the 2020 elections. We want to understand how companies can strengthen
their efforts to deal with this persistent problem. At a fundamental
level, today's hearing is about transparency. We want to get an
understanding of whether--and to what extent--social media companies
are incorporating questions of National security, public safety, and
the integrity of our democratic institutions into their business
models.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Concerns about violent and terror-related on-line content
has existed since the creation of the internet. This issue has
peaked over the last decade, with the growing sophistication in
which foreign terrorists and their global supporters have
exploited the openness of on-line platforms to radicalize,
mobilize, and promote their violent messages. These tactics
prove successful, so much so that we are seeing domestic
extremists mimic many of the same techniques to gather
followers and spread hateful, violent propaganda.
Public pressure has grown steadily on the social media
companies to modify their terms of service to limit posts
linked to terrorism, violence, criminal activity, and, most
recently, the hateful rhetoric of misinformation. The large and
mainstream companies have responded to this pressure in a
number of ways, including the creation of the Global Internet
Forum to Counter Terrorism, or GIFCT. They are also updating
their terms of service and hiring more human content
moderators.
Today's hearing is also an important opportunity to examine
the Constitutional limits placed on the Government to regulate
or restrict free speech. Advocating violent acts and recruiting
terrorists on-line is illegal, but expressing one's political
views, however repugnant they may be, is protected under the
First Amendment.
I was deeply concerned to hear the recent news reports
about Google's policy regarding President Trump and
conservative news media. Google's head of responsible
innovation, Jen Gennai, recently said, ``We all got screwed
over in 2016. The people got screwed over, the news media got
screwed over, everybody got screwed over. So we've rapidly been
like, what happened there? How do we prevent this from
happening again?''.
Then, Ms. Gennai again on video remarked, ``Elizabeth
Warren is saying that we should break up Google. That will not
make it better. It will make it worse, because all these
smaller companies that don't have the same resources that we do
will be charged with preventing the next Trump situation.''
Now, Ms. Gennai is entitled to her opinion, but we are in
trouble if her opinions are Google's policy.
That same report details alarming claims about Google's
deliberate attempt to alter search results to reflect the
reality Google wants to promote rather than objective facts.
This report and others like it are a stark reminder of why the
Founders created the First Amendment.
In fact, the video I just quoted from has been removed from
YouTube. That platform is owned by Google, who is joining us
here today. I have serious questions about Google's ability to
be fair and balanced when it appears they have colluded with
YouTube to silence negative press coverage.
Regulating speech quickly becomes a subjective exercise for
Government or the private sector. Noble intentions often give
way to bias and political agendas. The solution to this problem
is complex. It will involve enhanced cooperation between the
Government, industry, individuals, while protecting the
Constitutional rights of all Americans.
I appreciate our witnesses' participation here today. I
hope that today's hearing can be helpful in providing greater
transparency and understanding of this complex challenge.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement of Ranking Member Rogers follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Mike Rogers
June 26, 2019
Concerns about violent and terror-related on-line content have
existed since the creation of the internet. The issue has peaked over
the past decade with the growing sophistication in which foreign
terrorists and their global supporters have exploited the openness of
on-line platforms to radicalize, mobilize, and promote their violent
messages.
These tactics proved successful--so much so that we are seeing
domestic extremists mimic many of the same techniques to gather
followers and spread hateful and violent propaganda.
Public pressure has grown steadily on the social media companies to
modify their terms of service to limit posts linked to terrorism,
violence, criminal activity, and, most recently, to hateful rhetoric
and misinformation.
The large, mainstream companies have responded to this pressure in
a number of ways, including the creation of the Global Internet Forum
to Counter Terrorism, or GIFCT. They are also updating their terms of
service and hiring more human content moderators.
Today's hearing is also an important opportunity to examine the
Constitutional limits placed on the Government to regulate or restrict
free speech.
Advocating violent acts and recruiting terrorists on-line is
illegal. But expressing one's political views, however repugnant they
may be, is protected under the First Amendment.
I was deeply concerned to hear news reports about Google's policies
regarding President Trump and conservative news media.
Google's ``Head of Responsible Innovation'' Jen Gennai said
recently, ``Well all got screwed over in 2016 . . . the people got
screwed over, the news media got screwed over . . . everybody got
screwed over so we've rapidly been like what happened there and how do
we prevent it from happening again?''
Ms. Gennai then remarked: ``Elizabeth Warren is saying that we
should break up Google . . . That will not make it better it will make
it worse because all these smaller companies that don't have the same
resources that we do will be charged with preventing the next Trump
situation.''
Ms. Gennai is entitled to her opinion but we are in trouble if her
opinions are Google's policy.
That same report details alarming claims about Google's deliberate
attempt to alter search results to reflect the reality Google wants to
promote rather than objective facts.
This report, and others like it, are a stark reminder of why the
Founders created the First Amendment.
In fact, the video that I just quoted from has been removed from
YouTube. That platform is owned by Google who is joining us here today.
I have serious questions about Google's ability to be fair and
balanced when it appears to have colluded with YouTube to silence this
negative press coverage.
Regulating speech quickly becomes a subjective exercise for
Government or the private sector.
Noble intentions often give way to bias and political agendas.
The solution to this problem is complex. It will involve enhanced
cooperation between Government, industry, and individuals, while
protecting the Constitutional rights of all Americans.
I appreciate our witness' participation here today. I hope that
today's hearing can be helpful in providing greater transparency and
understanding of this complex challenge.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that, under the
committee rules, opening statements may be submitted for the
record.
I welcome our panel of witnesses.
Our first witness, Ms. Monika Bickert, is the vice
president of global policy management at Facebook. Next, we are
joined by Mr. Nick Pickles, who currently serves as the global
senior strategist for public policy at Twitter. Our third
witness is Mr. Derek Slater, the global director of information
policy at Google. Finally, we welcome Ms. Nadine Strossen, who
serves as the John Marshall Harlan II professor of law at New
York Law School.
Without objection, the witnesses' full statements will be
inserted in the record.
I now ask each witness to summarize his or her statement
for 5 minutes, beginning with Ms. Bickert.
STATEMENT OF MONIKA BICKERT, HEAD OF GLOBAL POLICY MANAGEMENT,
FACEBOOK
Ms. Bickert. Thank you, Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member
Rogers, and Members of the committee, and thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today.
I am Monika Bickert, Facebook's vice president for global
policy management, and I am in charge of our product policy and
counterterrorism efforts. Before I joined Facebook, I
prosecuted Federal crimes for 11 years at the Department of
Justice.
On behalf of our company, I want to thank you for your
leadership combating extremism, terrorism, and other threats to
our homeland and National security.
I would also like to start by saying that all of us at
Facebook stand with the victims, their families, and everyone
affected by the recent terror attacks, including the horrific
violence in Sri Lanka and New Zealand. In the aftermath of
these acts, it is even more important to stand together against
hate and violence. We make this a priority in everything that
we do at Facebook.
On terrorist content, our view is simple: There is
absolutely no place on Facebook for terrorists. They are not
allowed to use our services under any circumstances. We remove
their accounts as soon as we find them. We also remove any
content that praises or supports terrorists or their actions.
If we find evidence of imminent harm, we promptly inform
authorities.
There are three primary ways that we are implementing this
approach: First, with our products that help stop terrorists
and their propaganda at the gates; second, through our people,
who help us review terrorist content and implement our
policies; and, third, through our partnerships outside the
company, which help us stay ahead of the threat.
So, first, our products. Facebook has invested
significantly in technology to help identify terrorist content,
including through the use of artificial intelligence but also
using other automation and technology. For instance, we can now
identify violating textual posts in 19 different languages.
With the help of these improvements, we have taken action
on more than 25 million pieces of terrorist content since the
beginning of 2018. Of the content that we have removed from
Facebook for violating our terrorism policies, more than 99
percent of that is content that we found ourselves, using our
own technical tools, before anybody has reported it to us.
Second are people. We now have more than 30,000 people who
are working on safety and security across Facebook across the
world, and that is 3 times as many people as we had dedicated
to those efforts in 2017.
We also have more than 300 highly-trained professionals
exclusively or primarily focused on combating terrorist use of
our services. Our team includes counterterrorism experts,
former prosecutors like myself, former law enforcement
officials, former intelligence officials. Together, they speak
more than 50 languages, and they are able to provide 24-hour
coverage.
Finally, our partnerships. In addition to working with
third-party intelligence providers to more quickly identify
terrorist material on the internet, we also regularly work with
academics who are studying terrorism and the latest trends and
Government officials.
Following the tragic attacks in New Zealand, Facebook was
proud to be a signatory to the Christchurch Call to Action,
which is a 9-point plan for the industry to better combat
terrorist attempts to use our services.
We also partner across industry. As Mr. Chairman and the
Ranking Member mentioned, in 2017 we launched the Global
Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism, or GIFCT, with YouTube,
Microsoft, and Twitter. GIFCT, the point of that is we bring
companies together from across industry to share information
and also to share technology and research to better combat
these threats.
Through GIFCT, we have expanded an industry database for
companies to share what we call hashes, which are basically
digital fingerprints of terrorist content, so that we can all
remove it more quickly and help smaller companies do that too.
We have also trained over 110 companies from around the globe
in best practices for countering terrorist use of the internet.
Now, Facebook took over as the chair of GIFCT in 2019, and,
along with our fellow members, we have this year worked to
expand our capabilities, including making new audio and text
hashing techniques available to other member companies,
especially these smaller companies, and we have also improved
our crisis protocols.
In the wake of the horrific Christchurch attacks, we
communicated in real-time across our companies and were able to
stop hundreds of versions of the video of the attack despite
the fact that bad actors were actively trying to edit the video
to upload it to circumvent our systems.
We know there are adversaries who are always evolving their
tactics, and we have to improve if we want to stay ahead.
Though we will never be perfect, we have made real progress,
and we are committed to tirelessly combating extremism on our
platform.
I appreciate the opportunity to be here today, and I look
forward to answering your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bickert follows:]
Prepared Statement of Monika Bickert
June 26, 2019
i. introduction
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Rogers, and distinguished Members
of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today. My name is Monika Bickert, and I am the vice president of global
policy management at Facebook. In that role, I lead our efforts related
to Product Policy and Counterterrorism. Prior to assuming my current
role, I served as lead security counsel for Facebook, working on issues
ranging from children's safety to cybersecurity. And before that, I was
a criminal prosecutor with the Department of Justice for 11 years in
Chicago and Washington, DC, where I prosecuted Federal crimes including
public corruption and gang violence. On behalf of Facebook, I want to
thank you for your leadership in combating extremism, terrorism, and
other threats to our National security.
I want to start by saying that all of us at Facebook stand with the
victims, their families, and everyone affected by recent terrorist
attacks, including the horrific violence in Sri Lanka and New Zealand.
In the aftermath of such heinous acts, it is more important than ever
to stand against hate and violence. We will continue to make that a
priority in everything we do at Facebook. Facebook's mission is to give
people the power to build community and bring the world closer
together. We are proud that more than 2 billion people around the world
come to Facebook every month to share with friends and family, to learn
about new products and services, to volunteer or donate to
organizations they care about, or to help in a crisis. But people need
to feel safe in order to build this community. And that is why we are
committed to fighting any efforts by terrorist groups to use Facebook.
That is also why Facebook has rules against inciting violence,
bullying, harassing, and threatening others. Our goal is to ensure that
Facebook is a place where both expression and personal safety are
protected and respected.
ii. facebook's efforts to combat terrorism
On terrorist content, our view is simple: There is absolutely no
place on Facebook for terrorism. Our long-standing Dangerous
Individuals and Organizations policy bans any organization or
individual that proclaims a violent mission or has engaged in acts of
violence, including terrorist activity and organized hate. Regardless
of whether or not these individuals or groups post content that would
violate our policies, we remove their accounts as soon as we find them.
They simply are not allowed to use our services under any
circumstances. Furthermore, we remove any content that praises or
supports terrorists or their actions whenever we become aware of it,
and when we uncover evidence of imminent harm, we promptly inform
authorities.
We recognize the challenges associated with fighting on-line
extremism, and we are committed to being part of the solution. We are
working to address these threats in three ways: Through products that
help us stop terrorists at the gate, people who help us implement our
policies, and partnerships outside the company which can help us stay
ahead of the threat.
A. Products
One of the challenges we face is identifying the small fraction of
terrorist content--less than 0.03 percent--posted to a platform used by
more than 2 billion people every month. Facebook has invested
significantly in technology to help meet this challenge and to identify
proactively terrorist content, including through the use of artificial
intelligence (AI) and other automation. These technologies have become
increasingly central to keeping hateful or violent content off of
Facebook.
Importantly, we do not wait for ISIS or al-Qaeda to upload content
to Facebook before placing it into our internal detection systems.
Instead, we proactively go after it. We contract with groups like SITE
Intelligence and the University of Alabama at Birmingham to find
propaganda released by these groups before it ever hits our site. We
put this content, and other content we are able to identify from
elsewhere on the internet, into our matching systems. And once we are
aware of a piece of terrorist content, we remove it. We know that
terrorists adapt as technology evolves, and that is why we constantly
update our technical solutions. We use these solutions, as well as
human expertise, so we can stay ahead of terrorist activity on our
platform. We have provided information on our enforcement techniques in
the past, and I would like to describe in broad terms some new tactics
and methods that are proving effective.
1. Machine Learning Tools
We use machine learning to assess Facebook posts that may signal
support for ISIS or al-Qaeda. Our machine learning tools produce a
score indicating the likelihood that the post violates our
counterterrorism policies, which, in turn, helps our team of reviewers
prioritize reviewing posts with the highest scores. The system ensures
that our reviewers are able to focus on the most important content
first. And when the tool is sufficiently confident that a post contains
support for terrorism, we automatically and immediately remove that
post. We have seen real gains as a result of our efforts; for example,
prioritization powered by our new machine learning tools has been
critical to reducing significantly the amount of time terrorist content
reported by our users stays on the platform.
2. Changes To Facebook Live
Facebook has also made changes to Facebook Live in response to the
tragic events in Christchurch. We now restrict users from using
Facebook Live if they have violated certain rules--including our
Dangerous Organizations and Individuals policy. We apply a ``one
strike'' policy to Live: Anyone who violates our most serious policies
will be restricted from using Live for set periods of time--for
example, 30 days--starting on their first offense. And we are working
on extending these restrictions in the weeks to come, beginning with
preventing those same people from creating ads on Facebook.
3. Improvements To Existing Tools And Partnerships
We have improved several of our existing proactive techniques and
are now able to detect more effectively terrorist content. For example,
our tools to algorithmically identify violating text posts (what we
refer to as ``language understanding'') now work across 19 languages.
Similarly, though we have long used image- and video-hashing--which
converts a file into a unique string of digits that serves as a
``fingerprint'' of that file--we now also use audio- and text-hashing
techniques for detecting terrorist content.
These improvements in our technical tools and partnerships have
allowed for continued and sustained progress in finding and removing
terrorist content from Facebook. Since the beginning of 2018, we have
taken action on more than 25 million pieces of terrorist content, and
we found over 99 percent of that content before any user reported it.
B. People
We know that we cannot rely on AI alone to identify terrorist
content. Context often matters. To understand more nuanced cases, we
need human expertise. One of our greatest human resources is our
community of users. Our users help us by reporting accounts or content
that may violate our policies--including the small fraction that may be
related to terrorism. To review those reports, and to prioritize the
safety of our users and our platform more generally, including with
respect to counterterrorism, we have more than 30,000 people working on
safety and security across the company and around the world. That is
three times as many people as we had dedicated to such efforts in 2017.
Our safety and security professionals review reported content in more
than 50 languages, 24 hours a day. Within our safety and security team,
we have also significantly grown our team of dedicated counterterrorism
specialists. Distinct from our content review teams, we have more than
300 highly-trained professionals who are exclusively or primarily
focused on preventing terrorist content from ever appearing on our
platform and quickly identifying and removing it if it does. This team
includes counterterrorism experts, former prosecutors, and law
enforcement personnel. Together, they speak over 30 languages and are
working 24 hours a day around the world to detect and remove terrorist
content.
Because our reviewers are human, our performance is not always
perfect. We make mistakes. And sometimes we are slower to act than we
want to be. But keeping our platform and our users safe is one of
Facebook's highest priorities, and we are always working to improve.
C. Partnerships
We are proud of the work we have done to make Facebook a hostile
place for terrorists. We understand, however, that simply working to
keep terrorism off Facebook is not an adequate solution to the problem
of on-line extremism, particularly because terrorists are able to
leverage a variety of platforms. We believe our partnerships with
others--including other companies, civil society, researchers, and
governments--are crucial to combating this threat.
In 2017, Facebook co-launched the Global Internet Forum to Counter
Terrorism (GIFCT) with YouTube, Microsoft, and Twitter. The GIFCT
shares information between the participants and has trained 110
companies from around the globe. Just last week, we held an event in
Jordan that brought together more than 100 people from Government,
industry, and civil society to share best practices.
Through GIFCT we expanded a database--which now contains hashes for
more than 200,000 visually distinct images or videos--in which 15
companies share ``hashes,'' or digital fingerprints, to better enable
companies to identify noxious terrorist content.
Facebook took over as the chair of the GIFCT in 2019 and we have
worked to expand its capabilities, including increasing hash sharing.
In fact, we are freely providing our hashing technology to companies
participating in the consortium.
Our efforts to work with others in the industry to tackle the on-
line terrorist threat go further still. On May 15, 2019, in the wake of
the tragic New Zealand attacks, Facebook and other tech companies,
including Google, Twitter, Microsoft, and Amazon, signed the
Christchurch Call to Action. The Christchurch Call expands on the GIFCT
and builds on our other initiatives with Government and civil society
to prevent the dissemination of terrorist and violent extremist
content.
Facebook joined with others in the industry to commit to a 9-point
plan that sets out concrete steps the industry will take to address the
spread of terrorist content. Those steps are:
(1) Terms of Use.--We commit to updating our terms of use,
community standards, codes of conduct, and acceptable use
policies to expressly prohibit the distribution of terrorist
and violent extremist content.
(2) User Reporting of Terrorist and Violent Extremist Content.--We
commit to establishing one or more methods within our on-line
platforms and services for users to report or flag
inappropriate content, including terrorist and violent
extremist content. We will ensure that the reporting mechanisms
are clear, conspicuous, and easy to use, and provide enough
categorical granularity to allow the company to prioritize and
act promptly upon notification of terrorist or violent
extremist content.
(3) Enhancing Technology.--We commit to continuing to invest in
technology that improves our capability to detect and remove
terrorist and violent extremist content on-line, including the
extension or development of digital fingerprinting and AI-based
technology solutions.
(4) Livestreaming.--We commit to identifying appropriate checks on
livestreaming, aimed at reducing the risk of disseminating
terrorist and violent extremist content on-line. These may
include enhanced vetting measures and moderation where
appropriate. Checks on livestreaming necessarily will be
tailored to the context of specific livestreaming services,
including the type of audience, the nature or character of the
livestreaming service, and the likelihood of exploitation.
(5) Transparency Reports.--We commit to publishing on a regular
basis transparency reports regarding detection and removal of
terrorist or violent extremist content on our on-line platforms
and services and ensuring that the data is supported by a
reasonable and explainable methodology.
(6) Shared Technology Development.--We commit to working
collaboratively across industry, governments, educational
institutions, and NGO's to develop a shared understanding of
the contexts in which terrorist and violent extremist content
is published and to improve technology to detect and remove
terrorist and violent extremist content including by creating
robust data sets to improve AI, developing open-source or other
shared tools to detect and remove content, and by enabling all
companies to contribute to the effort.
(7) Crisis Protocols.--We commit to working collaboratively to
respond to emerging or active events on an urgent basis, so
relevant information can be quickly and efficiently shared,
processed, and acted upon by all stakeholders with minimal
delay. This includes the establishment of incident management
teams that coordinate actions and broadly distribute
information that is in the public interest.
(8) Education.--We commit to working collaboratively to help
understand and educate the public about terrorist and extremist
violent content on-line. This includes educating and reminding
users about how to report or otherwise not contribute to the
spread of this content on-line.
(9) Combating Hate and Bigotry.--We commit to working
collaboratively across industry to attack the root causes of
extremism and hate on-line. This includes providing greater
support for relevant research--with an emphasis on the impact
of on-line hate on off-line discrimination and violence--and
supporting the capacity and capability of NGO's working to
challenge hate and promote pluralism and respect on-line.
Our work to combat terrorism is not done. Terrorists come in many
ideological stripes--and the most dangerous among them are deeply
resilient. At Facebook, we recognize our responsibility to counter this
threat and remain committed to it. But we should not view this as a
problem that can be ``solved'' and set aside, even in the most
optimistic scenarios. We can reduce the presence of terrorism on
mainstream social platforms, but eliminating it completely requires
addressing the people and organizations that generate this material in
the real world.
iii. fighting other harmful content
Facebook recognizes that terrorist content is not the only threat
to our users' safety and well-being. There will always be people who
try to use our platforms to spread hate. And we have seen foreign
actors trying to interfere with elections by sowing division and
spreading false information. We are also working to address new tools
of distortion, including manipulated media. We are developing
technologies to identify manipulated content, dramatically reduce its
distribution, and provide additional context to inform our community
about its falsity. And we have partnered with outside fact checkers,
researchers, and our colleagues across the industry to help with these
efforts. We know that people want to see accurate information on
Facebook, so we will continue to make fighting misinformation a
priority.
We take all of these problems very seriously. Hate of any kind has
no place on Facebook. Any organization or individual that espouses
violence or hatred violates our standards. A few months ago, we updated
our policies to make it clear that all praise, support, and
representation of white nationalism or white separatism, in addition to
white supremacy, violates our rules. Any such content is removed from
our platform under our Dangerous Organizations and Individuals policy.
And Facebook does not tolerate attempts to undermine the integrity of
an election or suppress voter turnout. These issues are difficult, but
we will continue to work to craft policies that protect people; to
apply those policies consistently and without bias; and to give voice
to a community that transcends regions, cultures, and languages.
iv. conclusion
Security is an arms race and our adversaries are always evolving
their tactics. We constantly have to improve to stay ahead. Though we
will never be perfect, we have made progress. And we are committed to
tirelessly combating extremism on our platform by regularly reviewing
our policies, adopting technical solutions, and strengthening our
partnerships with external stakeholders. I appreciate the opportunity
to be here today, and I look forward to your questions.
Chairman Thompson. I thank you.
I now recognize the gentleman, Mr. Pickles, for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF NICK PICKLES, GLOBAL SENIOR STRATEGIST FOR PUBLIC
POLICY, TWITTER
Mr. Pickles. Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Rogers,
Members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear here today to discuss these important issues of
combating terrorist content on-line and manipulation for the
public conversation.
We keep the victims, their families, and the affected
communities of the attack in Christchurch and around the world
in our minds as we undertake this important work.
We have made the health of Twitter our top priority and
measure our efforts by how successfully we encourage healthy
debates, conversations, and critical thinking on the platform.
Conversely, hateful conduct, terrorist content, and deceptive
practices detract from the health of the platform.
I would like to begin by outlining three key policies.
First, Twitter takes a zero-tolerance approach to terrorist
content on our platform. Individuals may not promote terrorism,
engage in terrorist recruitment or terrorist acts.
Since 2015, we have suspended more than 1.5 million
accounts for violations of our rules related to the promotion
of terrorism and continue to see more than 90 percent of these
accounts suspended through proactive measures. In the majority
of cases, we take action at the account-creation stage before
an account has even tweeted. The remaining 10 percent is
identified through a combination of user reports and
partnerships.
Second, we prohibit the use of Twitter by violent extremist
groups. These are defined in our rules as groups who, whether
by their statements on or off the platform, promote violence
against civilians or use violence against civilians to further
their cause, whatever their ideology. Since the introduction of
this policy in 2017, we have taken action on 184 groups
globally and permanently suspended more than 2,000 unique
accounts.
Third, Twitter does not allow hateful conduct on its
service. An individual on Twitter is not permitted to promote
violence or directly attack or threaten people based on
protected characteristics. Where any of these rules are broken,
we will take action to remove the content and will permanently
remove those who promote terrorism or violent extremist groups
on Twitter.
As you have heard, Twitter is a member of the Global
Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism, a partnership between
YouTube, Twitter, Facebook, and Microsoft that facilitates
information sharing and technical information across industry,
as well as providing essential export for smaller companies.
We learned a number of lessons from the Christchurch
attacks. The distribution of media was manifestly different
from how IS or other terror organizations worked. This reflects
a change in the wider threat environment that requires a
renewed approach and a focus on crisis response.
After Christchurch, an array of individuals on-line sought
to continuously re-upload the content created by the attacker,
both the video and the manifesto. The broader internet
ecosystem presented then and still presents a challenge we
cannot avoid. A range of third-party services were used to
share content, including some forums and websites that have
long hosted some of the most egregious content available on-
line.
Our analysis found that 70 percent of the views of the
video posted by the Christchurch attacker came from verified
accounts on Twitter, including news organizations and
individuals posting the video to condemn the attack. We are
committed to learning and improving, but every entity has a
part to play.
We should also take some heart from the social examples we
have seen on Twitter around the world as users come together to
challenge hate and challenge division. Hashtags like
#PrayForOrlando, #JeSuisCharlie, or, after the Christchurch
attack, #HelloBrother reject terrorist narratives and offer a
better future for us all.
In the months since the attack, governments, industry, and
civil society have united behind our mutual commitments to a
safe, secure, open, and global internet. In fulfilling our
commitment to the Christchurch call, we will take a wide range
of actions, including to continue investing in technology so we
can respond as quickly as possible to a future instance.
Let me now turn to our approach to dealing with attempts to
manipulate the public conversation.
As a uniquely open service, Twitter enables the
clarification of falsehoods in real-time. We proactively
enforce policies and use technology to halt the spread of
content propagated through manipulated tactics. Our rules
clearly prohibit coordinated account manipulation, malicious
automation, and fake accounts.
We continue to explore how we may take further action,
through both policy and products, on these types of issues in
the future. We continue to critically examine additional
safeguards we can implement to protect the health of the
conversation occurring on Twitter. We look forward to working
with the committee on these important issues.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pickles follows:]
Prepared Statement of Nick Pickles
June 26, 2019
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Rogers, and Members of the
committee: Twitter's purpose is to serve the public conversation.
Twitter is a place where people from around the world come together in
an open and free exchange of ideas. My statement today will provide
information and deeper context on: (I) Twitter's work to protect the
health of the public conversation, including combating terrorism,
violent extremist groups, hateful conduct, and platform manipulation,
and (II) our partnerships and societal engagement.
i. twitter's work to protect the health of the public conversation
All individuals accessing or using Twitter's services must adhere
to the policies set forth in the Twitter Rules. Accounts under
investigation or which have been detected as sharing content in
violation with the Twitter Rules may be required to remove content, or
in serious cases, will see their account permanently suspended. Our
policies and enforcement options evolve continuously to address
emerging behaviors on-line.
A. Policy on Terrorism
Individuals are prohibited from making specific threats of violence
or wish for the serious physical harm, death, or disease of an
individual or group of people. This includes, but is not limited to,
threatening or promoting terrorism.
We have now suspended more than 1.5 million accounts for violations
related to the promotion of terrorism between August 1, 2015, and
December 31, 2018. In 2018, a total of 371,669 accounts were suspended
for violations related to promotion of terrorism. We continue to see
more than 90 percent of these accounts suspended through proactive
measures.
The trend we are observing year-over-year is a steady decrease in
terrorist organizations attempting to use our service. This is due to
zero-tolerance policy enforcement that has allowed us to take swift
action on ban evaders and other identified forms of behavior used by
terrorist entities and their affiliates. In the majority of cases, we
take action at the account creation stage--before the account even
tweets.
Government reports constituted less than 0.1 percent of all
suspensions in the last reporting period. Continuing the trend we have
seen for some time, the number of reports we received from governments
of terrorist content from the second half of last year decreased by 77
percent compared to the previous reporting period (January-June 2018).
We are reassured by the progress we have made, including
recognition by independent experts. For example, Dublin City University
Professor Maura Conway found in a detailed study that ``ISIS's
previously strong and vibrant Twitter community is now . . . virtually
non-existent.''
In tandem with removing content, our wider efforts on countering
violent extremism going back to 2015 have focused on bolstering the
voices of non-Governmental organizations and credible outside groups to
use our uniquely open service to spread positive and affirmative
campaigns that seek to offer an alternative to narratives of hate.
We have partnered with organizations delivering counter and
alternative narrative initiatives across the globe and we encourage the
committee to consider the role of Government in supporting the work of
credible messengers in this space at home and abroad.
B. Policy on Violent Extremist Groups
In December 2017, we broadened our rules to encompass accounts
affiliated with violent extremist groups. Our prohibition on the use of
Twitter's services by violent extremist groups--i.e., identified groups
subscribing to the use of violence as a means to advance their cause--
applies irrespective of the cause of the group.
Our policy states:
Violent extremist groups are those that meet all of the below
criteria:
identify through their stated purpose, publications, or
actions as an extremist group;
have engaged in, or currently engage in, violence and/or the
promotion of violence as a means to further their cause; and
target civilians in their acts and/or promotion of violence.
An individual on Twitter may not affiliate with such an
organization--whether by their own statements or activity both on and
off the service--and we will permanently suspend those who do so.
We know that the challenges we face are not static, nor are bad
actors homogenous from one country to the next in how they behave. Our
approach combines flexibility with a clear, consistent policy
philosophy, enabling us to move quickly while establishing clear norms
of unacceptable behavior.
Since the introduction of our policy on violent extremist groups,
we have taken action on 184 groups under this policy and permanently
suspended 2,182 unique accounts. Ninety-three of these groups advocate
violence against civilians alongside some form of extremist white
supremacist ideology.
C. Policy on Hateful Conduct
People on Twitter are not permitted to promote violence against or
directly attack or threaten other people on the basis of race,
ethnicity, national origin, sexual orientation, gender, gender
identity, religious affiliation, age, disability, or serious disease.
We also do not allow accounts whose primary purpose is inciting harm
toward others on the basis of these categories.
We do not allow individuals to use hateful images or symbols in
their profile image or profile header. Individuals on the platform are
not allowed to use the user name, display name, or profile bio to
engage in abusive behavior, such as targeted harassment or expressing
hate toward a person, group, or protected category.
Under this policy, we take action against behavior that targets
individuals or an entire protected category with hateful conduct.
Targeting can happen in a number of ways, for example, mentions,
including a photo of an individual, or referring to someone by their
full name.
When determining the penalty for violating this policy, we consider
a number of factors including, but not limited to the severity of the
violation and an individual's previous record of rule violations. For
example, we may ask someone to remove the violating content and serve a
period of time in read-only mode before they can Tweet again.
Subsequent violations will lead to longer read-only periods and may
eventually result in permanent account suspension. If an account is
engaging primarily in abusive behavior, or is deemed to have shared a
violent threat, we will permanently suspend the account upon initial
review.
D. Manipulation of the Public Conversation
Our policies regarding terrorism, violent extremist groups, and
hateful conduct are strictly enforced, as are all our policies. We take
additional steps to safeguard the public conversation from
manipulation.
As a uniquely open, public service, the clarification of falsehoods
could happen in seconds on Twitter. We proactively enforce policies and
use technology to halt the spread of content propagated through
manipulative tactics, such as automation or attempting to deliberately
game trending topics.
Our Site Integrity team is dedicated to identifying and
investigating suspected platform manipulation on Twitter, including
activity associated with coordinated malicious activity that we are
able to reliably associate with state-affiliated actors. In partnership
with teams across the company, we employ a range of open-source and
proprietary signals and tools to identify when attempted coordinated
manipulation may be taking place, as well as the actors responsible for
it. We also partner closely with governments, law enforcement,
academics, researchers, and our peer companies to improve our
understanding of the actors involved in information operations and
develop a holistic strategy for addressing them.
For example, we typically challenge 8 to 10 million accounts per
week for these behaviors, requesting additional details, like email
addresses and phone numbers in order to authenticate the account. We
also recently acquired a new business to augment our efforts in this
regard. This strategic investment will be a key driver as we work to
protect the public conversation and help all individuals on our service
see relevant information.
Attempts to execute misinformation campaigns rely on tactics like
coordinated account manipulation or malicious automation--all of which
are against Twitter's Rules. We are continuing to explore ways at how
we may take action--through both policy and product--on these types of
issues in the future. We continue to critically examine additional
safeguards we can implement to protect the conversation occurring on
Twitter.
In October 2018, we published the first comprehensive archive of
tweets and media associated with known state-backed information
operations on Twitter and since then we have provided two further
updates covering a range of actors. Thousands of researchers from
across the globe have now made use of these datasets, which contain
more than 30 million tweets and more than 1 terabyte of media, using
our archive to conduct their own investigations and to share their
insights and independent analysis with the world.
By making this data open and accessible, we seek to empower
researchers, journalists, governments, and members of the public to
deepen their understanding of critical issues impacting the integrity
of public conversation on-line, particularly around elections. This
transparency is core to our mission.
E. Investing in Tech: Behavior vs. Content
Twitter's philosophy is to take a behavior-led approach, utilizing
a combination of machine learning and human review to prioritize
reports and improve the health of the public conversation. That is to
say, we increasingly look at how accounts behave before we look at the
content they are posting. This is how we seek to scale our efforts
globally and leverage technology even where the language used is highly
context-specific. Twitter employs extensive content detection
technology to identify potentially abusive content on the service,
along with allowing users to report content to us either as an
individual or a bystander.
We have made the health of Twitter our top priority, and our
efforts will be measured by how we help encourage more healthy debate,
conversations, and critical thinking on the platform. Conversely,
abuse, automation, hateful conduct, terrorism, and manipulation will
detract from the health of our platform.
For abuse, this two-pronged strategy has allowed us to take 3 times
the amount of enforcement of action on abuse within 24 hours than this
time last year. We now proactively surface nearly 40 percent of abusive
content we remove compared to 20 percent a year ago to reduce the
burden on the individual. Since we started using machine learning 3
years ago to reduce the visibility on abusive content:
80 percent of all replies that are removed were already less
visible;
Abuse reports have been reduced by 7.6 percent;
The most visible replies receive 45 percent less abuse
reports;
100,000 accounts were suspended for creating new accounts
after a suspension during January through March 2019--a 45
percent increase from the same time last year;
60 percent faster response to appeals requests with our new
in-app appeal process;
3 times more abusive accounts suspended within 24 hours
after a report compared to the same time last year; and
2.5 times more private information removed with a new,
easier reporting process.
ii. partnerships and societal engagement
We work closely with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, along
with law enforcement and numerous public safety around the world. As
our partnerships deepen, we are able to better respond to the changing
threats we all face, sharing valuable information and promptly
responding to valid legal requests for information.
A. Industry Collaboration
Collaboration with our industry peers and civil society is also
critically important to addressing common threats from terrorism
globally. In June 2017, we launched the Global Internet Forum to
Counter Terrorism (the ``GIFCT''), a partnership among Twitter,
YouTube, Facebook, and Microsoft.
The GIFCT facilitates, among other things, information sharing;
technical cooperation; and research collaboration, including with
academic institutions. In September 2017, the members of the GIFCT
announced a significant financial commitment to support research on
terrorist abuse of the internet and how governments, tech companies,
and civil society can respond effectively. Our goal is to establish a
network of experts that can develop platform-agnostic research
questions and analysis that consider a range of geopolitical contexts.
Technological collaboration is a key part of GIFCT's work. In the
first 2 years of GIFCT, two projects have provided technical resources
to support the work of members and smaller companies to remove
terrorist content.
First, the shared industry data base of ``hashes''--unique digital
``fingerprints''--for violent terrorist propaganda now spans more than
100,000 hashes. The database allows a company that discovers terrorist
content on one of its sites to create a digital fingerprint and share
it with the other companies in the forum, who can then use those hashes
to identify such content on their services or platforms, review against
their respective policies and individual rules, and remove matching
content as appropriate or block extremist content before it is posted.
Second, a year ago, Twitter began working with a small group of
companies to test a new collaborative system. Because Twitter does not
allow files other than photos or short videos to be uploaded, one of
the behaviors we saw from those seeking to promote terrorism was to
post links to other services where people could access files, longer
videos, PDFs, and other materials. Our pilot system allows us to alert
other companies when we removed an account or Tweet that linked to
material that promoted terrorism hosted on their service. This
information sharing ensures the hosting companies can monitor and track
similar behavior, taking enforcement action pursuant with their
individual policies. This is not a high-tech approach, but it is simple
and effective, recognizing the resource constraints of smaller
companies.
Based on positive feedback, the partnership has now expanded to 12
companies and we have shared more than 14,000 unique URLs with these
services. Every time a piece of content is removed at source, it means
any link to that source--wherever it is posted--will no longer be
operational.
We are eager to partner with additional companies to expand this
project, and we look forward to building on our existing partnerships
in the future.
B. The Christchurch Attack
The Christchurch attack was unprecedented both in the way it
exploited the on-line environment but also the disparate range of on-
line communities that were involved in sharing the Christchurch video
and the hateful manifesto of the attacker.
We saw a wide range of individuals on the service continue to
upload excerpts of the attacker's video even after it had been removed.
This included those who sought to condemn the attack, including those
who combined video of their condemnation and prayers with video of the
attack, and others who saw baseless conspiracies and wanted to provide
evidence to refute such claims. There were those who believed to remove
the content was censorship and those who wanted to amplify the hatred
the video embodied. Our analysis found 70 percent of the views of
footage of the attack in Christchurch on Twitter were from content
posted by verified accounts, including media outlets and those seeking
to condemn the violence. In all of these circumstances we removed the
relevant content.
As a uniquely open service, we see regular examples around the
world of our users, communities, and groups challenging hate and
division, particularly following violent acts. As the world began to
comprehend the horror of what took place in Christchurch, some may have
sought to promote hate, but there was another conversation taking
place, one that reached many more people. The hashtag #HelloBrother saw
people around the world recognizing the brave act of one victim and
rejecting the terrorist's narrative, while hundreds of thousands of
tweets expressed similar sentiments in their own way. This is the
potential of open public conversation and what it can empower--a global
platform for the best of society to challenge violence and hatred.
c. the christchurch call to action
In the months since the attack, New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda
Ardern has led the international policy debate, and that work has
culminated in the Christchurch Call. Twitter's Chief Executive Officer
Jack Dorsey attended the launch of the Christchurch Call in Paris,
meeting with the Prime Minister to express our support and partnership
with the New Zealand Government.
Because terrorism cannot be solved by the tech industry alone, the
Christchurch Call is a landmark moment and an opportunity to convene
governments, industry, and civil society to unite behind our mutual
commitment to a safe, secure open, global internet. It is also a moment
to recognize that however or wherever evil manifests itself, it affects
us all.
In fulfilling our commitments in the Call, we will take a wide
range of actions. We continue to invest in technology to prioritize
signals, including user reports, to ensure we can respond as quickly as
possible to a potential incident, building on the work we have done to
harness proprietary technology to detect and disrupt bad actors
proactively.
As part of our commitment to educate users about our rules and to
further prohibit the promotion of terrorism or violent extremist
groups, we have updated our rules and associated materials to be
clearer on where these policies apply. This is accompanied by further
data being provided in our transparency report, allowing public
consideration of the actions we are taking under our rules, as well as
how much content is detected by our proactive efforts.
Twitter will take concrete steps to reduce the risk of
livestreaming being abused by terrorists, while recognizing that during
a crisis these tools are also used by news organizations, citizens, and
governments. We are investing in technology and tools to ensure we can
act even faster to remove video content and stop it spreading.
Finally we are committed to continuing our partnership with
industry peers, expanding on our URL-sharing efforts along with wider
mentoring efforts, strengthening our new crisis protocol arrangements,
and supporting the expansion of GIFCT membership.
d. a whole-of-society response
The challenges we face as a society are complex, varied, and
constantly evolving. These challenges are reflected and often magnified
by technology. The push and pull factors influencing individuals vary
widely and there is no one solution to prevent an individual turning to
violence. This is a long-term problem requiring a long-term response,
not just the removal of content.
While we strictly enforce our policies, removing all discussion of
particular viewpoints, no matter how uncomfortable our customers may
find them, does not eliminate the ideology underpinning them. Quite
often, it moves these views into darker corners of the internet where
they cannot be challenged and held to account. As our peer companies
improve in their efforts, this content continues to migrate to less-
governed platforms and services. We are committed to learning and
improving, but every part of the on-line ecosystem has a part to play.
We have a critical role. Tech companies and content removal on-line
cannot alone, however, solve these issues. They are systemic and
societal and so they require an whole-of-society approach. We welcome
the opportunity to continue to work with our industry peers,
Government, academics, and civil society to find the right solutions.
Our goal is to protect the health of the public conversation and to
take immediate action on those who seek to spread messages of terror
and violent extremism. However, no solution is perfect, and no
technology is capable of detecting every potential threat.
Twitter's efforts around the globe to support civil society voices
and promote positive messages have seen Twitter employees train groups
on 5 continents and we have provided pro-bono advertising to groups to
enable their messages to reach millions of people. When we at Twitter
talk about the health of the public conversation, we see the principles
of civility, empathy, and mutual respect as foundational to our work.
We will not solve problems by removing content alone. We should not
underestimate the power of open conversation to change minds,
perspectives, and behaviors.
We stand ready to assist the committee in its important work
regarding the issue of the tools that internet companies can employ to
stop the spread of terrorist content and misinformation on our
services.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you for your testimony.
I now recognize Mr. Slater to summarize his testimony for 5
minutes.
STATEMENT OF DEREK SLATER, GLOBAL DIRECTOR OF INFORMATION
POLICY, GOOGLE
Mr. Slater. Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Rogers, and
distinguished Members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today. I appreciate your
leadership on the important issues of radicalization and
misinformation on-line and welcome the opportunity to discuss
Google's work in these areas.
My name is Derek Slater, and I am the global director of
information policy at Google. In my role, I lead a team that
advises the company on public policy frameworks for on-line
content.
At Google, we believe that the internet has been a force
for creativity, learning, and access to information. Supporting
the free flow of ideas is core to our mission: To organize and
make the world's information universally accessible and useful.
Yet there have always been legitimate limits, even where
laws strongly protect free expression. This is true both on-
line and off, especially when it comes to issues of terrorism,
hate speech, and misinformation. We take these issues seriously
and want to be a part of the solution.
In my testimony today, I will focus on two areas where we
are making progress to help protect our users: First, on the
enforcement of our policies around terrorism and hate speech;
and, second, in combating misinformation broadly.
On YouTube, we have rigorous policies and programs to
defend against the use of our platform to spread hate or incite
violence. Over the past 2 years, we have invested heavily in
machines and people to quickly identify and remove content that
violates our policies.
First, YouTube's enforcement system starts from the point
at which a user uploads a video. If it is somewhat similar to
videos that already violate our policies, it is sent for humans
to review. If they determine that it violates our policies,
they remove it, and the system makes a digital fingerprint so
it can't be uploaded again.
In the first quarter of 2019, over 75 percent of the more
than 8 million videos removed were first flagged by a machine,
the majority of which were removed before a single view was
received.
Second, we also rely on experts to find videos that the
algorithm might be missing. Some of these experts sit at our
intel desk, which proactively looks for new trends in content
that might violate our policies. We also allow expert NGO's and
governments to notify us of bad content in bulk through our
Trusted Flagger program.
Finally, we go beyond enforcing our policies by creating
programs to promote counter-speech. Examples of this work
include our Creators for Change program, which supports YouTube
creators that are acting as positive role models. In addition,
Alphabet's Jigsaw group has deployed the redirect method, which
uses targeted ads and videos to disrupt on-line radicalization.
This broad and cross-sectional work has led to tangible
results. In the first quarter of 2019, YouTube manually
reviewed over 1 million suspected terrorist videos and found
that only fewer than 10 percent, about 90,000, violated our
terrorism policy. As a comparison point, we typically remove
between 7 million and 9 million videos per quarter, which is a
tiny fraction of a percent of YouTube's total views during this
time period.
Our efforts do not stop there. We are constantly taking
input and reacting to new situations. For example, YouTube
recently further updated its hate speech policy. The updated
policy specifically prohibits videos alleging that a group is
superior in order to justify discrimination, segregation, or
exclusion based on qualities like age, gender, race, caste,
religion, sexual orientation, or veteran status.
Similarly, the recent tragic events in Christchurch
presented some unprecedented challenges. In response, we took
more drastic measures, such as automatically rejecting new
uploads of videos without waiting for human review to check if
it was news content. We are now reexamining our crisis
protocols and have also signed the Christchurch Call to Action.
Finally, we are deeply committed to working with
Government, the tech industry, and experts from civil society
and academia to protect our services from being exploited by
bad actors, including during Google's chairmanship of the GIFCT
over the last year and a half.
On the topic of combating misinformation, we have a natural
long-term incentive to prevent anyone from interfering with the
integrity of our products. We also recognize that it is
critically important to combat misinformation in the context of
democratic elections, when our users seek accurate, trusted
information that will help them make critical decisions.
We have worked hard to curb misinformation in our products,
and our efforts include designing better ranking algorithms,
implementing tougher policies against monetization of
misrepresentative content, and deploying multiple teams that
identify and take action against malicious actors.
At the same time, we have to be mindful that our platforms
reflect a broad array of sources and information, and there are
important free-speech considerations. There is no silver
bullet, but we will continue to work to get it right.
In conclusion, we want to do everything we can to ensure
users are not exposed to harmful content. We understand these
are difficult issues of serious interest to the committee. We
take them seriously and want to be responsible actors who do
our part.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to taking your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Slater follows:]
Prepared Statement of Derek Slater
June 26, 2019
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Rogers, and distinguished Members
of the committee: Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today. I appreciate your leadership on the important issues of
radicalization and misinformation on-line, and welcome the opportunity
to discuss Google's work in these areas.
My name is Derek Slater, and I am the global director of
information policy at Google. In my role, I lead a team that advises
the company on public policy frameworks for on-line content--including
hate speech, terrorism, and misinformation. Prior to my role at Google,
I worked on internet policy at the Electronic Frontier Foundation and
at the Berkman Center for Internet and Society.
At Google, we believe that the internet has been a force for
creativity, learning, and access to information. Supporting this free
flow of ideas is core to our mission to organize and make the world's
information universally accessible and useful. We build tools that
empower users to access, create, and share information like never
before giving them more choice, opportunity, and exposure to a
diversity of opinions. Products like YouTube, for example, have
expanded economic opportunity for small businesses to market and sell
their goods; have given artists, creators, and journalists a platform
to share their work, connect with an audience, and enrich civic
discourse; and have enabled billions to benefit from a bigger, broader
understanding of the world.
While the free flow of information and ideas has important social,
cultural, and economic benefits, there have always been legitimate
limits, even where laws strongly protect free expression. This is true
both on-line and off, especially when it comes to issues of terrorism,
hate speech, and misinfomation. We are deeply troubled by the increase
in hate and violence in the world, particularly by the acts of
terrorism and violent extremism in New Zealand. We take these issues
seriously and want to be a part of the solution.
This is why, in addition to being guided by local law, we have
Community Guidelines our users have to follow. We also work closely
with Government, industry, and civil society to address these
challenges in partnership within the United States and around the
world. In my testimony today, I will focus on two key areas where we
are making progress to help protect our users: (i) On the enforcement
of our policies around terrorism and hate speech; and (ii) in
combatting misinformation broadly.
enforcement on youtube for terrorism and hate speech
We have rigorous policies and programs to defend against the use of
our platform to spread hate or incite violence. This includes:
Terrorist recruitment, violent extremism, incitement to violence,
glorification of violence, and videos that teach people how to commit
terrorist attacks. We apply these policies to violent extremism of all
kinds, whether inciting violence on the basis of race or religion or as
part of an organized terrorist group.
Tough policies have to be coupled with tough enforcement. Over the
past 2 years, we have invested heavily in machines and people to
quickly identify and remove content that violates our policies against
incitement to violence and hate speech:
(1) YouTube's enforcement system starts from the point at which a
user uploads a video. If it is somewhat similar to videos that
already violate our policies, it is sent for humans to review.
If they determine that it violates our policies, they remove it
and the system makes a ``digital fingerprint'' or hash of the
video so it can't be uploaded again. In the first quarter of
2019, over 75 percent of the more than 8 million videos removed
were first flagged by a machine, the majority of which were
removed before a single view was received.
(2) Machine learning technology is what helps us find this content
and enforce our policies at scale. But hate and violent
extremism are nuanced and constantly evolving, which is why we
also rely on experts to find videos the algorithm might be
missing. Some of these experts sit at our intel desk, which
proactively looks for new trends in content that might violate
our policies. We also allow expert NGO's and governments to
notify us of bad content in bulk through our Trusted Flagger
program. We reserve the final decision on whether to remove
videos they flag, but we benefit immensely from their
expertise.
(3) Finally, we go beyond enforcing our polices by creating
programs to promote counterspeech on our platforms to present
narratives and elevate the voices that are most credible in
speaking out against hate, violence, and terrorism.
(a) For example, our Creators for Change program supports creators
who are tackling tough issues, including extremism and
hate, by building empathy and acting as positive role
models. There have been 59 million views of 2018 Creators
for Change videos so far; the creators involved have over
60 million subscribers and more than 8.5 billion lifetime
views of their channels; and through `Local chapters' of
Creators for Change, creators tackle challenges specific to
different markets.
(b) Alphabet's Jigsaw group, an incubator to tackle some of the
toughest global security challenges, has deployed the
Redirect Method, which uses Adwords targeting tools and
curated YouTube playlists to disrupt on-line
radicalization. The method is open to anyone to use, and we
know that NGO's have sponsored campaigns against a wide
spectrum of ideologically-motivated terrorists.
This broad and cross-sectional work has led to tangible results. In
Q1 2019, YouTube manually reviewed over 1 million suspected terrorist
videos and found that only fewer than 10 percent (90K videos) violated
our terrorism policy. Even though the amount of content we remove for
terrorism is low compared to the overall amount our users and
algorithms flag, we invest in reviewing all of it out of an abundance
of caution. As comparison point, we typically remove between 7 and 9
million videos per quarter--a fraction of a percent of YouTube's total
views during this time period. Most of these videos were first flagged
for review by our automated systems. Over 90 percent of violent
extremist videos that were uploaded and removed in the past 6 months
(Q4 2018 & Q1 2019) were removed before receiving a single human flag,
and of those, 88 percent had fewer than 10 views.
Our efforts do not end there. We are constantly taking input and
reacting to new situations. For example, YouTube recently further
updated its Hate Speech policy. The updated policy specifically
prohibits videos alleging that a group is superior in order to justify
discrimination, segregation, or exclusion based on qualities like age,
gender, race, caste, religion, sexual orientation, or veteran status.
This would include, for example, videos that promote or glorify Nazi
ideology, which is inherently discriminatory. It also prohibits content
denying that well-documented violent events, like the Holocaust or the
shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary, took place. We began enforcing the
updated policy the day it launched; however, it will take time for our
systems to fully ramp up and we'll be gradually expanding coverage over
the next several months.
Similarly, the recent tragic events in Christchurch presented some
unprecedented challenges and we had to take some unprecedented steps to
address the unprecedented volume of new videos related to the events--
tens of thousands, exponentially larger than we had ever seen before,
at times coming in as fast as one per second. In response, we took more
drastic measures, such as automatically rejecting new uploads of clips
of the video without waiting for human review to check if it was news
content. We are now reexamining our crisis protocols, and we've been
giving a lot of thought to what additional steps we can take to further
protect our platforms against misuse. Google and YouTube also signed
the Christchurch Call to Action, a series of commitments to quickly and
responsibly address terrorist content on-line. The effort was
spearheaded by New Zealand's prime minister to ensure another misuse of
on-line platforms like this cannot happen again.
Finally, we are deeply committed to working with Government, the
tech industry, and experts from civil society and academia to protect
our services from being exploited by bad actors. During Google's
chairmanship of the Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism over the
last year-and-a-half, the Forum sought to expand its membership and to
reach out to a wide variety of stakeholders to ensure we are
responsibly addressing terrorist content on-line. For example, we
hosted a summit in Sunnyvale so G7 security ministers could hear the
concerns of smaller platforms We have also convened workshops with
activists and civil society organizations to find ways to support their
on-line counter-extremism campaigns, and sponsored workshops around the
world to share good practices with other tech companies and platforms.
Combating Misinformation
We have a natural, long-term incentive to prevent anyone from
interfering with the integrity of our products. We also recognize that
it is critically important to combat misinformation in the context of
democratic elections, when our users seek accurate, trusted information
that will help them make critical decisions. We have worked hard to
curb misinformation in our products. Our efforts include designing
better-ranking algorithms, implementing tougher policies against
monetization of misrepresentative content, and deploying multiple teams
that identify and take action against malicious actors. At the same
time, we have to be mindful that our platforms reflect a broad array of
sources and information and there are important free-speech
considerations. There is no silver bullet, but we will continue to work
to get it right, and we rely on a diverse set of tools, strategies, and
transparency efforts to achieve our goals.
We make quality count in our ranking systems in order to deliver
quality information, especially in contexts that are prone to rumors
and the propagation of false information (such as breaking news
events). The ranking algorithms we develop to that end are geared
toward ensuring the usefulness of our services, as measured by user
testing. The systems are not designed to rank content based on its
political perspective.
Since the early days of Google and YouTube, some content creators
have tried to deceive our ranking systems in order to increase their
visibility, a set of practices we view as a form of spam. To prevent
spam and other improper activity during elections, we have multiple
internal teams that identify malicious actors wherever they originate,
disable their accounts, and share threat information with other
companies and law enforcement officials. We will continue to invest
resources to address this issue and to work with law enforcement,
Congress, and other companies.
In addition to tackling spam, we invest in trust and safety efforts
and automated tools to tackle a broad set of malicious behaviors. Our
policies across Google Search, Google News, YouTube, and our
advertising products clearly outline behaviors that are prohibited,
such as misrepresentation of one's ownership or primary purpose on
Google News and our advertising products, or impersonation of other
channels or individuals on YouTube. We make these rules of the road
clear to users and content creators, while being mindful not to
disclose so much information about our systems and policies as to make
it easier for malicious actors to circumvent our defenses.
Finally, we strive to provide users with easy access to context and
a diverse set of perspectives, which are key to providing users with
the information they need to form their own views. Our products and
services expose users to numerous links or videos from different
sources in response to their searches, which maximizes exposure to
diverse perspectives or viewpoints before deciding what to explore in
depth. In addition, we develop many tools and features to provide
additional information to users about their searches, such as knowledge
or information panels in Google Search and YouTube.
conclusion
We want to do everything we can to ensure users are not exposed to
content that promotes or glorifies acts of terrorism. Similarly, we
also recognize that it is critically important to combat misinformation
in the context of democratic elections, when our users seek accurate,
trusted information that will help them make critical decisions.
Efforts to undermine the free-flow of information is antithetical to
our mission. We understand these are difficult issues of serious
interest to the committee. We take them seriously and want to be
responsible actors who are a part of the solution.
We know that our users will value our services only so long as they
continue to trust them to work well and provide them with the most
relevant and useful information. We believe we have developed a
responsible approach to address the evolving and complex issues that
manifest on our platform.
We look forward to continued collaboration with the committee as it
examines these issues. Thank you for your time. I look forward to
taking your questions.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you for your testimony.
I now recognize Ms. Strossen to summarize her statement for
5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF NADINE STROSSEN, JOHN MARSHALL HARLAN II PROFESSOR
OF LAW, NEW YORK LAW SCHOOL
Ms. Strossen. Thank you so much, Chairman Thompson and
Ranking Member Rogers and other Members of the committee.
My name is Nadine Strossen. I am a professor of law at New
York Law School and the immediate past president of the
American Civil Liberties Union.
Of great pertinence, last year, I wrote a book which is
directly pertinent to the topic of this hearing called ``Hate:
Why We Should Resist It with Free Speech, Not Censorship.''
I note, Mr. Chairman, that you referred to hate speech as
problematic content in addition with terror content and
misinformation. All of these kinds of speech, while potentially
harmful, present enormous dangers when we empower either
government or private companies to censor and suppress the
speech for this reason: The concepts of hate speech, terrorist
content, and misinformation are all irreducibly vague and
broad, therefore having to be enforced according to the
subjective discretion of the enforcing authorities. The
discretion has been enforced in ways that both under-suppress
speech that does pose a serious danger, as the Chairman pointed
out and the Ranking Member pointed out, but also do suppress
very important speech, as also has been pointed out, speech
that actually counters terrorism and other dangers.
What is worse is that, in addition to violating free speech
and democracy norms, these measures are not ineffective in
dealing with the underlying problems. I thought that was
something that was pointed out by comments by my co-panelists.
In particular, Nick Pickles' testimony, written testimony,
talked about the fact that, if somebody is driven off one of
these platforms, they will then take refuge in darker corners
of the web, where it is much harder to engage with them, to use
them as sources of information for law enforcement and
counterterrorism investigations.
So we should emphasize other approaches that are consistent
with free speech and democracy but have been lauded as at least
as effective and perhaps even more so than suppression. I was
very heartened that the written statements of my co-panelists
all emphasize these other approaches. Monika Bickert's
testimony talked about how essential it is to go after the root
causes of terrorism. The testimony of Nick Pickles and Derek
Slater also emphasize the importance of counter-speech,
counter-narratives, and redirection.
Now, I recognize that every single one of us in this room
is completely committed to free speech and democracy, just as
every single one of us is committed to countering terrorism and
disinformation. After all, the reason we oppose terrorism and
disinformation is precisely because of the harm that they do to
democracy and liberty.
Before I say anything further, I do have to stress
something that I know everybody here knows but many members of
the public do not, that these social media companies are not
bound by the First Amendment free-speech guarantee. So none of
us has a free-speech right to air any content on their
platforms at all. Conversely, they have their own free-speech
rights to choose what will be and what will not be on their
platforms. So it would be unconstitutional, of course, for
Congress to purport to tell them what they must put up and what
they must take down, to the extent that the takedowns would go
beyond First Amendment-unprotected speech.
Chairman Thompson, you did completely accurately, of
course, note that much of the content that is targeted as
terrorist is unprotected, but much of it is protected under the
Constitution, and much of it is very valuable, including human
rights advocacy that has been suppressed under these
necessarily overbroad and subjective standards.
Although the social media companies do not have a
Constitutional obligation to honor freedom of speech, given
their enormous power, it is incredibly important that they be
encouraged to do so.
In closing, I am going to quote a statement from the
written testimony of Nick Pickles which I could not agree with
more, when he said that ``we will not solve the problems by
removing content alone. We should not underestimate the power
of open conversation to change minds, perspectives, and
behaviors.''
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Strossen follows:]
Prepared Statement of Nadine Strossen \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Nadine Strossen is the John Marshall Harlan II professor of law
at New York Law School and the immediate past national president of the
American Civil Liberties Union (1991-2008). She gratefully acknowledges
the following NYLS students for providing valuable assistance with this
testimony, including the preparation of end notes: Managing research
assistant Marc D. Walkow, and research assistants Aaron Hansen and
Serene Qandil.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
June 26, 2019
introduction
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Rogers, and distinguished Members
of this committee: I am honored to join my esteemed co-panelists in
addressing this hearing's important topics. I appreciate the committee
Members' and panelists' commitments to counter the potential * serious
adverse impacts of the pertinent on-line expression: Expression that
could promote terrorism; and misinformation, which could defraud
individuals and distort elections and other democratic processes and
institutions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* I deliberately refer to the ``potential'' adverse impacts of
expression with terrorist content and misinformation because many
experts have concluded that such expression will not necessarily
contribute to the feared potential harms, and that non-censorial
strategies such as the ones I discuss can significantly reduce that
potential danger.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I thank the committee for exercising its important oversight
functions to examine the content moderation policies of the powerful
social media companies that are represented today.** Even though any
direct regulation of these policies would raise serious concerns about
abridging the companies' First Amendment rights, it is essential to
consider how the companies should exercise those rights in ways that
promote the free speech and other rights of the rest of us--and in ways
that promote democracy, security, and other important concerns.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
** I am confining my focus to the dominant large companies,
including the 3 that are represented at this hearing (Facebook, Google,
and Twitter). They exercise outsize influence, thus as a practical
matter requiring many people to use their services. Concerning smaller
social media companies, potential users retain real choices about
whether or not to participate. Accordingly, such smaller companies
should (as a normative matter) have more latitude to choose content and
define communities (again, as a legal matter, all of these companies
have such latitude).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I understand that I was invited to complement this panel of social
media leaders, despite my relative lack of specific experience with
social media in particular, because of my longstanding scholarship and
advocacy about freedom of speech for potentially harmful speech in
general (including speech with terror content and misinformation) in
many contexts, including on-line media.\2\ For example, I was deeply
involved in the developments leading to the historic 1997 Supreme Court
case that first considered--and upheld--First Amendment free speech
rights on-line: Reno v. ACLU.\3\ I was the national ACLU president
throughout all the pertinent developments, including lobbying and
litigating against Congress's first on-line censorship law (enacted in
1996), which the high Court struck down, essentially unanimously. The
Court celebrated the internet as ``a unique . . . medium of worldwide
human communication,'' whose ``content . . . is as diverse as human
thought.''\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See, e.g., Nadine Strossen, HATE: Why We Should Resist It with
Free Speech, Not Censorship (New York: Oxford University Press, 2018).
\3\ Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union, 521 U.S. 844 (1997).
Justice O'Connor authored a partial dissent, in which Justice Rehnquist
joined, but this concerned only a narrow particular application of the
statute (as applied to an on-line communication involving only one
adult and one or more minors, such as when an adult knowingly sends an
email to a minor); both of these Justices agreed with the majority's
broad holdings about the law's general unconstitutionality, making the
decision essentially unanimous. Reno, 521 U.S. at 886 (O'Connor, J.,
concurring in part and dissenting in part).
\4\ Reno, 521 U.S. at 850, 852.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Today's discussion can gain much from the teachings of this
landmark case, and from other past efforts to restrict various media
expression feared to potentially cause harm. Not only did the Court
strike down Congress's first internet censorship law in Reno v. ACLU,
but it also struck down Congress's revised version of that law in
subsequent rulings.\5\ Likewise, in its most recent decision about on-
line expression, 2 years ago, the Court again unanimously struck down a
law restricting such expression (in that case, a State law).\6\
Moreover, the Court again hailed the unique importance of on-line
communications, declaring:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union, 535 U.S. 564
(2002); Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union, 542 U.S. 656
(2004), cert. denied Mukasey v. American Civil Liberties Union, 2009
U.S. LEXIS 598 (2009).
\6\ Packingham v. North Carolina, 137 S. Ct. 1730 (2017).
``While in the past there may have been difficulty in identifying the
most important places . . . for the exchange of views, today the answer
is clear. It is cyber space--the `vast democratic forums of the
internet' in general, . . . and social media in particular.''\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Packingham, 137 S. Ct. at 1735.
As the preceding outline of relevant Supreme Court rulings
indicates, my support for on-line free expression is largely paralleled
by the Court's speech-protective rulings, and those in turn reflect the
views of Justices across the ideological spectrum. Despite all the
polarization in our political system and society, these particular
issues about on-line expression should garner broad consensus in the
other branches of Government, as they have on the Court.
Notwithstanding how divided our views might be on contested public
policy issues, we all have the same stake in preserving the most robust
freedom of speech for all such views--no matter how extreme,
controversial, or generally feared such views might be. In fact, those
of us who are engaged in public policy debates have the greatest stake
in strong freedom of speech. As the Court consistently has held, speech
on public policy issues is the most important expression in our
political system, essential not only for individual freedom and
equality, but also for our very democracy itself. In its words:
``Speech concerning public affairs is more than self-expression; it is
the essence of self-government.''\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Garrison v. Louisiana, 379 U.S. 64, 74-75 (1964).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The speech at issue in today's hearings--speech with terrorist ***
content and misinformation--certainly concerns public affairs; indeed,
that is precisely why it is potentially so harmful, as well as
undeniably important. As the Court likewise has explained, such speech
deserves the strongest protection not despite its potential serious
harmful impact, but rather precisely because of such powerful
potential. Let me quote a 2011 decision upholding freedom for extremely
controversial, provocative speech (this decision was nearly unanimous,
with only one dissenting vote):
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
*** The committee's designated topic for this hearing uses the
phrase ``terror content''; in this testimony, I also use the phrase
``terrorist content'' interchangeably.
``Speech is powerful. It can stir people to action, move them to tears
of both joy and sorrow, and--as it did here--inflict great pain. [W]e
cannot react . . . by punishing the speaker. As a Nation we have chosen
a different course--to protect . . . speech on public issues to ensure
that we do not stifle public debate.''\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Snyder v. Phelps, 562 U.S. 443, 460-61 (2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
overview
I will first set out my three major conclusions about the
important, challenging issues raised by today's hearing. I will then
lay out some more specific points that reinforce these conclusions.
three major conclusions
FIRST.--Any effort to restrict on-line terror content and
misinformation will be at best ineffective and at worst
counterproductive in achieving the important goal of such efforts: To
counter the expression's potential adverse impacts.
As the Electronic Frontier Foundation [``EFF''] recently concluded:
``[C]ontent moderation was never meant to operate at the scale of
billions of users . . . [A]s pressure from lawmakers and the public to
restrict various types of speech--from terrorism to fake news--grows,
companies are desperately looking for ways to moderate content at
scale. They won't succeed--at least if they care about protecting on-
line expression.''\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Jillian C. York and Corynne McSherry, ``Content Moderation is
Broken. Let Us Count the Ways,'' Electronic Frontier Foundation, Apr.
29, 2019, https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2019/04/content-moderation-
broken-let-us-count-ways.
EFF and others who have monitored content moderation efforts for
years have consistently reached the same conclusion. For example, in a
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2017 report, EFF stated:
``Over the years, we've found that companies' efforts to moderate on-
line content almost always result in overbroad content takedowns or
account deactivations. We therefore are justifiably skeptical [about]
the latest efforts . . . to combat pro-terrorism content.''\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Sophia Cope, Jillian C. York and Jeremy Gillula, ``Industry
Efforts to Censor Pro-Terrorism Online Content Pose Risks to Free
Speech,'' Electronic Frontier Foundation, July 12, 2017, https://
www.eff.org/deeplinks/2017/07/industry-efforts-censor-pro-terrorism-
online-content-pose-risks-free-speech.
Concepts such as ``terror content'' and ``misinformation'' are
inherently, inescapably vague and broad. Therefore, anyone who decides
whether particular social media posts should be so classified, and
hence restricted, inevitably exercises enormous discretion. Enforcers
of any such concepts will necessarily exercise this discretion in
accordance with subjective values--their own, or those of their social
media employers, or those of powerful political and other established
interests. As the old saying observes, ``One person's terrorist is
another's freedom fighter.'' Likewise, one person's ``misinformation''
or ``fake news'' is someone else's cherished truth.
The definitions of prohibited terrorist or extremist content that
Twitter and Facebook have enforced were cited as examples of these
inevitable definitional problems of vagueness and overbreadth, in an
important 2018 Report by the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the
Promotion and Protection of the Right to Freedom of Opinion and
Expression, David Kaye [``UN Special Rapporteur's Report''].\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ David Kaye, Report of the Special Rapporteur to the Human
Rights Council on online content regulation,
26, U.N. Doc. A/HRC/38/
35 (April 6, 2018), https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G18/
096/72/PDF/G1809672.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The unavoidable indeterminacy of these elastic concepts means that
their enforcement will be arbitrary at best, discriminatory at worst.
Predictably, these concepts will be disproportionately enforced against
marginalized, unpopular, dissident individuals and groups, those that
lack political power.
I will now cite a few illustrations of the foregoing general,
inevitable problems specifically concerning the particular expression
at issue: Social media speech with terrorist content and
misinformation.
When social media target speech with terrorist (or ``extremist'')
content, they inevitably suppress much valuable speech,
including human rights advocacy
These problems were detailed, for example, in a May 30, 2019 joint
report by the Electronic Frontier Foundation, Syrian Archive, and
Witness.\13\ Syrian Archive engages in ``documentation related to human
rights violations committed by all sides involved in the conflict in
Syria,'' and Witness promotes effective video advocacy for human
rights. Noting that social media ``companies have come under increasing
pressure'' to restrict extremist or terrorist expression, the report
explained that both algorithmic and human content moderation techniques
have ``caught in the net'' ``not only content deemed extremist, but
also . . . useful content like human rights documentation,'' with
``mistakes at scale that are decimating human rights content.'' As the
report elaborated:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Jillian C. York, ``Caught in the Net: The Impact of
`Extremist' Speech Regulations on Human Rights Content,'' Electronic
Frontier Foundation, May 30, 2019, https://www.eff.org/wp/caught-net-
impact-extremist-speech-regulations-human-rights-content.
``[I]t is difficult for human reviewers--and impossible for machines--
to consistently differentiate activism, counter-speech, and satire
about extremism from extremism itself. Blunt content moderation systems
at scale inevitably make mistakes, and marginalized users are the ones
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
who pay for those mistakes.
The report documented multiple examples of such counterproductively
suppressed marginalized speakers, including groups advocating for the
independence of the Chechen Republic of Iskeria, groups advocating for
an independent Kurdistan, satirical commentary, and conflict
documentation by journalists and human rights defenders in Syria,
Yemen, and Ukraine.
In the same vein, a 2017 New York Times story described how
YouTube's ``effort to purge extremist propaganda from its platform''
had led it to ``inadvertently remove[] thousands of videos that could
be used to document atrocities in Syria, potentially jeopardizing
future war crimes prosecutions.''\14\ Given the breakdown of
independent media since the start of the Syrian conflict, individuals
and civil society organizations have subsequently used YouTube to
document the war, including atrocities and human rights violations.
Since some of the ``disappeared'' videos cannot be restored, we are
losing ``the history of this terrible war,'' and ``the richest source
of information about human rights violations in closed societies,''
according to experts whom the Times quoted.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Malachy Browne, ``YouTube Removes Videos Showing Atrocities in
Syria,'' The New York Times, Aug. 22, 2017, https://www.nytimes.com/
2017/08/22/world/middleeast/syria-youtube-videos-isis.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This persistent problem, inherent in the irreducibly vague,
overbroad concepts of terrorist or extremist content (as well as
misinformation), had previously been documented in a 2017 EFF report,
which cited further illustrations, including that ``Facebook . . .
deactivated the personal accounts of Palestinian journalists'' on the
ground that ``they were involved in `terrorist activity,' '' and
temporarily banned a journalist from the United Arab Emirates ``for
posting a photograph of Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah with an LGBTQ
pride flag overlaid on it--a clear case of parody counter-speech that
Facebook's content moderators failed to grasp.''\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Cope, York, and Gillula, ``Industry Efforts.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Suppressing speech with terrorist content may well not promote counter-
terrorism efforts and could even undermine them
The Electronic Frontier Foundation has assembled expert testimony
about the strategic downsides of suppressing this expression, even
beyond the adverse impact that such suppression has on free speech:
``[T]he question is not whether terrorists are using the internet
to recruit new operatives--the question is whether taking down pro-
terrorism content and accounts will meaningfully contribute to the
fight against global terrorism. Governments have not sufficiently
demonstrated this to be the case. And some experts believe this
absolutely not to be the case.''\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Cope, York, and Gillula, ``Industry Efforts.''
Let me quote just a few of the many experts who have reached this
negative conclusion, for the multiple reasons indicated.
Censorship of terrorist content doesn't promote National security
Michael German, a former FBI agent with counter-terrorism
experience, who is now a fellow at the Brennan Center for Justice,
stated: ``Censorship has never been an effective method of achieving
security, and . . . suppressing on-line content will be as unhelpful as
smashing printing presses.''\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Jenna McLaughlin, ``The White House Asked Social Media
Companies to Look for Terrorists. Here's Why They'd #Fail.,'' The
Intercept, Jan. 20, 2016, https://theintercept.com/2016/01/20/the-
white-house-asked-social-media-companies-to-look-for-terrorists-heres-
why-theyd-fail.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Keeping terrorist content on-line may provide opportunities for
constructive engagement that could avert terrorist acts
For example, a Kenyan government official opposed shutting down an
al-Shabaab Twitter account, because ``al-Shabaab needs to be engaged
positively and [T]witter is the only avenue.''\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Jillian C. York and Trevor Timm, ``U.S. Government Threatens
Free Speech With Calls for Twitter Censorship,'' Electronic Frontier
Foundation, Jan. 6, 2012, https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2012/01/us-
government-calls-censor-twitter-threaten-free-speech.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
More generally, this conclusion was reached by a United Nations
report on ``The Use of the Internet for Terrorist Purposes'':
``On-line discussions provide an opportunity to present opposing
viewpoints or to engage in constructive debate, which may have the
effect of discouraging potential supporters. Counter-narratives with a
strong factual foundation may be conveyed through on-line discussion
forums, images, and videos. Successful messages may also demonstrate
empathy with the underlying issues that contribute to radicalization,
such as political and social conditions, and highlight alternatives to
violent means of achieving the desired outcomes.''\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, The use of the
Internet for terrorist purposes (Vienna: United Nations, 2012), 12.
A powerful specific example of the effective use of social media
platforms to counter on-line terrorist propaganda comes from the U.S.
Center for Strategic Counterterrorism Communications. Noting that the
Center uses Facebook and YouTube for such purposes, the U.N. report
cited one illustration of the touted strategy of ``reducing
radicalization and extremist violence by identifying in a timely manner
extremist propaganda . . . on the internet and responding swiftly with
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
targeted counter-narratives'':
``For instance, in May 2012, the Center . . . responded, within 48
hours, to banner advertisements promoting extremist violence posted on
various websites by al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, with counter-
advertisements on the same websites featuring an altered version of
that same message that was intended to convey that the victims of the
terrorist organization's activities were Yemeni nationals.''\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ UNODC, Use of the internet, 13.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Keeping terrorist content on-line facilitates intelligence gathering
and counter-terrorism efforts
Let me again quote the above-cited U.N. report:
``While terrorists have developed many ways to use the internet in
furtherance of illicit purposes, their use of the internet also
provides opportunities for the gathering of intelligence and other
activities to prevent and counter acts of terrorism, as well as for the
gathering of evidence for the prosecution of such acts. A significant
amount of knowledge about the functioning, activities and sometimes the
targets of terrorist organizations is derived from . . . internet
communications. Further, increased internet use for terrorist purposes
provides a corresponding increase in the availability of electronic
data which may be compiled and analysed for counter-terrorism purposes.
Law enforcement, intelligence and other authorities are developing
increasingly sophisticated tools to proactively prevent, detect and
deter terrorist activity involving use of the internet.''\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ UNODC, Use of the internet, 12.
Social media companies' restrictions on misinformation likewise have
suppressed much valuable information, and also have reinforced
misinformation
Efforts to clearly, consistently define and enforce prohibited
``misinformation'' are at least as futile as those to define prohibited
``terror content.'' The U.N. Special Rapporteur's Report stressed the
inevitable vagueness and overbreadth of restrictions on
``disinformation,'' warning that some such ``measures, particularly
those that . . . restrict[] . . . news content, may threaten
independent and alternative news sources or satirical content.''\22\
Likewise, EFF's May 1, 2019 report concluded that ``when tech companies
ban an entire category of content'' such as ``disinformation,'' ``they
have a history of overcorrecting and censoring accurate, useful
speech--or, even worse, reinforcing misinformation.''\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Kaye, Report of the Special Rapporteur,
31.
\23\ Jillian C. York, David Greene, and Gennie Gebhart,
``Censorship Can't be the Only Answer to Disinformation Online,''
Electronic Frontier Foundation (May 1, 2019), https://www.eff.org/
deeplinks/2019/05/censorship-cant-be-only-answer-disinformation-online.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One especially ironic illustration of the latter problem is a 2018
incident in which Facebook's training materials used an egregious
example of disinformation that was incendiary to boot. It was a
photograph that depicted dozens of Buddhist monks surrounded by piles
of dead, barely-clothed bodies, which was captioned as ``The Bod[ies]
of Muslims slaught[er]ed by Buddhist[s].'' Facebook's training
materials described this image as ``a newsworthy exception'' to
Facebook's general ban on nudity (another inherently vague, overbroad
concept of restricted speech) because it depicted ``the victims of
violence in Burma [Myanmar].'' In fact, though, this image actually
depicted the aftermath of an earthquake in another country years
earlier.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Joseph Cox, ``Facebook's Own Training Materials Fell for Fake
News,'' Motherboard/Tech by Vice (Sep. 5, 2018), https://www.vice.com/
en_us/article/j5ny5d/facebook-training-manuals-documents-fell-fake-
news.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SECOND.--Social media companies' most effective strategies for
countering the potential adverse impact of terrorist content and
misinformation are non-censorial, including: Altering the algorithmic
curation that amplifies some potentially dangerous content; and
empowering users with more individualized tools to understand and
control the content they see, and to assess its credibility.
As stated by Vera Eidelman, a staff attorney with the ACLU's
Speech, Privacy, and Technology Project: ``Rather than focus[ing] their
resources and innovation on how best to censor, [social media]
companies should invest in user controls and enabling third party
innovation re[garding] user controls and content moderation.''\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Vera Eidelman, email message to Nadine Strossen, May 28, 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Likewise, in a May 1, 2019 report critiquing social media
restrictions on ``disinformation,'' the EFF endorsed two interrelated
technological approaches that social media should pursue to empower all
of us to make our own voluntary, informed choices about what on-line
material to view, and what not to view, consistent with our own
interests and values: ``addressing the algorithmic `megaphone' at the
heart of the problem and giving users control over their own
feeds.''\26\ Although this particular report focused on disinformation,
its conclusions apply fully to other potentially problematic on-line
content, including terrorist material:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ York, Greene, and Gebhart, ``Censorship Can't be the Only
Answer.''
``Algorithms like Facebook's Newsfeed or Twitter's timeline make
decisions about which . . . content to promote and which to hide. That
kind of curation can play an amplifying role for some types of
incendiary content, despite the efforts of platforms like Facebook to
tweak their algorithms to `disincentivize' or `downrank' it. Features
designed to help people find content they'll like can too easily funnel
them into a rabbit hole of disinformation. That's why platforms should
examine the parts of their infrastructure that are acting as a
megaphone for dangerous content and address the root cause of the
problem rather than censoring users.
``Transparency about how a platform's algorithms work, and tools to
allow users to . . . create their own feeds, are critical . . .
[Facebook's] [r]ecent transparency improvements in this area are
encouraging, but don't go far enough . . . .
``Users shouldn't be held hostage to a platform's proprietary
algorithm. Instead of . . . giving users just a few opportunities to
tweak it, platforms should open up their APIs **** to allow users to
create their own filtering rules for their own algorithms. News
outlets, educational institutions, community groups, and individuals
should all be able to create their own feeds, allowing users to choose
who they trust to curate their information and share their preferences
with their communities.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
**** ``API'' is an abbreviation for ``application program
interface,'' which is a set of routines, protocols, and tools for
building software applications.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additional non-censorial approaches
In addition to the foregoing essential user empowerment strategies,
other non-censorial approaches can also curb the potential adverse
impact of terrorist content and misinformation more effectively than
restricting such expression. These include:
enforcing the many existing laws against actual terrorist
and fraudulent conduct; and
increasing media literacy, so consumers of on-line
expression learn how to avoid terrorist and fraudulent
communications, and how to find and generate effective
``counterspeech,'' refuting and responding to such problematic
communications, dissuading other people from accepting their
messages, and perhaps even dissuading those who issued the
communications (as has happened in significant instances).
PEN America, which advocates for writers and free speech, has
issued two recent reports about fraudulent news and disinformation (in
March 2019 and October 2017),\27\ which strongly endorse media literacy
skills as the ultimate antidote to the potential serious adverse impact
of such expression. As its 2019 report concluded: ``[T]he most
effective proactive tactic against fraudulent news is a citizenry that
is well-equipped to detect, and reject, fraudulent claims.''\28\
Correspondingly, that report concluded that ``the spread of fraudulent
news must not become a mandate for Government or corporate
censorship.''\29\ Non-censorial steps that social media companies
should take, according to PEN America, include ``empower[ing] consumers
with easy-to-use tools . . . to gauge the credibility of information
disseminated through the platform.''\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ ``Truth on the Ballot: Fraudulent News, the Midterm Elections,
and Prospects for 2020,'' PEN America (Mar. 13, 2019), https://pen.org/
wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Truth-on-the-Ballot-report.pdf; ``Faking
News: Fraudulent News and the Fight for Truth,'' PEN America (Oct. 12,
2017), https://pen.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/2017-Faking-News-
11.2.pdf.
\28\ PEN America, ``Truth on the Ballot,'' 7.
\29\ PEN America, ``Truth on the Ballot,'' 48.
\30\ PEN America, ``Faking News,'' 27.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
THIRD.--While social media companies have the legal right to engage
in content moderation--including efforts to restrict terrorist content
and misinformation--they should do so in ways that are consistent with
universal human rights norms, including those governing freedom of
expression. At a minimum, they should follow procedural standards that
promote accountability, fundamental fairness/due process, and
transparency.
The Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, adopted by the
United Nations Human Rights Council in 2011, urge companies to adhere
to international human rights standards throughout their operations and
wherever they operate.\31\ Although these Principles are non-binding,
the ``overwhelming role'' that the giant social media companies play
``in public life globally argues strongly for their . . .
implementation'' of these Principles, according to the U.N. Special
Rapporteur's Report.\32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Kaye, Report of the Special Rapporteur,
6.
\32\ Kaye, Report of the Special Rapporteur,
5.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In terms of free speech norms, the U.N. Special Rapporteur's Report
maintained that these companies should permit ``users to develop
opinions, express themselves freely and access information of all kinds
in a manner consistent with human rights law.''\33\ The applicable
human rights law substantially overlaps with core U.S. free speech
principles; it requires that any speech restriction should be clearly
and narrowly defined, and demonstrated to be both necessary and
proportionate to avert specific, serious harm that the speech would
directly cause. For speech that is feared to have a more indirect,
speculative harmful potential, we should respond with non-censorial
measures, as outlined above.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ Kaye, Report of the Special Rapporteur,
15.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Concerning minimal procedural standards, a starting point is the
``Santa Clara Principles On Transparency and Accountability in Content
Moderation,'' which were adopted in 2018 by a group of civil liberties
organizations and individual experts.\34\ These minimum procedural
principles have also been endorsed by the U.N. Special Rapporteur's
Report, and at least their general ``spirit'' has been endorsed by many
major social media companies, including all three companies represented
at this hearing.\35\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ ``Santa Clara Principles on Transparency and Accountability in
Content Moderation,'' The Santa Clara Principles (May 2018), https://
santaclaraprinciples.org. The authors of the Principles were the ACLU
of Northern California, The Center for Democracy & Technology,
Electronic Frontier Foundation, New America's Open Technology
Institute, Irina Raicu, Nicolas Suzor, Sarah T. Roberts, and Sarah
Myers West.
\35\ Gennie Gebhart, ``Who Has Your Back? Censorship Edition
2019,'' Electronic Frontier Foundation (June 12, 2019), https://
www.eff.org/wp/who-has-your-back-2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Santa Clara Principles spell out detailed steps that social
media companies should take to pursue the following broader
initiatives:
(1) Publishing the numbers of posts removed and accounts
permanently or temporarily suspended due to violations of their content
guidelines;
(2) Providing notice to each user whose content is taken down or
whose account is suspended about the reason for such action; and
(3) Providing a meaningful opportunity for timely appeal of any
content removal or account suspension.
more specific points that reinforce these major conclusions
First.--Throughout history, we have seen a constant impulse to
disproportionately blame expression for societal problems, which is
understandable but misguided.
Correspondingly, it seems to be intuitively appealing to seek to
suppress expression of ideas that one disfavors or fears to be
potentially dangerous. As former Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell
Holmes memorably put it:
``Persecution for the expression of opinions seems to me perfectly
logical. If you have no doubt of your premises or your power, and want
a certain result with all your heart, you naturally express your wishes
in law, and sweep away all opposition.''\36\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ Abrams v. United States, 250 U.S. 616, 630 (1919) (Holmes, J.,
dissenting).
Nonetheless, Holmes even more memorably explained why that tempting
speech-blaming/speech-suppressive instinct is inconsistent with
individual liberty and democracy, setting out the ``emergency
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
principle'' that all modern Justices have embraced:
``[W]e should be eternally vigilant against attempts to check the
expression of opinions that we loathe and believe to be fraught with
death, unless they so imminently threaten immediate interference with
the lawful and pressing purposes of the law that an immediate check is
required to save the country.''\37\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ Ibid.
The general pattern of scapegoating expression for allegedly
fostering societal problems is especially pronounced concerning
expression that is conveyed by any new media. Each new, powerful
communications medium raises concerns about its ability to transmit
controversial expression to vulnerable individuals and groups,
provoking fear--even panic--about potential ensuing harm. Accordingly,
throughout history, censorial efforts have greeted each new
communications medium: From the printing press to the internet.
Let me list some examples of media-blaming for a range of serious
social problems, just within my adult lifetime:
Sexual expression in all media, including on-line, has been
blamed for undermining everything from women's equality and
safety to the ``traditional American family.''
So-called ``hate radio'' has been blamed for fomenting
domestic extremism and terrorism.
Violent videos have been blamed for instigating school
shootings.
Rap and rock lyrics have been blamed for instigating sexual
assaults against women and also shootings of police officers.
Second.--With 20/20 hindsight, we have consistently come to realize
that this scapegoating of expression as a purported major cause of
social ills--and the associated calls for censorship as a purported
solution--have multiple interrelated flaws.
This approach wrongly regards individuals as passive
automatons who lack autonomy to make our own choices about what
expression to view and what not to, and to avoid being
passively ``brainwashed'' by what we do view.
To be sure, as discussed above, social media companies and
others should take affirmative steps to maximize individual
freedom of choice in this sphere. We should ensure that all
media consumers have the educational and technological
resources to make truly independent, informed, voluntary
decisions about our communications. In the social media
context, this means not directing users to increasingly
extreme content, unbeknownst to them. It does mean
developing and deploying technology that will empower each
user to make maximally individualized choices about what
content to view and to communicate, and what to avoid or
block.
Scapegoating expression also diverts attention and resources
from the real problems: Underlying attitudes and actual
conduct. Suppressing expression is a superficial, cheap ``quick
fix'' for complex, deep-rooted problems, which actually fixes
nothing. To the contrary, pushing the feared ideas underground
may well make it harder to counter those ideas, and also harder
to prevent those who hold them from engaging in harmful
conduct.
This censorial approach may not only make it harder to
recruit advocates of the feared ideas/actions away from their
ideologies, but it may well also increase attention, sympathy,
and support for such ideologies among members of the broader
public. This pattern is so common that several terms have been
coined to describe it, including ``the forbidden fruits
effect,'' ``the boomerang effect,'' and ``the Streisand
effect'' (the latter term was coined when Barbra Streisand
sought to block on-line photographs of her Malibu home, thus
increasing exponentially the viewing of such photographs). We
should focus instead on persuading people to reject dangerous
ideas, and preventing people from engaging in harmful conduct.
Third.--Social media companies are not constrained by the First
Amendment's Free Speech Clause, which limits only Government actors,
not private-sector actors. To the contrary, social media companies have
their own First Amendment rights, including the right to decide which
speakers and expression to permit--or not to permit--on their
platforms. However, these platforms should provide the same free speech
opportunities that Government is required to provide, consistent with
both compelling policy concerns and global human rights norms
applicable to business.
As I noted at the outset of this testimony, social media companies
have their own First Amendment rights to adopt and enforce content
moderation policies they choose, and any Government regulation of such
policies--whether prescribing or proscribing--any such policies--would
raise serious concerns about abridging the companies' freedom of
speech. However, it is eminently appropriate for Congress and other
Government actors, as well as civil society groups and users, to
encourage these companies to implement content moderation policies, and
to take other actions, that promote their users' free speech, as well
as promoting other essential concerns, including National security and
democracy.
As a practical matter, social media platforms now constitute the
most important forums for exchanging information and ideas, including
between ``We the People'' (to quote the Constitution's opening words)
and the political candidates and officials who are accountable to us.
In a 2017 Supreme Court decision that unanimously struck down a State
law that restricted access to social media by convicted sex offenders
who had served their prison terms, Justice Anthony Kennedy's majority
opinion stressed the social media's stature as the preeminent platform
for expression. If we do not have equal, open access to these forums,
to convey and receive communications, then for all practical purposes,
our freedom of speech--and, accordingly, our equal stature as sovereign
citizens--is curtailed. As Justice Kennedy declared:
``A fundamental principle of the First Amendment is that all persons
have access to places where they can speak and listen, and then, after
reflection, speak and listen once more. The Court has sought to protect
the right to speak in this spatial context. A basic rule, for example,
is that a street or a park is a quintessential forum for the exercise
of First Amendment rights . . . While in the past there may have been
difficulty in identifying the most important places (in a spatial
sense) for the exchange of views, today the answer is clear. It is
cyber space . . . and social media in particular.''\38\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ Packingham, 137 S. Ct. at 1735.
Moreover, as discussed above, social media companies should adhere
to the U.N. Human Rights Council's Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights, which include respect for free speech. As the U.N.
Special Rapporteur urged, social media companies should engage in
content moderation that permits ``users to express themselves freely
and access information of all kinds in a manner consistent with human
rights law.''\39\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ Kaye, Report of the Special Rapporteur,
39.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fourth.--A core free speech principle that social media companies
should honor, consistent with both U.S. and human rights law, is
``content neutrality'' or ``viewpoint neutrality'': That speech should
not be restricted solely due its disfavored content--i.e., its
viewpoint, message, or ideas.
No matter how loathed or feared such content may be, by no matter
how many of us, we must respond to it with non-censorial counter
measures, including education and persuasion. Measures that
discriminate against speech based solely on its disfavored content or
viewpoint are almost automatically un-Constitutional. The Supreme Court
has hailed content neutrality as ``the bedrock principle'' undergirding
Constitutional freedom of speech.\40\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\40\ Texas v. Johnson, 491 U.S. 397, 414 (1988).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This fundamental free speech principle is reflected in
international human rights norms. Accordingly, the U.N. Special
Rapporteur's Report expressly urges social media companies to enforce
their content moderation policies consistent with a ``non-
discrimination'' standard, rather than through ``heavy-handed
viewpoint-based regulation.''\41\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\41\ Kaye, Report of the Special Rapporteur,
48, 66.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fifth.--Social media companies should additionally honor the
complementary ``emergency'' principle, which is also integral to both
U.S. and human rights law.
When we move beyond the content of speech and consider its context,
speech may be restricted if it satisfies the emergency test: When,
under all the facts and circumstances, the speech directly causes
certain specific, imminent, serious harm, which cannot effectively be
countered through non-censorial measures.
This key principle is also reflected in the global human rights
requirements of ``necessity'' and ``proportionality.'' As the U.N.
Special Rapporteur's Report explained, proponents of any speech
restriction ``must demonstrate that the restriction imposes the least
burden on the exercise of'' free speech, ``and actually protects, or is
likely to protect, the legitimate . . . interest at issue.'' Proponents
of the restriction ``may not merely assert necessity but must
demonstrate it, in the restriction of specific expression.'' Moreover,
social media ``[c]ompanies should . . . demonstrate the necessity and
proportionality of any content actions (such as removals or account
suspensions).''\42\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\42\ Kaye, Report of the Special Rapporteur,
7, 28, 66
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Applying these standards to terror content and misinformation,
social media companies should not restrict such expression unless they
could demonstrate that the restriction was ``necessary'' and
``proportional'' for averting the potential harms of such expression.
This showing would be hard to make concerning either terror content or
misinformation, in light of the evidence discussed above, which
demonstrated the inherent overbreadth of such speech restrictions, and
called into question whether they are even effective in averting the
potential harms, let alone necessary.
Sixth.--The Supreme Court has designated several narrowly-defined
categories of speech that may be restricted consistent with the content
neutrality and emergency principles, including two that are pertinent
to the two types of speech at issue in these hearings: Speech with
terrorist content and misinformation. It would be appropriate for
social media companies to restrict these narrowly-defined subcategories
of speech with terrorist content and misinformation: Speech that
satisfies the standards for punishable incitement, fraud, or
defamation.
The Court has barred Government from restricting speech that
contains terrorist content or speech that is feared to
potentially contribute to terrorism unless, in context, it
satisfies the following, appropriately strict, standards: It
intentionally incites imminent violent or criminal conduct, and
it is actually likely to do so imminently. Accordingly, the
Court has struck down even restrictions on explicit advocacy of
violent or criminal conduct, including terrorism, when it falls
short of the foregoing strict intentional incitement
standard.\43\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\43\ Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U.S. 444 (1969).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Court has barred Government from punishing many kinds of
``misinformation'' and even outright lies, except in certain
situations when intentional falsehoods directly cause certain
specific imminent serious harms, including by defrauding an
individual who has reasonably relied on the falsehood in a way
that causes demonstrable tangible injury; or by defaming an
individual about a matter of private concern in a way that
injures her reputation and causes demonstrable tangible injury.
When the defamatory falsehood pertains to a public official or
public figure, it may not be punished unless the complainant
can establish, by ``clear and convincing evidence,'' that the
speaker knowingly or recklessly lied.\44\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\44\ New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254 (1964).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Seventh.--Speech that does not satisfy the emergency test may still
cause serious harm; that is true for speech with terrorist content and
misinformation. However, the modern Court has consistently enforced the
content neutrality and emergency principles because it is even more
harmful to grant enforcing authorities latitude to punish speech that
does not satisfy the emergency test. This is true regardless of who the
enforcing authorities are, including social media companies.
As Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes famously recognized,
``Every idea is an incitement.''\45\ He did not mean that Government
may therefore suppress every idea, but rather the opposite: If every
idea that could potentially incite harmful conduct or consequences
could be suppressed, all ideas could be suppressed. Accordingly, to
shield freedom to express ideas--potentially inciting and potentially
dangerous as they are--we should confine censorial power only to ideas
and expression that satisfy the emergency test: Directly causing
specific, imminent, serious harm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\45\ Gitlow v. New York, 268 U.S. 652, 673 (1925) (Holmes, J.,
dissenting).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If censorial power could be exercised under a looser, broader
standard, the resulting discretion would inevitably lead to suppressing
valuable speech, and would disproportionately target speech by
relatively disempowered, marginalized individuals and groups, including
those who challenge the status quo.
For example, before the Supreme Court adopted the strict
``intentional incitement'' test, Government regularly enforced
legal restrictions on ``terrorist'' and other feared expression
against politically unpopular, relatively powerless speakers,
including abolitionists, socialists, women's suffragists,
pacifists, anti-war and anti-draft demonstrators, and civil
rights advocates.
Likewise, before the Supreme Court adopted strict standards
limiting punishable defamation, National media outlets and
civil rights leaders and organizations were regularly targeted
with defamation lawsuits that (absent the Court's invalidation)
would have led to speech-suppressive damage awards, preventing
information and advocacy about the civil rights movement from
reaching the critically important Nation-wide audience.
When expression may be restricted short of the emergency
standard, the restrictions are often counterproductive:
Suppressing expression that would actually promote the
countervailing goals at issue.
As detailed above, these general, inevitable problems have--
predictably--specifically afflicted social media companies'
enforcement of their standards that restrict terrorist content
and misinformation.
conclusion
In closing, I would like to invoke an apt observation by the famed
twentieth-century journalist H.L. Mencken: ``For every complex problem,
there is a solution that is clear, simple--and wrong.''
How to effectively counter the serious potential adverse impact of
terror content and misinformation is certainly a complex problem. While
restricting such expression might appear to be a clear, simple
solution, it is in fact neither--and, moreover, it is wrong. We must
focus on the non-censorial strategies I have discussed, including user
empowering education and technology. Although these approaches are also
not simple, they are far more promising than censorship.
Chairman Thompson. I thank all the witnesses for their
testimony.
I remind each Member that he or she will have 5 minutes to
question the panel.
I will now recognize myself for questions.
Misinformation is some of this committee's challenges as it
relates to this hearing, as well as the terrorist content.
Let's take, for instance, the recent doctored video of Speaker
Nancy Pelosi that made her appear to be drunk or slurring her
words. Facebook and Twitter left up the video, but YouTube took
it down. Everybody agreed that something was wrong with it.
Facebook, again, took a different approach.
So I want Ms. Bickert and Mr. Pickles to explain how you
decided the process for leaving this video up on Facebook and
Twitter.
Then, Mr. Slater, I want you to explain to me why YouTube
decided to take it down.
Ms. Bickert.
Ms. Bickert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me first say, misinformation is a top concern for us,
especially as we are getting ready for the 2020 elections. We
know this is something that we have to get right. We are
especially focused on what we should be doing with increasingly
sophisticated manipulated media.
So let me first speak to our general approach with
misinformation, which is: We remove content when it violates
our community standards. Beyond that, if we see somebody that
is sharing misinformation, we want to make sure that we are
reducing the distribution and also providing accurate
information from independent fact-checking organizations so
that people can put in context what they see.
To do that, we work with 45 independent fact-checking
organizations from around the world, each of which is certified
by Poynter as being independent and meeting certain principles.
As soon as we find something that those fact-checking
organizations rate ``false'' on our platform, we dramatically
reduce the distribution, and we put next to it related articles
so that anybody who shares that gets a warning that this has
been rated ``false.'' Anybody who did share it before we got
the fact-checkers's rating gets a notification that the content
has now been rated ``false'' by a fact-checker, and we are
putting next to it those related articles from the fact-
checking organizations.
Chairman Thompson. I understand. How long did it take you
to do that for the Pelosi video?
Ms. Bickert. The Pelosi video was uploaded to Facebook on
Wednesday, May 22, around late morning. On Thursday around 6:30
p.m., a fact-checking organization rated it as ``false,'' and
we immediately downranked it and put information next to it.
That is something where we think we need to get faster. We
need to make sure that we are getting this information to
people as soon as we can. It is also a reason that at 6:30
p.m.----
Chairman Thompson. So it took you about a day-and-a-half.
Ms. Bickert. Yes, it did, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
Mr. Pickles.
Mr. Pickles. So, as Monika said, the process for us is we
review this against our rules; any content that breaks our
rules we will remove. We are also very aware that people use
manipulated tactics to spread this content--fake accounts,
automation. So we will take action on the distribution as well
as the content.
This is a policy area we are looking at right now not just
in the case of where videos might be manipulated but also where
the videos are fabricated, where the whole process of creating
media may be artificial.
We think that the best way to approach this is with a
policy and a product approach that covers in some cases
removing----
Chairman Thompson. I understand, but just get to why you
left it up.
Mr. Pickles. So, at present, the video doesn't break our
rules, and then the account posting it doesn't break our rules.
But it is absolutely a policy area we are looking at right now,
about whether our rules and our products are the correct
framework for dealing with this challenge, which----
Chairman Thompson. So if it is false or misinformation,
that doesn't break your rules.
Mr. Pickles. Not at present, no.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
Mr. Slater.
Mr. Slater. So, on YouTube, we have tough community
guidelines that lay out the rules of the road, what is inbounds
to be up on the platform and what is out. Violative content,
when it is identified to us via machines or users, we will
review and remove.
In this case, the video in question violated our policies
around deceptive practices, and we removed it.
Chairman Thompson. So, again, our committee is tasked with
looking at misinformation and some other things. We are not
trying to regulate companies, but terrorist content can also be
a manipulated document.
So, Ms. Strossen, talk to us about your position with that.
Ms. Strossen. The difficulty in--the inherent subjectivity
of these concepts, Chairman Thompson, is illustrated by the
fact that we have three companies that have subscribed to
essentially the same general commitments and yet are
interpreting the details very differently with respect to
specific content. We see that over and over again.
Ultimately, the only protection that we are going to have
in this society against disinformation is training and
education starting at the earliest levels of a child's
education in media literacy.
Because Congress could never protect against misinformation
in traditional media--right?--unless it meets the very strict
standards of defamation that is punishable and fraud that is
punishable, content, including the Pelosi video, is completely
Constitutionally protected in other media.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
I yield to the Ranking Member for his questions.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Slater, the video I referenced in my comments with Ms.
Gennai and your employee, would you like to take this
opportunity--have you seen it?
Mr. Slater. Congressman, I have not seen the full video,
but I am broadly aware of what you are talking about, yes.
Mr. Rogers. OK. Would you like to take an opportunity to
respond to the comments that I offered about what was said?
Mr. Slater. Could you be specific, Congressman? What would
you like me to respond to?
Mr. Rogers. When she basically, for example, said that we
can't let Google be broken up because these smaller companies
won't have the same resources we have to stop Trump from
getting reelected.
Mr. Slater. Thank you for the clarification.
So let me be clear, this employee was recorded without her
consent. I believe these statements were taken out of context.
But stepping back to our policies, how we address the issue
you are talking about, no employee, whether in the lower ranks,
up to senior executives, has the ability to manipulate our
search results or our products or our services based on their
political ideology.
We design and develop our products for everyone. We mean
everyone. We do that to provide relevant results, authoritative
results. We are in the trust business. We have a long-term
incentive to get that right.
We do that in a transparent fashion. You can read more on
our How Search Works site. We have search rater guidelines that
are public on the web that describe how we look at rating. We
have robust systems and checks and balances in place to make
sure those are rigorously adhered to as we set up our systems.
Mr. Rogers. OK. I recognize that she was being videotaped
without her knowledge, but the statements that I quoted from
were full, complete statements that were not edited.
So it is concerning when you see somebody who is an
executive at Google--and there were more than one in that
video, by the way--making statements that indicate that it is
management's policy within Google to try to manipulate
information to cause one or another candidate for President of
the United States--or, for that matter, any other office--to be
successful or not be successful.
So that is what gave rise to my concern. Do we have reason
to be concerned that Google has a pervasive nature in the
company to try to push one political party over another in the
way it conducts its business?
Mr. Slater. Congressman, I appreciate the concern, but let
me be clear again: In terms of what our policy is, from the
highest levels on down, and what our practices and structures
and checks and balances are about, we do not allow anyone--
lower level, higher level--to manipulate our products in that
way.
Mr. Rogers. OK. I hope it is not the culture at any of your
platforms, because you are very powerful in our country.
Ms. Strossen, you raised concerns in your testimony that,
while social media companies legally can decide what content to
allow on their platforms, such censorship stifles free speech
and results in biased coverage.
What are your recommendations to these companies regarding
content moderation without censorship?
Ms. Strossen. Thank you so much, Ranking Member Rogers.
I would, first of all, endorse at least the transparency
that both you and Chairman Thompson stressed in your opening
remarks and, in addition, other process-related guarantees,
such as due process, the right to appeal, and a clear statement
of standards.
I would also recommend standards that respect the free-
speech guarantees not only in the United States Constitution
but of international human rights that the United Nations Human
Rights Council has recommended in a nonbinding way that
powerful companies adopt. That would mean that content could
not be suppressed unless it posed an emergency, that it
directly caused certain specific, serious, imminent harm that
can't be prevented other than through suppression.
Short of that, as you indicated, for example, Ranking
Member Rogers, politically controversial, even repugnant,
speech should be protected. We may very much disagree with the
message, but the most effective as well as principled way to
oppose it is through more speech.
I would certainly recommend, as I did in my written
testimony, that these companies adopt user-empowering
technology that would allow us users to make truly informed,
voluntary decisions about what we see and what we don't see,
and not manipulate us, as has been reported many times, into
increasing rabbit holes and echo chambers, but give us the
opportunity to make our own choices and to choose our own
communities.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Texas, Ms. Jackson
Lee, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the Chair, and I thank the Ranking
Member, the committee Members for this hearing.
Let me indicate that there is known to the public the
fourth estate, and I might say that we have a fifth estate,
which is all of you and others that represent the social media
empire.
I believe it is important that we work together to find the
right pathway for how America will be a leader in how we
balance the responsibilities and rights of such a giant entity
and the rights and privileges of the American people and the
sanctity and security of the American people.
Social media statistics from 2019 show that there are 3.2
billion social media users world-wide, and this number is only
growing. That equates to about 42 percent of the current world
population. That is enormous. Certainly, I know the numbers are
just as daunting in the United States.
So let me ask a few questions, and I would appreciate
brevity because of the necessity to try to get as much in as
possible.
On March 15, 2019, worshipers were slaughtered in the midst
of their prayers in Christchurch, New Zealand. The gunman live-
streamed the first attack on Facebook Live.
So my question to you, Ms. Bickert, is, can you today
assure the committee that there will never be another attack of
this nature that will be streamed as it is happening over
Facebook Live?
You mentioned 30,000 and 300, and so I hope they may
contribute to your answer. But I yield to you for your answer.
Ms. Bickert. Congresswoman, thank you.
The video was appalling. The attack, of course, is an
unspeakable tragedy. We want to make sure we are doing
everything to make sure it doesn't happen again and it is not
live-streamed again.
One of the things we have done is we have changed access to
Facebook Live so that people who have a serious content policy
violation are restricted from using it. So the person who live-
streamed the New Zealand attack will not----
Ms. Jackson Lee. What is the likelihood of you being able
to commit that that would not happen again, in terms of the new
structures that you have put in place?
Ms. Bickert. Well, the technology we are working to
develop--the technology is not perfect. So artificial
intelligence is a key component of us recognizing videos before
they are reported to us. This video was not--about fewer than
200 people saw it while it was live on Facebook. Nobody
reported it.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So can you give me--my time is short. Do
you have a percentage? Fifty percent? Sixty percent?
Ms. Bickert. With the technology, I can't give a
percentage. I can say that we are working with governments and
others to try to improve that technology so that we will be
able to better recognize----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Pickles and Mr. Slater, if you would,
Ms. Bickert did raise the question about artificial
intelligence. So, if you would respond as to the utilization of
AI and individuals, as briefly as possible, please.
Mr. Pickles. So one of the challenges Twitter has is that
there is not a lot of content--280 characters, a maximum of 2-
minutes-20 video. So one of the challenges in Christchurch was,
we didn't see the same video uploaded. We saw different
snippets that took different lengths.
So we are investing in technology to make sure that people
can't re-upload content once it has been removed previously. We
are also making changes to make sure that, for example, where
people manipulate media we can move quicker. But this is an----
Ms. Jackson Lee. So you are using human subjects and AI?
Mr. Pickles. It is machine learning and humans, yes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right.
Mr. Slater.
Mr. Slater. Thank you, Congresswoman.
We use, similarly, a combination of machine learning and
people to review. Speaking overall, in the first quarter of
2019, 75 percent of the 8 million videos we removed, they were
first flagged by a machine, and the majority were removed
before a single view.
When it comes to violent extremism, it is even stronger. So
over 90 percent of the violent extremist videos that were
uploaded and removed in the past 6 months were removed before a
single human flag, and 88 percent with less than 10 views. That
is----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Let me ask a question about deepfakes--because my time is
going--for each of you, in the 2020 election, what you will do
to recognize the fact that deepfakes can be a distortion of an
election that is really the premise of our democracy. Can you
quickly answer that question?
At the same time, I just want to make mention of the fact
that free speech does not allow incitement, fighting words,
threats, and otherwise.
Could you just answer that, please----
Ms. Bickert. Yes, Congresswoman.
Ms. Jackson Lee [continuing]. The deepfakes? As briefly as
you can.
Ms. Bickert. Absolutely.
We are working with experts outside the company and others
to make sure that we understand how deepfakes can be used and
come up with a comprehensive policy to address them.
In the mean time, we are focused on removing fake accounts,
which are disproportionately responsible for this sort of
content, and also making sure that we are improving the speed
at which we counter misinformation with actual factual articles
and reduce the distribution.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Pickles.
Mr. Pickles. So, similarly, we are working on a product and
policy solution. But one of the things that we already have in
place is, if anyone presents any misinformation about how to
vote that lends to voter suppression, we will remove that now.
That policy has been in place for some time.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Slater.
Mr. Slater. Similarly, we are investing significantly in
working with researchers and others to build capacities in this
space. We have an intel desk that scans the horizon for new
threats and constantly is looking at this sort of issue.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you for your courtesy. I yield back,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
North Carolina, Mr. Walker, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
While we were sitting here today, I just looked up on the
internet, put in ``Facebook apologizes,'' ``Google
apologizes,'' ``Twitter apologizes,'' and there were more pages
than I could count, going through those apologies there.
I listened closely to the words or how you framed it, both
Mr. Pickles and Mr. Slater, when you talked about--one of you
used ``hateful content''--Mr. Pickles. Mr. Slater, you used the
expression ``hate speech.'' You listed several different people
that were protected. What I did not hear you say in that group
of people that you listed were those that were wanting to
express their faith.
In April--one of the larger apologies I think that you guys
have made--in April, Kelsey Harkness brought us to the
attention of Abby Johnson's life story in a movie called
``Unplanned.'' That movie has gone on to make $20 million at
the box office. But Google listed that as propaganda.
My question for you today: Was that a machine that listed
that, or was that an individual?
Mr. Slater. Congressman, I am not familiar with the
specific video in question. I would have to--I would be happy
to go back----
Mr. Walker. This isn't a video. It is a movie. It was one
of the larger stories in April this year, a major motion
picture. You are not familiar with that? It didn't come across
your radar?
Mr. Slater. No, sir, I am not familiar with that specific
video.
Mr. Walker. OK. All right.
When we talk about the difference between hateful content
and hate speech, I know, Mr. Pickles, in June, just earlier
this year, Marco Rubio brought the attention that Twitter was
banning any kind of language that was maybe offensive to China.
You later came back and apologized.
The question for you is: How does Twitter use their
discretion to block information without discriminating against
different individuals or groups?
Mr. Pickles. Well, first, as you say, our rules identify
hateful conduct. So we focus on behavior first. So how do two
accounts interact? We look at that before we look at the speech
that they are sharing.
So there are offensive views on Twitter, and there are
views that people will disagree with strongly on Twitter. The
difference between that and targeting somebody else is a
difference between content and conduct. So our rules don't have
ideology in them. They are enforced without ideology and
impartially. Where we do make mistakes, I think it is important
for us to recognize.
I know one of the challenges we have is that, where we
remove someone from Twitter and they come back for a different
purpose, our technology will recognize that person trying to
come back on Twitter, and we don't want people to come back to
the platform that we have removed. Sometimes that does catch
people who are having a different purpose.
So there is both a value to technology, but we should
recognize where we have made a mistake.
Mr. Walker. Mr. Slater, how does Google audit their content
moderation policies to ensure that they are being followed and
that they are not being driven by bias?
Mr. Slater. Thank you, Congressman, for that question.
Speaking broadly, we have a robust system of both the
development and the enforcement of our policies. We are
constantly reviewing and analyzing the policies themselves to
understand whether they are fit for purpose, whether they are
drawing the right lines.
Our reviewers go through extensive training to make sure we
have a consistent approach. We draw those reviewers from around
the country, around the world, and, again, train them very
deeply and are constantly reviewing----
Mr. Walker. Yes, and I appreciate it. I need to keep
moving.
What type of training, if any, do you provide for your
human content moderators regarding subjectivity and avoiding
bias, Mr. Slater?
Mr. Slater. Again, we provide robust training to make sure
that we are applying a consistent rule.
Mr. Walker. ``Robust training,'' what does that mean? What
is robust training?
Mr. Slater. So, when reviewers are brought on board, before
they are allowed to review, we provide them with a set of
educational materials and detailed steps. In addition, they are
reviewed by managers and others to make sure that they can
correct mistakes, then learn from those mistakes, and so on.
Mr. Walker. All right.
Ms. Bickert, do you think that AI will ever get to the
point where you can rely solely on it to moderate content, or
do you think human moderation will always play a role?
Ms. Bickert. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
At least for the near future, human moderation is very
important to this. Technology is good at some things. It is
good at, for instance, matching known images of terror
propaganda or child sexual abuse. It is not as good at making
the contextual calls around something like hate speech or
bullying.
Mr. Walker. Uh-huh.
Final couple questions as I wind down my time.
Mr. Pickles, do you have any idea how many times Twitter
apologizes per month for missing it on content?
Mr. Pickles. Well, I know that we take action on appeals
regularly. Every decision we have made----
Mr. Walker. Do you have a number on that?
Mr. Pickles. I don't have a number off-hand, but I can
happily follow up.
Mr. Walker. Mr. Slater, do you have any idea how many times
Google apologizes for mismanaging the content per month?
Mr. Slater. Congressman, similarly, we have an appeals
process, so there are times where we don't get it right----
Mr. Walker. Do you have a number?
Mr. Slater. I do not today, but I would be happy to come
back to you.
Mr. Walker. Yes, I think you guys have apologized more than
Kanye West has to Taylor Swift at some point.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from
Illinois, Ms. Underwood, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Underwood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In March, 2 weeks after the Christchurch terror attack,
Facebook announced it would start directing users searching for
white supremacist terms to Life After Hate, an organization
that works to rehabilitate extremists.
Life After Hate is based in Chicago, so I met with them
last month when I was at home in Illinois. They told me since
Facebook's announcement they have seen, ``a large bump in
activity that hasn't slowed down.''
Facebook and Instagram have 3 billion users combined. Life
After Hate is a tiny organization whose Federal funding was
pulled by this administration. They do great work and simply
don't have the resources to handle every single neo-Nazi on the
internet on their own.
Ms. Bickert, has Facebook considered providing continuous
funding to Life After Hate for the duration of this
partnership?
Ms. Bickert. Congresswoman, thank you for that question.
Life After Hate is doing great work with us. For those who
don't know, basically, we are redirecting people who are
searching for these terms to this content. We do this in some
other areas as well, like, for instance, with self-harm support
groups.
We do see that sometimes they are under-resourced. So this
is something that we can come back to you on, but we are
definitely committed to making sure this works.
Ms. Underwood. OK. So right now there is no long-term
funding commitment, but you will consider it.
Ms. Bickert. I am not sure what the details are, but I will
follow up with you on them.
Ms. Underwood. OK. So Facebook has made Life After Hate a
significant component of its strategy against on-line
extremism, and so we really would appreciate that follow-up
with exact information.
Ms. Bickert. I would be happy to.
Ms. Underwood. Mr. Slater, over the years, YouTube has put
forward various policy changes in an attempt to limit how
easily dangerous conspiracy-theory videos spread. For example,
YouTube announced over a year ago that it would display,
``information cues'' in the form of links to Wikipedia next to
the conspiracy videos.
Mr. Slater, in the 15 months since this policy was
announced, what percentage of users who view videos with
information cues actually click on the link for more
information?
Mr. Slater. Thank you for the question, and I think this is
a very important issue. We do both display these sort of
contextual cues to Wikipedia and Encyclopedia Britannica as
well as take a number of other steps.
Ms. Underwood. Right.
Mr. Slater. I don't have a specific percentage on how many
have clicked through but would be happy to come back to you.
Ms. Underwood. OK. If you can follow up in writing, that
would be appreciated.
Most Wikipedia articles can be edited by anyone on the
internet. We have all seen some with questionable content. Does
YouTube vet the Wikipedia articles that it links to on
information cues to ensure their accuracy? Or do you all work
with Wikipedia to ensure that the articles are locked against
malicious edits?
Mr. Slater. We work to raise up authoritative information
and ensure that what we are displaying is trustworthy and
correct any mistakes that we may make.
Ms. Underwood. So you all have corrected the YouTube--I'm
sorry, the Wikipedia pages if it is incorrect?
Mr. Slater. No. I am sorry. Before we display such things,
we look to ensure that we have a robust process to make sure
that we are displaying accurate information.
Ms. Underwood. The question is about what you are linking
to.
Mr. Slater. Yes.
Ms. Underwood. OK. So can you just follow up with us in
writing on that one?
Mr. Slater. Yes.
Ms. Underwood. Great.
Ms. Bickert, Facebook has displayed links to additional
reporting next to content that contains disinformation. What
percentage of users click through to read that additional
reporting?
Ms. Bickert. I don't have that percentage for you,
Congresswoman. I am sorry about that. But I will follow up in
writing quickly.
Ms. Underwood. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, at this point, I would like to ask the clerk
to display the two screenshots my staff provided earlier on the
TV screens.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Ms. Underwood. Last month, Instagram announced that it
would hide search results for hashtags that displayed vaccine
disinformation. So, yesterday, I did a simple search for
``vaccine'' on Instagram from two different accounts. These are
the top results. As you can see, the majority of these
responses display anti-vax hashtags and popular accounts with
titles like ``CorruptVaccines,'' ``VaccinesUncovered,'' and
``Vaccine Injury Awareness.''
These are not niche terms. This content is not hard to
find, and vaccine disinformation is not a new issue.
Ms. Bickert, clearly, Instagram's efforts here have some
gaps. Anti-vax content is a deadly threat to public health.
What additional steps can Instagram commit to taking to ensure
that this content is not promoted?
Ms. Bickert. Congresswoman, thank you for that question.
Vaccine hoaxes and misinformation are really top of mind for
us. We have launched some recent measures, but I want to tell
you how we are working to get better on those.
One thing we are doing is, when accounts are sharing
misinformation, we are trying to downrank them and downrank
them in the search results as well. That is something that is
on-going. It requires some manual review for us to make sure
that we are doing that right. But we are getting better at
that.
Another thing is actually surfacing educational content,
and we are working with major health organizations to provide
that. So, when people go searching for this, at the top of the
search results they will see that informational content. We are
working with those health organizations right now, and we
should have that content up and running soon. I can follow up
with you with the details on that.
Ms. Underwood. Please. While this is a new initiative for
your organization, it is critically important that that
information is shared with users at the time that they search
for it, which we know is on-going.
Look, everyone in this room appreciates that on-line
extremism and disinformation are extremely difficult problems
that require broad, coordinated solutions. But these aren't new
challenges, and failing to respond seriously to them is
dangerous. The research is clear: Social media helps extremists
find each other, helps make their opinions more extreme, and
helps them hurt our communities.
My constituents and I want strong policies from your
companies that keep us safe. While I truly believe that your
current policies are well-intentioned, there is a lot more that
needs to be done. Frankly, some of it should have been done
already. I am looking forward to working with your companies
and my colleagues in Congress on broad, real solutions.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Katko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here today.
It is obvious from this conversation that this is a very
difficult area to maneuver in.
Ms. Strossen, I understand your concerns about First
Amendment infringement, but I also understand and I applaud the
companies' desire to try and find that delicate balance. Quite
frankly, since you are not a Government entity, you have more
flexibility in how you do that, and it is kind of up to you, as
the stewards of that flexibility, to do the best job you
possibly can. So I am going to get back to you in a minute with
a couple of questions.
But I just want to follow up with Mr. Slater to make sure I
am perfectly clear with what you are saying here. I am well
aware from your testimony previously of what the policies and
practices are at Google. But that video that Mr. Rogers did
reference did show that people were--looked like they were
talking about a very serious political bias and their intent to
implement that bias in their job. Whether or not that happened,
I don't know.
I am not asking about the policies and practices. I am
asking you if you personally have ever been made aware of
anyone that has done that, used political bias at Google to
alter content, or whether they--first of all, have you ever
heard that within Google? I know what your policy and practices
are, so I don't want a long answer. I just want to know if you
have heard that.
Mr. Slater. Congressman, I am not aware of any situation.
Our robust checks and balances and processes would prevent
that.
Mr. Katko. OK. So you personally have not ever heard of
that, ever, since your time at Google.
Mr. Slater. Correct.
Mr. Katko. OK. The allegation that Congressman Walker
referenced about the abortion movie, you have heard nothing
about people limiting contact with respect to that, as well--
context--excuse me--content?
Mr. Slater. Congressman, I am not familiar with that video,
no.
Mr. Katko. OK. All right. You have never heard anybody
limiting content in that regard for any sort of issue-oriented
things?
Mr. Slater. Again, we would remove content where it
violates our policies, but not--but our policies with regard to
ranking----
Mr. Katko. I am aware of your policy and practices. I'm
just saying, have you ever heard that yourself? There is a
difference. You understand the difference? It is not what your
policy and practices are; it is what you are personally aware
of.
Mr. Slater. Yes, Congressman, I believe I understand. I am
not aware of any situation like that.
Mr. Katko. OK. Thank you.
Now, I want to talk to Mr. Slater--all of you here today.
This internet forum, G-I-F-C-T, GIFCT--which is the lamest
acronym ever, by the way--Global Internet Forum to Counter
Terrorism.
Can someone just--Mr. Pickles, perhaps, could you just give
me a little detail of what exactly the goal is of this forum?
Mr. Pickles. Sure. Equally, as Facebook and Google have
both chaired the organization, happy for them to add.
I think the critical thing is, GIFCT is about bringing
together 4 companies who have expertise and investment on
countering terrorism but recognizing that the challenge is far
bigger.
So the 3 strands. Support small companies. As we remove
content, it goes across the internet, and we need to help those
small companies. Fund research, so we can better understand, so
we have a research network. Then, finally, sharing technical
tools. So you have heard people reference these digital
fingerprints to make sure that, whether it is a fingerprint
or--in Twitter's case, we share the URL. So, if we take down an
account for spreading a terrorist manual and we see it is
linked to a company, we will tell the other company, ``Hey, a
terrorist account is linked to something on your service. You
should check it out.''
Mr. Katko. It is similar to what you do in the malware
arena, correct?
Mr. Pickles. Yes. So industry collaboration is really at
the heart of it.
Mr. Katko. OK. Now, what companies are members of this? Is
there a whole bunch, or is there just a limited number?
Mr. Pickles. So, when we founded it, it was Google,
Twitter--sorry--YouTube, Twitter, Microsoft, and Facebook.
Dropbox has now joined.
One of the things we have is a partnership with Tech
Against Terrorism, which allows small companies to go through a
training process, so they learn things like how to write their
terms of service, how to enforce their terms of service. By
mentoring them, that is where--we are hopeful that we will have
more companies joining and growing this, but the hash-sharing
consortium has many members, 15 members. We share URLs with 13
companies.
So it is broad, but we want it to have a high standard. We
want membership to be the companies who are doing the best, and
that is why we want to keep a high bar and bring people in.
Mr. Katko. I understand.
Now, as far as the encrypted messaging platforms, I take it
they are not all members of this, they are not all participants
on this, are they?
Mr. Pickles. I am probably not the best person to answer
that question.
Mr. Katko. Would you know, Ms. Bickert?
Ms. Bickert. Sure. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
So the main members are, as Mr. Pickles mentioned, those 5
companies. Now, in terms----
Mr. Katko. I understand.
Ms. Bickert [continuing]. Of the smaller companies who have
been trained, that does include some of the encrypted messaging
services. Because some of this is about just understanding what
are the right lines to draw, how to work with law enforcement
authorities, which encrypted communication services can
definitely do.
Mr. Katko. Some of the--my biggest concern is that, while
the big players in this field, all of you at the table, seem to
be endeavoring to try and do the right thing, especially with
respect to counterterrorism, that the encrypted messaging
platforms, by and large, have a much broader field to play in,
and there doesn't seem to be much we can do to stop their
content from spreading their filth and their violence.
So I would love to hear any suggestions--I know my time is
up, so perhaps in writing--as to how we could try and entice
some of them to be part of this effort. The encryption is
obviously a breeding ground for white supremacists, violence of
all sorts. Trying to get the companies to be more responsible
and just not worried about their bottom-line profit-making
would be--would be great to hear from you guys. So thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from
Michigan, Ms. Slotkin, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Slotkin. Good morning. Thanks for being here.
I wanted to switch gears for just a second and talk about
the influence and the spread of foreign-based information,
foreign-based political ads in particular, in our political
process.
Many of us read the Mueller report page by page, and I was
interested, Ms. Bickert, that the Facebook general counsel
stated for the record that, for the low, low price of $100,000,
the Russian-associated Internet Research Agency got to 126
million American eyeballs.
I am interested in this because the political ads that they
put forward were specifically targeted to swing States, and
Michigan is one of those States, so we saw an overabundance of
these ads. They were specifically paid for by foreign entities,
and they were advocating for or against a candidate in our
political process. I have a serious problem with that.
So, separate from the issues of speech and what an American
does or does not have the right to say, can you speak
specifically to Facebook's reaction to the fact that they
spread foreign, purchased information--and it doesn't matter to
me that it was Russian; it could be Chinese or Iranian--and
what steps you have taken since 2016 to prevent the spread of
foreign information?
Ms. Bickert. Absolutely, Congresswoman. Thank you for the
question. Where we were in 2016--I mean, we are in a much, much
better place. So let me share with you some of the steps we
have taken.
First of all, all of those ads came from fake accounts. We
have a policy against fake accounts, but we have gotten much
better--and we had it then, but we have gotten much better at
enforcing it. Now we are actually stopping more than a million
accounts, fake accounts, per day at the time of upload. We
publish stats on how many fake accounts we are removing every
quarter, and you can see how much better we have gotten in the
past 2 years.
Another thing that we are doing with political ads
specifically is we are requiring unprecedented levels of
transparency. Now, if you want to run a political or political
issue ad in the United States, you have to first verify your
identity. You have to show you are an American, which means we
actually send you something--because we have seen fake IDs
uploaded from advertisers--we send you something through the
mail, and you actually then get a code, and you upload for us
the government ID. So we verify that you are a real American.
Then we also put a ``paid for'' disclaimer on the political
ad, and we put it in an ads library we have created that is
visible to everybody. So, even if you don't have a Facebook
account, you can go and see this ads library. You can search
what type of political ads are appearing, who is paying for
them, and other information about how they are being targeted
and so forth.
Ms. Slotkin. That is good to hear. I am glad to hear it. I
would love to see--if there are reports, I would love to just
be directed to them so I can see them.
For the others at the table, can you talk about your
specific--and brief, please--your specific policy on the spread
of foreign political ads for or against a candidate running for
office in the United States?
Mr. Pickles. So the first thing we did was to ban Russia
Today and all of its associated entities from using any of our
advertising products going forward.
We took all of the revenue from Russia Today and their
associated entities and are funding research and partnerships
with organizations like the Atlantic Council, like the
DisinfoLab in Brussels, to research better how we can prevent
against this.
We then took the unprecedented step of publishing every
tweet, not just the paid-for ones, every tweet that was
produced by a foreign influence operation in a public archive.
So you can now access more than 30 million tweets that runs to
more than a terabyte of videos and photographs in a public
archive. Those include operations from Russia, Iran, Venezuela,
and other countries.
Ms. Slotkin. Mr. Slater.
Mr. Slater. Thank you for the question.
Looking backward at 2016, we found very limited improper
activity on our platforms. That is a product of our threat
analysis group and our other tools to root out that sort of
behavior.
Looking forward, we continue to invest in that, as well as
our election transparency efforts, requiring verification of
advertisers for Federal candidates, disclosure in the ads, and
then a transparency report.
Ms. Slotkin. Great.
What about the spread of information through bots? What
kind of disclosure requirement so that when someone is
receiving or viewing something they have some way of knowing
who produced it, who is spreading it, whether it is a human
being, a machine?
Why don't we start with Facebook.
Ms. Bickert. Thank you, Congresswoman.
One of our policies is that you have to have your real name
and be using an account authentically. So, when we are removing
bot accounts, we are removing them for being fake accounts.
Those are all numbers that we publish.
Mr. Pickles. Every week, we challenge between 8 million and
10 million accounts for breaking our rules on suspicious
activity, including malicious automation. So we are removing
those accounts. About 75 percent of those 8 million to 10
million challenge, fail those challenges, and they are removed
every week.
Mr. Slater. Congresswoman, for our part, we have strict
policies about misrepresentation in ads, impersonation. We are
looking out, again, through our threat analysis group, for
coordinated, inauthentic behavior and will take action where
appropriate.
Ms. Slotkin. Thank you.
I know my time has expired. Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Louisiana for 5
minutes, Mr. Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Slater, are you ready? Get your scripted answers ready,
sir.
Google and YouTube are developing quite a poor reputation
in our Nation. A clear history of repetitively silencing and
banning voices. Conservatives or liberal, doesn't concern me
right now. We are talking about freedom of speech and access to
open communications.
We are here today to discuss extremist content, violent
threats, terrorist recruiting tactics, and instigation of
violence. To get the same justification your platform uses to
quell true extremism is often used to silence and restrict the
voices that you disagree with, and we don't like it.
For example, Prager University, a series of 5-minute videos
which discuss political issues, religion, economic topics from
a conservative perspective, has had over 50 of their videos
restricted.
Some of their restricted videos include ``Why America Must
Lead.'' Perhaps that is a question that should be directed to
the mirror. America leads because of our stance for freedom,
for all voices to be heard. ``The Ten Commandments/Do Not
Murder'' video--pulled by your people. What is wrong with the
10 commandments, might I ask? ``Why Did America Fight the
Korean War?'', a legitimate reflection on a significant part of
the history of our Nation--pulled.
Additionally, YouTube removed a video from Project Veritas
which appears to show a senior Google executive acknowledging
politically-motivated search manipulation with an intent to
influence election outcomes. None of us here want that, on
either side of this aisle. I don't know a man or woman present
that is not a true patriot and loves their country. We have
varying ideological perspectives, yes, but we love our country,
and we will stand for freedom, including against Google.
A frequent reason provided by YouTube is that the content
in question harmed the broader community. What could be more
harmful to the broader community than the restriction of our
free speech and open communications, regardless of our
ideological stance?
Please define for America, what do you mean by ``harmed the
broader community'' as it is used to justify restricting the
content on Google or YouTube? And point out, is harm limited to
physical threats and the incitement of violence, as it should
be, or is it a convenient justification to restrict the content
that you deem needs to be restricted?
Please explain to America how you determine what is
``harmed the broader community,'' what does that mean. Let's
have your scripted answer.
Mr. Slater. Congressman, thank you for the question. I
appreciate the concern and the desire to foster robust debate.
We want YouTube to be a place where everyone can share their
voice and get a view of the world.
Mr. Higgins. But you don't allow everyone to share their
voice. I have given examples in my brief time--and thank you,
Mr. Chairman, for recognizing my time.
The First Amendment protects Americans' right to express
their viewpoints on-line. Is something that offends an
individual or something an individual agrees with, does that
meet your company's definition of extreme?
Mr. Slater. We have community guidelines that lay out the
rules of the road about what is not permitted on the platform,
including incitement to violence, hate speech, harassment, and
so on. If you can clarify what you are asking about
specifically, I would be happy to try and answer.
Mr. Higgins. Mr. Slater, God bless you, sir. Google is in a
bind. Today, America is watching. Today, America is taking a
step back. We are looking at the services, we are looking at
the platforms that we use, and we are finding, to our horror,
that they can't be trusted.
Today, America is looking carefully at Google, and a word
reverberates through the minds of America: Freedom. Shall it be
protected, shall it be preserved, or shall it be persecuted and
subject to the will and whim of massive tech companies?
Mr. Chairman, thank you for recognizing my time, and I
yield the balance. Thank you for holding this hearing today.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from New York for 5
minutes, Ms. Clarke.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I thank our panelists for appearing before us today.
I want to go into the issue of deepfakes, because I have
recently introduced legislation, the first ever in a House
bill, to regulate the technology. If my bill passes, what it
would do is it would make sure that deepfake videos include a
prominent, unambiguous disclosure as well as a digital
watermark that can't be removed.
The question I have is, when it comes to your attention
that a video has been substantially altered or entirely
fabricated, how your companies decide whether to do nothing,
label it, or remove it? That is for the panel.
Ms. Bickert. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
Ms. Clarke. Sure.
Ms. Bickert. So, when it comes to deepfakes, this is a real
top priority, especially because of the coming elections.
Right now, our approach is, we try to use our third-party
fact-checking organizations. There are 45 of them world-wide.
If they rate something as being false--they can also tell us
that something has been manipulated. At that point, we will put
the information from the fact-checking organization next to it.
So, much like the label approach, this is a way of actually
letting people understand that this is something that is, in
fact, false. We also reduce the distribution of it.
We are also looking to see if there is something we should
do specifically in the area of deepfakes. We don't want to do
something in a one-off way; we want to have a comprehensive
solution. Part of that means we have to get a comprehensive
definition of what it means to actually have a deepfake. Those
are conversations that we look forward to having with you.
Ms. Clarke. Yes. My bill would require that there is a
digital watermark and that it shows how--similar to how your
companies do sort of a hash of terrorist content. If there was
a central database of deceptive deepfake hashes, would you
agree to utilize that?
Mr. Pickles.
Mr. Pickles. I am happy to pick up on that and the previous
question.
I was at a conference in London a few weeks ago hosted by
the BBC and an NGO called Digital Witness, and they actually
work on issues around verifying media from war zones of war
crimes. So I think, actually, as Monika says, this policy goes
from a whole spectrum of content, from synthetic to edited to
manipulated. So I think, certainly, from our point of view,
every partnership is one we want to explore to make sure that
we have all the information.
I think your framing of how in some circumstances there may
be situations to remove content, in other circumstances it is
about providing context to the user and giving them more
information, that is the best balance, I think, of making sure
that we have all the tools available to us. That is the
approach that we are developing now.
Ms. Clarke. Yes. Time is not your friend here. What we are
trying to find is something universal that creates
transparency, respects the First Amendment, but also makes sure
that, you know, it is something that, you know, as Americans
whose eyes are constantly on video, something you can identify
right away. If you have to go through all of these sources to
determine--and each platform has a different way of
indicating--it almost nullifies that.
So I wanted to put that on your radar, because I think that
there needs to be some sort of a universal way in which
Americans can detect immediately that what they are seeing is
altered in some form or fashion. That is what my bill seeks to
do.
Imagine if Russia, just days before the 2020 election,
released a fake video of a Presidential candidate accepting a
bribe or committing a crime.
If your companies learn of a deepfake video being promoted
by a foreign government to influence our election, will you
commit to removing it? How would you handle such a scenario?
Have you thought about it? Give us your thoughts. I don't
have a whole lot of time.
Ms. Bickert. Congresswoman, we do have a real name
requirement on Facebook, and we also have various transparency
requirements that we enforce. So if it is shared by somebody
not in a real name or otherwise violating our transparency
requirements, we would simply remove it.
Mr. Pickles. We have a clear policy on affiliated behavior,
so activity affiliated with an entity we have already removed.
As I said, we have removed millions of tweets connected with
the Internet Research Agency. We would remove any activity
affiliated with that organization.
Mr. Slater. Thank you for the question. It is a critical
issue. I think we would evaluate such a video under our
policies, including our deceptive practices policies, and look
as we would at any sort of foreign interference.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
I look forward to talking to you further about this,
because we have to get to that sweet spot, and we are not
there, it is very clear from your testimony.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes----
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson [continuing]. The gentlelady from
Arizona, Mrs. Lesko, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Years ago, required reading I had was the book ``1984.''
This committee hearing is scaring the heck out of me, I have to
tell you. It really is. Because here we are talking about, you
know, if somebody googles ``vaccines,'' the answer was, ``Oh,
we are going to put above what the person is actually looking
for what we think is best.'' Who are the people judging what is
best, what is accurate?
This is really scary stuff and really goes to the heart of
our First Amendment rights. So I don't always agree with the
ACLU--and you are the past president of ACLU, Ms. Strossen, but
I agree with you wholly on this.
We have to be very careful, my colleagues, on this. Because
what you deem as inaccurate I do not deem as inaccurate or
other people may not deem. In a previous briefing on this
issue, one of the Members said, ``Well, I think President
Trump's tweets incite terrorism.'' Well, are we now going to
ban what President Trump says because somebody thinks that it
incites terrorism?
This is some really scary stuff, and I am very concerned. I
am glad I am part of this, because, boy, we need more of us
standing up for our rights, whether it is what you believe or
what I believe.
I have a specific question, and this is to Mr. Slater.
In this Project Veritas video, which I did watch last
night, they allege that there are internal Google documents,
which they put on the video, and this is what it said:
``For example, imagine that a Google image query for `CEOs'
shows predominantly men. Even if it were a factually accurate
representation of the world, it would be algorithmic
unfairness. In some cases, it may be appropriate to take no
action if the system accurately reflects current reality, while
in other cases it may be desirable to consider how we might
help society reach a more fair and equitable state via product
intervention.''
What does that mean, Mr. Slater?
Mr. Slater. Thank you, Congresswoman, for the question.
I am not familiar with the specific slide, but I think what
we are getting at there is, when we are designing our products,
again, we are designing for everyone. We have a robust set of
guidelines to ensure we are providing relevant, trustworthy
information. We work with a set of raters around the world,
around the country, to make sure that those search rater
guidelines are followed. Those are transparent and available
for you to read on the web.
Mrs. Lesko. All right. Well, I personally don't think that
answered the question at all, but let me go to the next one.
You asked, Mr. Clay Higgins, a specific example. So, Mr.
Slater, he was talking about Prager University. I just
googled--and I used Google--on ``Prager University,'' and it
came up. On the Prager University website, it says,
``Conservative ideas are under attack. YouTube does not want
young people to hear conservative ideas. Over 10 percent of our
entire library is under `restricted mode.' ''
Why are you putting Prager University videos about liberty
and those type of things on restricted mode?
Mr. Slater. Thank you, Congresswoman. I appreciate the
question.
To my knowledge, Prager University is a huge success story
on YouTube, with millions of views, millions of subscribers,
and so on. Remains so to this day.
There is a mode that users can choose to use called
``restricted mode,'' where they might restrict the sorts of
videos that they see. That is something that is applied to many
different types of videos from across the board, consistent not
with respect to political viewpoints but applied to, for
instance, ``The Daily Show,'' other sorts of channels as well.
To my knowledge, it has been applied to a very small
percentage of those videos on Prager University. Again, that
channel has been a huge success story, I think, with a huge
audience on YouTube.
Mrs. Lesko. Mr. Pickles, regarding Twitter, President Trump
has said, I think on multiple occasions, that--he has accused
Twitter of, you know, people having a hard time--being deleted
from followers. This actually happened to my husband. He
followed Donald Trump, and then, all of a sudden, it was gone.
So can you explain that? What is happening there? Why does
that happen? Because I tell you, a lot of conservatives really
think there is some conspiracy going on here.
Mr. Pickles. Well, I can certainly look into the case of
your husband to make sure there wasn't an issue there.
What I can say is that President Trump is the most followed
head of state anywhere in the world. He is the most talked-
about politician anywhere in the world on Twitter. Although he
did lose some followers when we recently undertook an exercise
to clean up compromised accounts, President Obama lost far more
followers in the same exercise.
So I think people can look at the way that people are
seeing President Trump's tweets widely and be reassured that
the issues that you are outlining there are not representative
in Twitter's approach.
Mrs. Lesko. Mr. Chairman, I ran out of time, but if we have
another round, I really want to hear from Ms. Strossen. I want
to hear her views, because she hasn't had a lot of time to
speak, so I hope some of my fellow colleagues ask her.
Thank you.
Ms. Strossen. Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from California, Ms.
Barragan, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
This is for Ms. Bickert, Mr. Pickles, and Mr. Slater. I
want to talk a little bit about your relationship with civil
society groups that represent communities targeted by terrorist
content, including white supremacist content. I am specifically
referring to content that targets religious minorities, ethnic
minorities, immigrants, LGBTQ, and others.
Can you help by describing your engagement with civil
society groups in the United States to understand the issues of
such content and develop standards for combating this content?
Ms. Bickert. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
Yes, any time that we are evolving our policies, which we
are doing constantly, we are reaching out to civil society
groups, not just in the United States but around the world. I
have a specific team under me, actually, called Stakeholder
Engagement. That is what they do.
When they are doing this, one of their jobs is to make
sure--let's say we are looking at our hate speech policies. One
of their jobs is to make sure that we are talking to people
across the spectrum, so different groups that might be affected
by the change, people who will have different opinions. All of
those people are brought into the conversation.
Mr. Pickles. Well, similarly, we have teams around the
world who are speaking to civil society groups every day.
Something we are also doing is training them, and I think it is
really important. Because Twitter is a unique public platform
and a public conversation, when people actually challenge
hatred and offer a counternarrative, offer a positive
narrative, their views can be seen all over the world.
So, you know, ``Je Suis Charlie'' was seen all over the
world after an attack in Paris. Similarly, after Christchurch,
``Hello Brother,'' or even ``Hello Salam,'' which was a
gentleman in Kenya who challenged a terrorist who was trying to
separate Christians and Muslims.
So we talk to civil society groups both about our policies
but also how they can use our platform more to reach more
people with their messages.
Ms. Barragan. OK.
Then, Mr. Slater, before you start, because I want to make
sure you incorporate this, one of my concerns is the onus to
report the hateful content is placed on the very communities
that are targeted by the hateful content. That can make social
media platforms hostile places for people in targeted
communities. So can you also tell us what your companies are
doing to alleviate this burden?
So Mr. Slater, and then I would like to hear from the two
of you on that.
Mr. Slater. Sure.
Speaking of how we enforce our community guidelines,
including against hate speech, including, again, as we said, we
have updated our hate speech policies to deal with people
expressing superiority to justify discrimination and so on. We
use a combination of machines and people--machines to scan
across for broad patterns and so on, compared to previous
violative content.
So we do take our responsibility here very seriously, our
ability to detect that first, review it before it has been
flagged. You know, we are making great strides in that.
We also do rely on flags from users, as well as flags from
trusted flaggers--that is, civil society groups, other experts,
who we work with very closely both in the development of our
policies and then again in flagging those sorts of videos.
Ms. Barragan. Yes.
So, just to the two of you, about the burden?
Mr. Pickles. This is something that we have said
previously; there was too much burden on victims. A year ago,
20 percent of the abuse we removed was surfaced proactively.
That is now 40 percent. So, in a year, we have been able to
double the amount of content that we find proactively without
waiting for a victim to review it. We are continuing to invest
to raise that number further.
Ms. Barragan. Can the three of you provide an example where
you had community engagement and, because of that feedback,
there was a policy change that you made?
Mr. Pickles. Let me share a slightly different example,
which is how we write a better policy to prevent that.
So, when we were crafting a policy on nonconsensual
intimate imagery, that covers not just media shared by an ex-
partner, but it might share creep shots, which I think have
been--so various countries start asking, do you have a policy
on creep shots? Because we had spoken to those very civil
society groups, our policy from the beginning was reaching
broadly enough to capture not just the original problem but all
those different issues.
Ms. Barragan. Ms. Bickert.
Ms. Bickert. Yes. Let me address the second question that
you asked about, putting the burden on the victims.
We have invested a lot in artificial intelligence. So there
are certain times when artificial intelligence has really
helped us and other areas where it is very much in its infancy.
With hate speech, over the past few years, we have gone from
zero proactive detection to now, in the first quarter of this
year, the majority of content that we are removing for
violating our hate speech policies we are finding using
artificial intelligence and other technology.
So huge gains there. There is still a long way to go
because all of those posts, after they are flagged by
technology, have to be reviewed by real people who can
understand the context.
Ms. Barragan. Right.
Ms. Bickert. In terms of where our engagement has led to
concrete changes, one thing I would point to is the use of hate
speech in imagery. The way that we originally had our policies
on hate speech, it was really focused on what people were
saying in text. It was only through working with civil society
partners that we were able to see how we needed to refine those
policies to cover images too.
Another thing I would point to is, a lot of groups told us
it was hard to know exactly how we defined hate speech and
where we drew the line. That was a contributing factor, among
many others, in why a couple years ago we published a very
detailed version of our community standards, where now people
can see exactly how we define hate speech and how we implement
it.
Ms. Barragan. Great. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas for 5
minutes, Mr. Crenshaw.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for some of the thoughtful discussion on how you
combat terrorism on-line. I think there are worthy debates to
be had there. There are good questions on whether, you know,
some of this content provides education so that we know of the
bad things out there or whether it is radicalizing people.
Those are hard discussions to have, and I don't know that we
are going to solve them today.
But the problem is that the testimony doesn't stop there;
the policies at your social media companies do not stop there.
It doesn't stop with the clear-cut lines of terrorism and
terrorist videos and terrorist propaganda. Unfortunately, that
is not exactly what we are talking about. It goes much further
than that. It goes down the slippery slope of what speech is
appropriate for your platform and the vague standards that you
employ in order to decide what is appropriate.
This is especially concerning given the recent news and the
recent leaked emails from Google. They show that labeling
mainstream conservative media as ``Nazis'' is a premise upon
which you operate. It is not even a question, according to
those emails. The emails say, given that Ben Shapiro, Jordan
Peterson, and Dennis Prager are Nazis, given that that is a
premise, what do we do about it?
Two of three of these people are Jewish, very religious
Jews, and yet you think they are Nazis. It begs the question,
what kind of education do people at Google have so they think
that religious Jews are Nazis?
Three of these people had family members killed in the
Holocaust. Ben Shapiro is the No. 1 target of the alt-right,
and yet you people operate off the premise that he is a Nazi.
It is pretty disturbing.
It gets to the question, do you believe in hate speech--how
do you define that? Can you give me a quick definition right
now? Is it written down somewhere at Google? Can you give me a
definition of hate speech?
Mr. Slater. Congressman, yes. So hate speech, again, as
updated in our guidelines, now extends to superiority over
protected groups that justify discrimination, violence, and so
on based on a number of defining characteristics, whether that
is race, sexual orientation, veteran status----
Mr. Crenshaw. Do you have an example of Ben Shapiro or
Jordan Peterson or Dennis Prager engaging in hate speech? Do
you have one example off the top of your head?
Mr. Slater. So, Congressman, we evaluate individual pieces
of content based on that content rather than based on the
speaker.
Mr. Crenshaw. OK. Let's get to the next question. Do you
believe speech can be violence? All right, now, not can you
incite violence; that is very clearly not protected. But can
speech just be violence? Do you believe that speech that isn't
specifically calling for violence can be labeled violence and,
therefore, harmful to people? Is that possible?
Mr. Slater. Congressman, I am not sure I fully understand
the distinction you are drawing. Certainly, again, incitement
to violence or things that are----
Mr. Crenshaw. Right.
Mr. Slater [continuing]. Encouraging dangerous behavior,
those are things that would be against our policies.
Mr. Crenshaw. Here is the thing. When you call somebody a
Nazi, you can make the argument that you are inciting violence,
and here is how. As a country, we all agree that Nazis are bad.
We actually invaded an entire continent to defeat the Nazis. It
is normal to say hashtag-punch-a-Nazi, because there is this
common thread in this country that they are bad and that they
are evil and that they should be destroyed.
So, when you are operating off of that premise--and,
frankly, it is a good premise to operate on--well, what you are
implying, then, is that it is OK to use violence against them.
When you label them, one of the most powerful social media
companies in the world, labels people as Nazis, you can make
the argument that is inciting violence. What you are doing is
wholly irresponsible.
It doesn't stop there. A year ago, it was also made clear
that your fact-check system is blatantly targeting conservative
newspapers. Do you have any comments on that? Are you aware of
the story I am talking about?
Mr. Slater. I am not familiar with necessarily the specific
story, Congressman. I am aware that, from all political
viewpoints, we sometimes get questions of this sort. I can say
that our fact-check labels generally are done algorithmically
based on a markup and follow our policies----
Mr. Crenshaw. For the record, they specifically target
conservative news media. Oftentimes they don't even--they have
a fact-check on there that doesn't even reference the actual
article, but Google makes sure that it is right next to it so
as to make people understand that that one is questionable,
even though, when you actually read through it, it has nothing
to do with it.
You know, a few days ago--and this goes to you, Ms.
Bickert--one of my constituents posted photos on Facebook of
Republican women daring to say that there are women for Trump.
Facebook took down that post right away, with no explanation.
Is there any explanation for that?
Ms. Bickert. Without seeing it, it is hard for me to opine.
That doesn't violate our policies. But I am happy to follow up
on the specific example with you.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you.
Listen, here is what it comes down to. If we don't share
the values of free speech, I am not sure where we go from here.
You know, this practice of silencing millions and millions of
people, it will create wounds and divisions in this country
that we cannot heal from.
This is extremely worrisome. You have created amazing
platforms; we can do amazing things with what these companies
have created. But if we continue down this path, it will tear
us apart.
You do not have a Constitutional obligation to enforce the
First Amendment, but I would say that you absolutely have an
obligation to enforce American values. The First Amendment is
an underpinning of American values that we should be protecting
until the day we die.
Thank you.
Thank you for indulging me, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
Ms. Strossen, the Chair is going to take prerogative and
allow you to make a comment if you would like.
Ms. Strossen. Oh, thank you so much for protecting my free-
speech rights, Mr. Chairman.
The main point that I wanted to make is that, even if we
have content moderation that is enforced with the noblest
principles and people are striving to be fair and impartial, it
is impossible. These so-called standards are irreducibly
subjective. What one person's hate speech is--and an example
was given by Congressman Higgins--is somebody else's cherished,
loving speech.
For example, in European countries, Canada, Australia, New
Zealand, which generally share our values, people who are
preaching religious texts that they deeply believe in and are
preaching out of motivations of love are prosecuted and
convicted for engaging in hate speech against LGBTQ people.
Now, I obviously happen to disagree with those viewpoints, but
I absolutely defend their freedom to express those viewpoints.
At best, these so-called standards--and I did read every
single word of Facebook's standards. The more you read them,
the more complicated it is. No two Facebook enforcers agree
with each other, and none of us would either.
So that means that we are entrusting to some other
authority the power to make decisions that should reside in
each of us as individuals, as to what we choose to see and what
we choose not to see and what we choose to use our own free-
speech rights to respond to.
On that, I think these platforms have--I cannot agree more
about the positive potential, but we have to maximize that
positive potential through user empowerment tools, through
radically increased transparency.
One of the problems of this----
Chairman Thompson. I am not going to limit your speech; I
am going to limit your time.
Ms. Strossen. Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. Congressman Correa for 5 minutes.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Chairman Thompson and the Ranking
Member, for holding this very critical hearing on very
interesting, very important issues.
I want to turn a little bit to the Russian interference in
2016. The Mueller report outlines indictment of 13 Russians, 3
companies for conspiring to subvert our election system. In
2018, we saw indications that, again, Russians were at it
again. In 2020, former Secretary of Homeland Security Nielsen,
before she was resigned--she resigned--brought up the fact that
the Russians were at it for 2020 again. There are other
countries also trying to affect our election system.
So I am hearing your testimony, and my question, of course,
Ms. Strossen, addressing the issue of First Amendment: Does the
First Amendment cover fake videos on-line?
We talked a little bit about the Pelosi fake video, and
maybe you say ``yes.'' I probably say ``probably not.'' I will
tell you why. Because that is a damaging video with false
content. Although you may be private companies, when I hear my
children tell me, I saw it on this platform, the assumption is
that it is factual.
Ms. Bickert, it took you 24 hours to take that video down.
The others didn't take it down.
You are essentially a messenger, and when your information
shows up on-line, this population believes that you are
credible and that the information on there is probably credible
too. That is what is damaging to our country, to our democracy.
Moving forward, we have another election happening now, and
if this information continues to be promulgated through your
social media, through your companies, we have a First Amendment
issue, but we have an issue, also, of democracy and keeping it
whole.
Any thoughts?
Ms. Bickert.
Ms. Bickert. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
We share the focus on making sure that we are ready----
Mr. Correa. Twenty-four hours is not fast enough. So are we
playing here defense or offense? Are we reacting? Are you being
proactive so the next Nancy Pelosi video is something you can
take down essentially faster than 24 hours?
Ms. Bickert. Congressman, we are being proactive. I do
agree that there is a lot that we can do to get faster.
Our approach when there is misinformation is making sure
that people have the context to understand it. We don't want
people seeing it in the abstract. We want to make sure we are
informing people, and we have to do so quickly. So that is
something that we are focused on getting better at.
Mr. Correa. So let me ask you something. On the Pelosi
video, who put it up?
Ms. Bickert. It was uploaded by a regular person with a
regular account.
Mr. Correa. So somebody at home with some very smart
software and a good platform was able to put together a fake
video and put it up.
Ms. Bickert. Congressman, the technique that was used was
to slow down the audio, which is the same thing we see a lot of
comedy shows, frankly, do----
Mr. Correa. OK.
Ms. Bickert [continuing]. With a lot of politicians----
Mr. Correa. So what were the consequences to this
individual for putting up essentially a video of somebody,
defaming, you know, hurting her reputation?
Ms. Bickert. Congressman, that video--our approach to
misinformation is we reduce the distribution, and then we put
content from fact-checkers next to it so that people can
understand that the content is false or has been manipulated.
Mr. Correa. Mr. Pickles.
Mr. Pickles. Well, one of the things we talked about
earlier was how to provide context to users. So our focus now
is developing----
Mr. Correa. Well, are your policies changing so that you
will be able to take it down next time, or are you just going
to let it ride?
Mr. Pickles. Well, we are looking at all of our policies in
this area.
Mr. Correa. Are you going to look at taking it down, or are
you going to let it ride? A ``yes'' or a ``no.''
Mr. Pickles. Well, I think we are looking at both how do
you give more----
Mr. Correa. Mr. Slater, what are you going to do?
I didn't get an answer.
Mr. Slater, what are you going to do next time you see a
video like this?
Mr. Slater. With respect to that video, to be clear, we
took it down, under our deceptive practices policy.
Mr. Correa. Ms. Strossen, not to, you know, violate your
freedom of speech here, do you think these false videos on-line
are Constitutionally protected?
Ms. Strossen. There is a very strict definition of false
speech that is Constitutionally unprotected. The Supreme Court
has repeatedly said that blatant, outright lies are
Constitutionally protected unless----
Mr. Correa. So let me switch in my 7 seconds I have left.
Will you write policy so outright lies do not have the
devastating effect on our voters that they had in the 2016
election?
Mr. Pickles. As I said, we are looking at the whole issue.
Mr. Correa. Thank you.
Ms. Bickert, Mr. Slater, any thoughts?
Ms. Bickert. We, too, Congressman, are making sure that we
have the right approach for the election.
Mr. Correa. Thank you.
Mr. Slater.
Mr. Slater. Absolutely. We want to raise up authoritative
content, reward it, and then demote borderline content, harmful
misinformation, and remove violative content.
Ms. Strossen. If I may say, this is exactly the reason why
President Trump wants to change the libel laws, because it is
now legal to lie about politicians and Government officials.
Mr. Correa. Maybe there is an area we will work together on
some issues, huh?
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New Jersey,
Mrs. Watson Coleman, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for being here. This has been very informative.
Let me ask you a really quick question, ``yes'' or ``no.''
The GIFCT--is that right?--GIFCT, your collaboration, does
keeping your trade secrets secret interfere with your sharing
standards and, you know, working together to----
Mr. Pickles. I don't----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. ``Yes'' or ``no''?
Mr. Pickles. I don't think it has to, no.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. OK.
I know you use this platform for terrorism. Do you use that
platform at all for, sort-of, hate groups?
Mr. Pickles. Not at present, but, certainly, after New
Zealand, that highlighted that we do need to broaden our
approach to different issues.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Uh-huh.
So, in my briefing, dog whistling has been mentioned as a
certain kind of political messaging strategy that employs coded
language to send a message to certain groups that flies under
the radar. It is used by white supremacist groups often. It is
rapidly evolving on social media platforms and has its--a space
and targeting of racism and other sort-of -isms that we find
abhorrent in this country.
How do you solve the challenge of moderating dog-whistle
content on your platform, especially when it is being used to
encourage these -isms that we abhor so much?
Mr. Pickles. I am happy to start and then let others
finish.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. I would--yes. I will take 1, 2, 3.
Mr. Pickles. Well, first, we enforce our rules, and one of
the things that our rules are is about behavior. So, if you are
targeting somebody because of their membership of a protected
characteristic, that is the important factor. The words come
secondary.
GIFCT has an entire stream of research, and one of the
reasons for having that research stream is so that we can
investigate what are the latest trends, what are the things we
need to be learning about those kind of terms.
Then, finally, when we see, whether it is different kinds
of extremist groups, speaking for Twitter, we have banned more
than 180 groups from our platform for violent extremism across
the spectrum, both in the United States and globally.
So we have a policy framework and also the industry
sharing.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
Ms. Bickert. Thank you, Congresswoman.
I would echo that a lot of this is about getting to the
groups. We do have a hate speech policy, but, beyond that, we
know that sometimes there are groups that are just engaging in
bad behavior. So we ban not only violent groups but also white
supremacist groups and other hate groups. We have removed more
than 200 of them from our platform to date.
Mr. Slater. Thank you for the question.
We do, as I said, remove hate speech on our platform. The
sort of concerns you are talking about is what motivated the
more recent changes.
We also recognize that things may brush up against those
policies, be borderline, but not quite cross them. For those,
we do work to reduce, demote them in the frequency and
recommendations and so on.
Ms. Strossen. Congresswoman, if I could have just 10
seconds----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. I am going to ask you a question, so
you can have a little bit more than that.
Ms. Strossen. Thank you.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. This is a very quick question. Ms.
Bickert, did you bring any staff here with you today, any
employees from your----
Ms. Bickert. Yes, we did.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Could you please have them stand up?
For those that have accompanied Ms. Bickert, could you
please stand up?
Two.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Pickles, you?
Mr. Pickles. Yes.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
Mr. Slater.
Thank you very much.
A couple of things that you mentioned. You talked about
making sure that the people are real and that they are American
when they are going to do advertising. You said we are going to
send information to you, you have to send it back, and it just
simply proves that you are maybe pretending to be an American
living--and really living here or having a domicile here, an
address here, still doesn't necessarily guarantee that they are
legitimate. So that is a challenge, I think, that we might
have.
Is that understandable, Mr. Slater, or am I confusing you?
Mr. Slater. If you could clarify the question, I would
appreciate it.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. It is not a question; it is a
statement. We were talking earlier about making sure that
people who are doing political advertising, et cetera, are not
foreign nationals, that they are Americans. Did we not have
this discussion about this advertising? It was stated by
somebody there--thank you.
Ms. Bickert. That's right.
Mrs. Watson Coleman [continuing]. That you do verification
to make sure that the person is an American, does live in
America, and isn't this false whatever coming from another
nation. I said, that really doesn't necessarily prove that, as
far as I am concerned.
Ms. Bickert. Congresswoman, just to clarify, that is
Facebook's approach. We do verify----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Right. I have to give her the 10
percent. I have to give her the----
Ms. Bickert. Oh, sorry. We also--we look at a Government
ID.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Because my question to you is, are
there trigger words that come out of some of this speech that
you think should be protected that needs to be taken down
because it incites?
Ms. Strossen. All of them, it is a problem.
I wanted to give an example from a story in Bloomberg News
today that talked about YouTube's recent new policy of
broadening the definition of unprotected hate speech. On the
very first day that it went into effect, one of the people that
was suppressed was an on-line activist in the United Kingdom
against anti-Semitism. But, in condemning anti-Semitism, he
was, of course, referring to Nazi expression and Nazi insignia,
and, hence, he was kicked off.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. So there are no trigger words. It
seems to me that--I think it was Mr. Pickles. Did you do the
definition of hate speech for us earlier?
Mr. Pickles. That was the hateful conduct under Twitter's--
--
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Yes. I think that that probably covers
the President of the United States of America, unfortunately.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
New York, Mr. Rose, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rose. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Thank you all for being here.
Two months ago, in the immediate aftermath of the
Christchurch incident, we sent out a letter to you all, asking,
how much money are you spending on counterterrorist screening,
and how many people do you have allocated to it? We have had
interesting conversations over those ensuing months.
The 3 basic problems that you have brought to me are that,
No. 1, that oversimplifies it because there is also an AI
component to this. Well, yesterday, we did a hearing that
showed AI alone cannot solve this, impossible, and not into the
future. You all agree with that.
The second thing, though, that you have all said to me is
that this is a collective action problem, we are all in this
together, and we have the GIFCT. So I have some very basic
questions about the GIFCT. I would appreciate it if you could
just immediately answer ``yes'' or ``no,'' and then we can get
into the details.
First question: Does the GIFCT have any full-time
employees?
Ms. Bickert. Does the GIFCT have a full-time employee
dedicated to it to run it?
Ms. Bickert. No. We have people at Facebook full-time
dedicated to GIFCT.
Mr. Rose. OK.
Mr. Pickles. The same. We have people at Twitter working
with GIFCT, but we don't have--GIFCT doesn't have staff.
Mr. Rose. OK.
Mr. Slater. Yes, our answer is the same.
Mr. Rose. Does the GIFCT have a brick-and-mortar structure?
If I want to go visit the GIFCT, could I do so?
Ms. Bickert.
Ms. Bickert. No, Congressman.
Mr. Rose. OK.
Ms. Bickert. We do host the database physically at
Facebook.
Mr. Rose. OK.
Mr. Pickles.
Mr. Pickles. No. Our collaboration is 4 companies working
together. We meet in person; we have virtual meetings. It is
about collaboration, not about a physical building.
Mr. Rose. OK.
Mr. Slater.
Mr. Slater. That is right. Nothing further to add.
Mr. Rose. So no brick-and-mortar structure, but I presume
you have a Google Hangout or maybe a Facebook hangout. I don't
know how you would decide that.
But Adhesive and Sealant Council, an association located in
Bethesda, Maryland, at the Adhesive and Sealant Council, it has
5 full-time staff, it has a brick-and-mortar structure. You all
cannot get your act together enough to dedicate enough
resources to put full-time staff under a building dealing with
this problem.
I think it speaks to the ways in which we are addressing
this with this technocratic, libertarian elitism. All the
while, people are being killed. All the while, there are things
happening that are highly preventable.
AI. Are there any AI systems that any of you all have that
are not available to the GIFCT?
Ms. Bickert. Congressman, yes, depending on how our
products work. They all work differently, so artificial
intelligence works differently.
What we have--and we actually worked for some time on doing
this. We had to come up with one common technical solution that
everybody could use. We now have that for videos, and we do
give it for free to smaller companies. But that is but one
technique we have.
Mr. Rose. OK.
Please, just keep it--I just want to know if you have any
AI not--that the GIFCT doesn't have, though.
Mr. Pickles. Well, I would also say that this isn't just
AI. That is why we share URLs--very low-tech, lo-fi. But if you
are a small company and someone gives you a URL to content, you
don't need AI to look at that. So I think that is why it is a
combination solution.
Mr. Rose. Uh-huh.
Mr. Slater. Nothing further to add to those comments.
Mr. Rose. OK.
My understanding is that there were no officially declared
POCs for the GIFCT that were made public from each company
until after the Christchurch shooting. I know that they were
there, but they were not declared established POCs at each of
your companies until after the Christchurch shooting 2 months
ago. Is this the case?
Ms. Bickert. Congressman, we have a channel that people can
use that gets routed to whoever is on-call from our team.
Mr. Rose. But is that the case, that there were no
established POCs--and this is the information you all have
given me already; I am just asking you to put it on the
record--no established POCs at the GIFCT until after the
Christchurch shooting? Is that correct?
Ms. Bickert. Perhaps not publicly listed, but certainly
people know who to call----
Mr. Rose. No established public POCs until after the
Christchurch shooting.
Mr. Pickles. Well, I would draw a distinction between the
POCs and the companies. We work together every week, every day.
I think the point you are getting at is crisis response is----
Mr. Rose. I am getting to the fact that you are not taking
it seriously, because there is no public building, there is no
full-time staff, there were no public POCs until after the
Christchurch shooting.
Mr. Pickles. Well, I think----
Mr. Rose. That is what I am speaking to. How is anyone
supposed to think that you all take this collective action
problem seriously if you have no one working on it full-time?
This is not something that technology alone can solve. This
is a problem that we are blaming the entire industry for,
rightfully so. There are the smallest of associations in this
town and throughout the country that do so much more than you
do.
It is insulting--it is insulting that you would not at
least apologize for saying that there were no established POCs
prior to the Christchurch shooting. It was a joke of an
association, it remains a joke of an association, and we have
got to see this thing dramatically improved.
Last, if there were terrorist content shown to be on your
platforms by a public entity, would you take it down?
So, Ms. Bickert, why when the whistleblower association
reveals that you Facebook is establishing through its AI
platform al-Qaeda community groups, such as this one, a local
business, al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, with 217
followers--I have it right here on my phone--by the
whistleblower association. It is considered the most active of
al-Qaeda's branches, or franchises, that emerged due to
weakening central leadership. It is a militant Islamist
organization primarily active in Yemen and Saudi Arabia. Why is
this still up?
We have every right right now to feel as if you are not
taking this seriously. By ``we,'' I do not mean Congress; I
mean the American people.
Thank you.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Florida, Mrs.
Demings, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
We have already talked about the massacre at Christchurch,
and we also know that it was law enforcement who notified
Facebook about what was going on.
Ms. Bickert, I would like to know if you could talk a
little bit about your working relationship with law enforcement
and share some of the specific things that you are doing to
further enhance your ability to work with law enforcement to
continue to work to prevent incidents like this from happening
again.
Ms. Bickert. Thank you, Congresswoman.
We have a special point of contact from our law enforcement
engagement team, so people from within our company, usually
former law enforcement, who are assigned to each company. Those
relationships are well-functioning and are the reason that New
Zealand law enforcement were able to reach out to us. Once they
did, within minutes----
Mrs. Demings. You surely believe that they would have been
able to reach out to you if you didn't have a law enforcement
team, right? Wouldn't that have been part of their
responsibility, any law enforcement agency that saw what was
happening live on your platform, to notify you?
Ms. Bickert. Congresswoman, we want to make it very easy,
if they see something, that they know exactly where to go.
It is also a reason--so, here, with New Zealand, when they
reached out to us, we responded within minutes. We also have an
on-line portal through which they can reach us, and that is
manned 24 hours a day. So if there is any kind of an emergency,
we are on it.
Finally, if we see that there is an imminent risk of harm,
we proactively reach out to them.
I will also tell you, any time that there is a terror
attack or some sort of mass violence in the world, we
proactively reach out to law enforcement to make sure that if
there are accounts we should know about or names of victims,
any sort of action that we should be taking, that we are on it
immediately.
Mrs. Demings. OK.
Moving right along, Mr. Pickles, you said that we will not
solve the problems by moving content alone. Is that correct,
what you said?
Mr. Pickles. Yes.
Mrs. Demings. OK. I know that most companies do a pretty
good job in terms of combating or fighting child exploitation
or pornography. I would just like to hear you talk a little bit
about your efforts to combat terrorism and share some of the
similarities. Because we can't solve the problems by just
taking down the content alone.
So if you could just show some of the similarities in terms
of your efforts of combating terrorism along with your efforts
to combat child pornography. I know you put a lot of resources
in combating child pornography, rightfully so. But could you
talk about the similarities in the two goals?
Mr. Pickles. Absolutely. There are similarities and
differences. In the similarities space, we are able to use
similar technology to look for an image we have seen before. If
that appears again, we can proactively detect that image and
stop it being distributed and then, critically, work with law
enforcement to bring that person to--so we work with the
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, who work
with law enforcement around the world.
So that process of discovering content, working with law
enforcement is seamless. Because I think, particularly for
child sexual exploitation but also for violent threats, we----
Mrs. Demings. So what about for----
Mr. Pickles [continuing]. We need people----
Mrs. Demings [continuing]. Combating terrorism?
Mr. Pickles. So I think, in either case, if someone is
posting that content, removing the content is our response, but
there is a law enforcement response there, as well, which holds
people to account, potentially prosecutes them for criminal
offenses. And that working in tandem between the two is very
important.
We have a similar industry body that shares information. We
also work with governments to share threat intelligence and
analysis of trends so that we can make sure we are staying
ahead of bad actors.
But the biggest area of similarity is, the bad actors never
stay the same. They are constantly evolving. So we have to
constantly be looking for the next opportunity to improve----
Mrs. Demings. OK. All right. Thank you.
At the beginning of this conversation, the Chairman asked a
question about--or referenced the video of the Speaker and why
some of you removed it and some did not.
Mr. Slater, I was so pleased to hear your answer, which
was--you look for deceptive practices? If it was deceptive, you
removed it, correct?
Could you just talk a little bit more about--it seemed like
such a--and, Ms. Strossen, I believe you said that the social
media platforms' free-speech right is their ability to decide
what is posted and what is not posted.
Ms. Strossen. Exactly.
Mrs. Demings. It is just that simple, right? They can
decide what is posted and what is not posted.
So, Mr. Slater, if you could just talk a little bit about
your process, and it was deceptive, you took it down.
Mr. Slater. I would be happy to, Congresswoman. It is an
important question.
We have community guidelines. One of those guidelines is
about deceptive practices. We review each bit of content
thoroughly to make sure whether it is violative or whether it
may fit into an exception--education, documentary, and so on
and so forth--and do that on an individualized basis to see if
the context has been met.
We present those guidelines publicly on our website for
anyone to read.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Taylor,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Taylor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just a quick question. So is Google an American company?
Mr. Slater. Congressman, we are headquartered in
California, yes.
Mr. Taylor. Are you loyal to the American Republic? I mean,
is that something you think about? Or do you think of
yourselves as an international company?
Mr. Slater. We build products for everyone. We have offices
all across this country, have invested heavily in this country,
and are proud to be founded and headquartered in this country.
Mr. Taylor. So, if you found out that a terrorist
organization was using Google products, would you stop that?
Would you end that?
Mr. Slater. We have a policy, Congressman, of addressing
content from designated terrorist organizations, to prohibit
it, make sure it is taken down.
Mr. Taylor. I am not asking about content. I am saying, if
you found that al-Nusrah terrorist organization was using Gmail
to communicate inside that terrorist organization, would you
stop that? Do you have a policy on that?
If you don't have a policy, that is fine. I am just trying
to--where are you on this?
Mr. Slater. Certainly. Where appropriate, we will work with
law enforcement to provide information about relevant threats,
illegal behavior, and so on. Similarly, we will respond to
valid requests for information from law enforcement.
Mr. Taylor. I am not asking if you respond to subpoenas. I
appreciate that. It is good to hear that you deign to be legal.
What I am asking is, if a terrorist organization uses a
Google product and you know about that, do you allow that to
continue? Or do you have a policy?
Mr. Slater. Under the appropriate circumstances and where
we have knowledge, we would terminate a user and provide
information to law enforcement.
Mr. Taylor. OK. So you will forgive me for not--your answer
is a little opaque. I am still trying to figure this out.
So, if a terrorist organization is using a Google product,
do you have a policy about what to do about that?
Mr. Slater. Thank you, Congressman. I am attempting to
articulate that policy. I would be happy to come back to you
with further information if it is unclear.
Mr. Taylor. OK. Do----
Mrs. Demings. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Taylor. Sure.
Mrs. Demings. Listen to the answer about referring it to
law enforcement. I think that is an appropriate response,
because if there is a suspicion that criminal activity is
afoot, you would want to refer it to law enforcement and law
enforcement make the call on that.
Mr. Taylor. Sure.
Mrs. Demings. So just to kind-of----
Mr. Taylor. OK.
Mrs. Demings [continuing]. Maybe help you a little bit with
that particular portion of it. But----
Mr. Taylor. Thanks, Chief.
Mrs. Demings [continuing]. Back to the policy. Thank you.
Mr. Taylor. Appreciate it.
Just to kind-of follow up with that, so the Islamic
Republic of Iran is the largest state sponsor of terrorism in
the world, right? They are a terrorist--and, you know, pieces
of the Islamic Republic are terrorist organizations. Do you
have a specific ban on that terrorist organization and their
ability to use your Google products?
Mr. Slater. Congressman, we have prohibitions on designated
terrorist organizations using products, uploading content, and
so on.
Mr. Taylor. OK. So you seek to ban terrorist organizations
from using Google products?
I am not trying to put words in your mouth. I am just
trying to understand your position on this.
Mr. Slater. Designated terrorist organizations, we have
prohibitions on that sort of organization, correct?
Mr. Taylor. I am not just asking about content. I am asking
about the services you provide. Right? You provide Gmail, you
provide iCalendar, you provide a whole host of different
services that people can use. I am trying to ask about the
services, not the content. I realize that the focus of this
hearing is about content, which is why you are here, but I am
asking about the actual services.
Mr. Slater. To the best of my knowledge, if we were to have
knowledge--and, again, as my colleagues have said, these bad
actors are constantly changing their approaches, trying to game
the system, and so on. But we do everything we can to prohibit
that sort of illegal behavior from those sorts of
organizations.
Mr. Taylor. Do you have screens set up to try to figure out
who the users are, to try to, you know, pierce the veil, so to
speak, into an anonymous account, figure out where that is or
who that might be, where it is sourcing from? Are you looking
at that? Is that something, a part of how you operate as an
organization, that Google does?
Mr. Slater. Absolutely, Congressman. We use a combination
of automated systems, threat analysis to try and ferret out
behaviors that may be indicative in that way.
Mr. Taylor. All right. Thank you. I appreciate your
answers.
With that, Mr. Chairman--and I appreciate the panel for
being here. This is an important, important topic, and thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Nevada, Ms.
Titus, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We have heard a lot about incidents, but we haven't
mentioned much about one that occurred in my district of Las
Vegas. This was the deadliest shooting in the United States in
modern history. October 1, 2017, a gunman opened fire on a
music concert, a festival. After that attack, there was a large
volume of hoaxes, conspiracy theories, misinformation that
popped up all across your platforms, including about the
misidentity of the gunman, his religious affiliation, and some
of the fake missing victims. Some individuals even called it a
false flag.
In addition, when you put up a search Safety Check site on
Facebook, where loved ones could check in to see who was safe
and who wasn't, there were all kind of things that popped up,
like links to spam websites that solicited Bitcoin donations,
they pedaled false information, claiming that the shooter was
associated with some anti-Trump army--just a lot of mess there,
where people were trying to make contact.
I wonder if you have any specific policy or protocols or
algorithms to deal with the immediate aftermath of a mass
shooting like this. All three of you.
Ms. Bickert. Thank you, Congresswoman.
Let me say that the Las Vegas attack was a horrible
tragedy. We think we have improved since then, but I want to
explain what our policies were even then and how we have gotten
better.
So, with the Las Vegas attack, we remove any information
that is praising that attack or the shooter, and we also took
steps to protect the accounts of the victims. Sometimes in the
aftermath of these things, we will see people try to hack into
accounts or do other things like that, so we take steps to
protect the victims. We also worked very closely with law
enforcement.
Since then, one area where we have gotten better is crisis
response in the wake of a violent tragedy. So, for instance,
with Christchurch, you had these companies at the table and
others communicating real-time, sharing with one another URLs,
new versions of the video of the attack, and so forth to make
sure--and it was literally a real-time, for the first 24 hours,
operation where we were sharing. In that first 24 hours, on
Facebook alone, we were able to stop 1.2 million versions of
the video from hitting our site.
So we have gotten a lot better technically, but this is an
area where we will continue to invest.
Mr. Pickles. Thank you.
As you have just heard, I think one of the challenges we
have in this space is different actors will change their
behavior to try and get around our rules.
One of the things that we saw after Christchurch which was
concerning was people uploading content to prove the event had
happened. So the suggestion that because companies like us were
removing content at scale, people were calling that censorship,
so there were people uploading content to prove the attack had
happened.
That is a challenge that we haven't had to deal with
before, and it is something we are very mindful of. We need to
figure out what is the best way to combat that challenge.
We have policies against the abuse and harassment of the
survivors and victims and their families. So if someone is
targeting someone who has been a victim or a survivor and is
denying the event took place or is harassing them because of
another factor, like political ideology, we would take action
for the harassment in that space.
Then, finally, the question of how we work with
organizations to spread the positive message going forward. So
that is where, you know, if there are groups in your
communities who are affected by this and working with the
victims to show the kind of positivity of your community, then
we would be keen to work with those organizations, wherever
they are in the United States, to spread that message of
positivity.
Ms. Titus. Mr. Slater.
Mr. Slater. Yes. Thank you, Congresswoman. This is of the
utmost seriousness. It was a tragic event, I think, for our
country, for society. Personally, as someone who lived in both
Las Vegas and New Zealand, both of these events I hold deeply
in my heart.
We take a threefold approach to the sort of misinformation
and other conduct that you were talking about:
We try and, on YouTube, raise up authoritative sources of
information, particularly in those breaking news events, to
make sure that authoritative sources outpace those who might
wish to misinform and so on.
We will strike, remove denials of well-documented violent
events or people who are spreading hate speech toward the
survivors of that event.
We will also seek to reduce exposure to content that is
harmful misinformation, including conspiracies and the like.
Ms. Titus. Well, these people have already been victimized
in the worst sort of way. You hate to see them then become
victims of something that occurs over the internet.
One thing we heard from law enforcement was that you might
think about--and I think this relates to kind-of what you were
saying, Mr. Slater--using your algorithms to elevate posts that
come from law enforcement, so people seeking help go to those
first as opposed to some of this other information just that
comes in randomly.
In your work with law enforcement, have you considered
that? I know you were addressing the chief's questions earlier.
Ms. Bickert.
Ms. Bickert. Thank you, Congresswoman.
That is something that we can explore with law enforcement.
We certainly try to make sure that people have accurate
information after attacks. Our systems didn't work the way we
wanted them to after Las Vegas. We learned from that, and I
think we are in a better place today.
Ms. Titus. I would appreciate it if you would look into
that. I think law enforcement would too.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Mississippi for 5
minutes.
Mr. Guest. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, to our representatives from Facebook, Google,
and Twitter, I want to thank you for being here today. I want
to thank you for previously appearing for a closed briefing
that we had earlier this year.
So we seek to continue to examine this complex issue of
balancing First Amendment rights against making sure that
content that is on social media does not promote terroristic
activity.
Professor Strossen, you were not here during that closed
briefing, so I want to ask a couple questions to you.
During your testimony, your written testimony, you
highlight the potential dangers associated with content
moderation, even when done by private companies in accordance
with their First Amendment rights. You make a case for social
media companies to provide free-speech protections to users.
You even state in the conclusion of your written
testimony--you say, ``How to effectively counter the serious
potential adverse impact of terror content and misinformation
is certainly a complex problem. While restricting such
expressions might appear to be a clear, simple solution, it is,
in fact, neither, and, moreover, it is wrong.''
Now, I know that was the conclusion of an 11-page report
that you provided, but could you just briefly summarize that
for the purpose of this hearing?
Ms. Strossen. Thank you so much, Congressman Guest.
Yes, the problem is the inherent subjectivity of these
standards. No matter how much you articulate them--and I think
it is wonderful that Facebook and the other companies have now,
fairly recently, shared their standards with us--you can see
that it is impossible to apply them consistently to any
particular content.
Reasonable people will disagree. The concept of ``hate,''
the concept of ``terror,'' the concept of ``misinformation''
are strongly debated. One person's fake news is somebody else's
cherished truth.
Now, a lot of attention has been given to the reports about
discrimination against conservative viewpoints in how these
policies are implemented. I want to point out that there also
have been a lot of complaints from progressives and civil
rights activists and social justice activists complaining that
their speech is being suppressed.
What I am saying is that, no matter how good the intentions
are, no matter who is enforcing it, whether it be a Government
authority or whether it be a private company, there is going to
be, at best, unpredictable and arbitrary enforcement and, at
worst, discriminatory enforcement.
Mr. Guest. Let me ask you, as an expert in the First
Amendment, do you feel that content moderation by social media
companies has gone too far?
Ms. Strossen. I think that, you know, first of all, they
have a First Amendment right. I think that is really important
to stress.
But given the enormous power of these platforms--which, as
the Supreme Court said in a unanimous decision 2 years ago,
that this is now the most important forum for the exchange of
information and ideas, including with elected officials, those
who should be accountable to we, the people.
So if we do not have free and unfettered exchange of ideas
on these platforms for all practical purposes, we don't have
it. That is a threat to our democratic republic as well as it
is to individual liberty.
There is a lot that these platforms can do in terms of user
empowerment so that we can make our own choices about what to
see and what not to see and, also, information that will help
us evaluate the credibility of the information that is being
put out there.
Mr. Guest. Finally, Ms. Strossen, do you have any
recommendations that you feel would help balance individuals'
First Amendment rights versus trying to protect social media
from terrorists being able to use that as a platform that you
would recommend, first, to the social media companies? Then are
there any recommendations that you would have of this body,
things that Congress should consider, that would help us as we
navigate this very difficult situation?
Ms. Strossen. I think that Congress's oversight, as you are
exercising very vigorously, is extremely important. I think
encouraging, but not requiring, the companies to be respectful
of all of the concerns--human-rights concerns of fairness and
transparency and due process, as well as free speech, but also
concerns about potential terrorism and dangerous speech.
I actually think that the U.S. Supreme Court and
international human rights norms, which largely overlap, have
gotten it right. They restrict discretion to enforce standards
by insisting that, before speech can be punished or suppressed,
that there has to be a specific and direct, tight causal
connection between the speech in that particular context which
causes an imminent danger.
We can never look at words alone in isolation, to get back
to the question that I was asked by the Congresswoman, because
you have to look at context. If in a particular context there
is a true threat, there is intentional incitement of imminent
violence, there is material support of terrorism, there is
defamatory statements, there is fraudulent statements, all of
that can be punished by the Government, and, therefore, those
standards should be enforced by social media as well. That
would give us--in my view, that is exactly the right way to
strike the balance here.
Mr. Guest. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Reverend
Cleaver, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am going to have a little different approach than my
colleagues.
Ms. Strossen, in 1989, I was a member of the city council
in Kansas City, and the Klan had planned a big march in Swope
Park. All this is still on-line; you can look at it. I fought
against them. The ACLU supported their right to march and that,
if I had passed an ordinance--I was also vice mayor at the
time--if I passed an ordinance, they would challenge it in
court.
I am not mad. I am not upset. I am a former board member of
the ACLU. So I think that free speech has to be practiced even
when it is abhorrent.
Now, for everybody else--and, in some ways, I kind-of feel
sorry for you, not enough to let you out without, you know,
beating up on you a little bit. But, you know, we--I am afraid
for our country. I mean, we have entered an age where people
respect an alternative truth. It is just so painful for me to
watch it. I don't think I am watching it in isolation.
Alternative truths, where people just will say something that
is not true and continue to say it. It doesn't matter.
I saw it last night, where the President said, ``Barack
Obama started this border policy, and I am correcting it.''
What they did--and this is what I want you to consider. What
one of the TV networks did is put up people making statements
about what was happening. They showed Jeff Sessions, when he
had first announced the separation policy and so forth.
You know, the problem is that--Churchill said that a lie
can travel halfway around the world before the truth puts on
its shoes. That is true. If we started a 20th-Century new
bible, that should be one of the scriptures, because it is a
fact. The truth cannot always be uncontaminated with sprinkles
of deceit.
So you guys have a tough job. I don't want to make it seem
like it is something that you can do easily.
Our system of government, I think, even beyond that, our
moral connections are dependent a lot more--and I didn't
realize this. I spent 3\1/2\ years in the seminary. I didn't
even realize this until recently. But we depend significantly
on shame. I mean, there are some things that laws can't touch,
and so our society functions on shame. So, when shame is
dismembered, I am not sure what else we have left.
But what I would like for you to react to and maybe even
consider is, you know, instead of taking something down in some
instances, why not just put up the truth next to it? I mean,
the truth. I am not talking about somebody else's response. I
am talking about the truth, where you, you know, like the
video--I wish I could have brought it to you, where they said,
here is the lie, and here is the truth.
Can anybody help me?
OK. All right.
Anybody else?
Mr. Slater. So this is a very important issue, Congressman.
And----
Mr. Cleaver. Yes, that is why--yes.
Mr. Slater. Absolutely. So one of the things we have been
trying to do is two-fold with respect to harmful
misinformation.
So one is, where there is a video that says, say, the moon
landing didn't happen----
Mr. Cleaver. My grandmother says that.
Mr. Slater [continuing]. Or the Earth is flat, the video
may be up, but you will see a box underneath it that says, here
is a link to the Wikipedia page about the moon landing, or the
Encyclopedia Britannica page, where you can go learn more. I
think that speaks to----
Mr. Cleaver. Yes, that is what I am talking about. Yes.
Mr. Slater [continuing]. The sort of feature that you are
talking about.
The other thing we try and do----
Mr. Cleaver. You do that now?
Mr. Slater. We do that today, yes, sir.
The other thing we try and do is reduce the exposure of the
frequency of the recommendations to information that might be
harmful misinformation, such as those sorts of conspiracies.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you.
Mr. Pickles. Well, I think you rightly highlighted the
interplay between what is on social media companies, the news
media, what is on TV. How that cycle of information works
together is a critical part of solving this.
I think the one thing that, for Twitter, because we are a
public platform, very, very quickly people are able to
challenge, to expose, to say, ``That is not true. Here is the
evidence. Here is the data.''
There is something incredibly important about these
conversations taking place in public. That, I think, is
something, as we move into the information century, we need to
bear in mind.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you.
Ms. Bickert. Congressman, thank you.
Similar to what my colleague referenced, if there is
something like misinformation that a third-party fact-checking
organization has debunked--and we work with 45 of these
organizations world-wide. They all meet objective criteria;
they are all Poynter-certified. What we do is we actually take
the articles from those fact-checkers and put it right next to
the false content so that people have that context. If you go
to share some of that content, we say, ``This content has been
rated false by a fact-checker,'' and we link them to it.
Similarly, when it comes to things like misinformation
about vaccines, we are working with organizations like the CDC
and the World Health Organization to get content from them that
we can actually put next to vaccine-related misinformation on
our site.
We do think this is a really important approach. It
obviously takes a lot of resources.
Another thing we are trying to do is--I guess what I would
say is empower those--and this is similar to what Mr. Pickles
mentioned--empower those who have the best voices to reach the
right audience on this. So we invest heavily in promoting
counterspeech and truthful speech.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Thompson. Thank you very much.
Before we close, I would like to insert into the record a
number of documents.
The first is several letters from stakeholders, addressed
to Facebook as well as Twitter and YouTube, about hateful
content on their platform.
The second is a joint report from the Center for European
Policy Studies and the Counter Extremism Project.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The information has been retained in committee files and is
available at https://www.ceps.eu/ceps-publications/germanys-netzdg-key-
test-combatting-online-hate/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The third is a statement for the record from the Anti-
Defamation League.
The fourth are copies of community standards as of this day
for Facebook, Twitter, and Google.**
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
** The information has been retained in committee files and is
available at https://www.facebook.com/communitystandards/, https://
help.twitter.com/en/rules-and-policies/twitter-rules, and https://
www.youtube.com/about/policies/#community-guidelines, respectively.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to follows:]
October 30, 2017.
Mr. Mark Zuckerberg, Chief Executive Officer,
Ms. Sheryl Sandberg, Chief Operating Officer,
Facebook, Inc., 1 Hacker Way, Menlo Park, CA 94025.
Dear Mr. Zuckerberg and Ms. Sandberg:
We, the undersigned civil rights, interfaith, and advocacy
organizations write to express our deep concern regarding ads, pages,
and hateful contenton your platform used to divide our country, and in
particular, to promote anti-Muslim, anti-Black, anti-immigrant, and
anti-LGBTQ animus. We thank you for recent meetings with some of our
organizations representing communities that were directly affected by
the material on your platform. We appreciate that senior members of
your team--including you, Ms. Sandberg--have facilitated these
meetings, and we hope that these conversations are the beginning of a
serious and ongoing dialog. Now, it is necessary for Facebook to take
critical steps to address the bigotry and discrimination generated on
your platform.
As you know, we do not yet have access to all the divisive content
targeting communities we represent; therefore, we are only able to cite
to the few examples that were leaked to the media.
For example, Russian operatives set up misleading accounts
impersonating or posing as American individuals and groups on Facebook
to promote Russian propaganda during the American election season.
Reports indicate that a Russian Facebook account called ``Secured
Borders'' posed as a group of US citizens concerned about the increased
number of refugees in America. This fake account not only promoted
anti-immigrant messaging online, but also managed to organize an in-
person anti-refugee rally in Twin Falls, Idaho in August 2016.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Geoffrey Smith, ``Russia Orchestrated Anti-Immigrant Rallies in
the U.S. via Facebook Last Year,'' Fortune, Sept. 12, 2017, available
at http://fortune.com/2017/09/12/russia-orchestrated-anti-immigrant-
rallies-in-the-u-s-via-facebook-last-year/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, a Facebook page entitled ``United Muslims of America''
was an imposter account traced back to Russia \2\--the real United
Muslims of America is a California-based interfaith organization
working at the local level to promote dialog and political
participation.\3\ The imposter account smeared political candidates and
promoted political rallies aimed at Muslim audiences.\4\ In another
example, the Internet Research Agency in Russia promoted an anti-Muslim
rally thousands of miles away in Houston, Texas where individuals
protested outside of a mosque.\5\ Additional reports indicate that
Facebook offered its expertise to a bigoted advocacy group by creating
a case study testing different video formats, and advising on how to
enhance the reach of the group's anti-refugee campaign in swing States
during the final weeks of the 2016 election.\6\ These examples of
content on Facebook were not only harmful, but also used to rile up
supporters of President Trump.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Dean Obeidallah, ``How Russian Hackers Used My Face to Sabotage
Our Politics and Elect Trump,'' The Daily Beast, Sept. 27, 2017,
available at https://www.thedailybeast.com/how-russian-hackers-used-my-
face-to-sabotage-our-politics-and-elect-trump.
\3\ United Muslims of America ``About'' page, available at http://
www.umanet.org/about-us.
\4\ Obeiallah, supra note 1.
\5\ Tim Lister & Clare Sebastian,``Stoking Islamophobia and
secession in Texas--from an office in Russia,'' CNNPolitics, Oct. 6,
2017, available at http://www.cnn.com/2017/10/05/politics/heart-of-
texas-russia-event/index.html.
\6\ Melanie Ehrenkranz, ``Facebook Reportedly Used Anti-Muslim Ad
as Test Case in Video Formats,'' Gizmodo, Oct. 18, 2017, available at
https://gizmodo.com/facebook-reportedly-used-anti-muslim-ad-as-test-
case-in-1819645900.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Furthermore, it has been reported that Russian operatives purchased
Facebook ads about Black Lives Matter--some impersonating the group and
others describing it as a threat.\7\ This included ads that were
directly targeted to reach audiences in Ferguson, Missouri and
Baltimore, Maryland. CNN reports that the Russian Internet Research
Agency used these ads in an attempt to amplify political discord and
create a general atmosphere of incivility and chaos.\8\ This included a
fake ad containing an image of an African-American woman dry-firing a
rifle, playing on the worst stereotypes regarding African-Americans as
threatening or violent.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Adam Entous, Craig Timberg, & Elizabeth Dwoskin,``Russian
operatives used Facebook ads to exploit America's racial and religious
divisions,'' The Washington Post, Sept. 25, 2017, available at https://
www.washingtonpost.com/business/technology/russian-operatives-used-
facebook-ads-to-exploit-divisions-over-black-political-activism-and-
muslims/2017/09/25/4a011242-a21b-11e7-ade1-
76d061d56efa_story.html?tid=sm_tw&utm_term=.e49cecc1a834.
\8\ Dylan Byers, ``Exclusive: Russian-bought Black Lives Matter ad
on Facebook targeted Baltimore and Ferguson,'' CNN Media, Sept. 28,
2017, available at http://money.cnn.com/2017/09/27/media/facebook-
black-lives-matter-targeting/index.html.
\9\ Adam Entous, Craig Timberg, & Elizabeth Dwoskin, ``Russian
Facebook ads showed a black woman firing a rifle, amid efforts to stoke
racial strife,'' The Washington Post, Oct. 2, 2017, available at
https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/technology/russian-facebook-
ads-showed-a-black-woman-firing-a-rifle-amid-efforts-to-stoke-racial-
strife/2017/10/02/e4e78312-a785-11e7-b3aa-
c0e2e1d41e38_story.html?utm_term=.aa2267a2f46c.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We were alarmed to see your platform being abused to promote
bigotry, and especially disappointed that it has taken media exposure
and Congressional oversight to give a degree of transparency into your
practices. It is important to keep in mind that pervasive bigotry has
long existed on your platform, and the Russian operatives simply
exploited the hateful content and activity already present. We are
concerned about how a platform like Facebook's could operate without
appropriate safeguards that take into account how it could be
manipulated to further sow divisions in our society.
As a company and social network platform whose mission is ``to give
people the power to build community and bring the world closer
together,''\10\ we hope that you understand the gravity of this hateful
rhetoric and behavior. During a time when anti-Muslim, anti-Black,
anti-LGBTQ, and anti-immigrant sentiment has swept the nation, it is
more important than ever for companies like yours to take an
unequivocal stance against bigotry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Facebook ``About'' page, February 4, 2004, available at
https://www.facebook.com/pg/facebook/about/?ref=page_internal.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Over the years, many of us have raised concerns about how your
platform may have a negative impact on our communities, with
disappointing results. For example, we have requested that you address
attacks on African Americans and Muslims, organizing by hate groups,
and the censorship of Black, Arab, Muslim, and other marginalized
voices. As a result of the pervasive presence and organizing by hate
groups on your platform--some could not exist as national level
entities without it--we have repeatedly requested that you convene a
gathering with civil rights organizations to discuss appropriate and
strategic responses. While you were unable to sufficiently respond to
the concerns raised above, Facebook participated in and organized
events that stigmatized Muslims and other communities such as a recent
convening called ``Tech Against Terrorism.''
Though in the past you have displayed a willingness to listen to
our concerns, we have yet to see meaningful change. It is our hope that
recent developments will mark a new chapter in Facebook's commitment to
protecting the rights of all who use your platform.
As we continue this important dialog, we urge you to:
1. Fully disclose to the public all of the ads, pages, events,
accounts, and posts you have traced back to Russian operatives
targeting African American, LGBTQ, and Muslim communities. In
particular, we believe that Facebook has a special
responsibility to notify those individuals and organizations
who have been impersonated or misrepresented.
2. Bring on an independent third-party team to conduct a thorough
and public audit of the civil rights impact of your policies
and programs, as well as how the platform has been used by hate
groups, political entities, and others to stoke racial or
religious resentment or violence. Other leading companies in
the industry like Airbnb have made the decision to conduct such
an assessment, and we hope you will follow their lead.
3. Regularly convene a new working group of a diverse group of
civil rights organizations working to counter bigotry, and
solicit input on policies and processes from this group. And,
integrate addressing hate into Facebook's corporate structure
by:
a. Assigning a board committee with responsibility for
assessing management efforts to stop hate groups, State
actors, and individuals engaged in hate from using your
platform and tools;
b. Assigning a senior manager who is a member of Facebook's
Executive Team with authority to oversee addressing hate
company-wide and name that person publicly and employing
staff with expertise in this area to vet advertisements and
develop process and procedures the address this issue; and,
c. Creating a committee of outside advisors with expertise in
identifying and tracking hate who will be responsible for
producing an annual report on the effectiveness of steps
taken by Facebook.
4. Develop, with input from diverse civil rights groups and
experts, and make public a clear process for how Facebook:
a. Reviews content constituting hate speech;
b. Reviews efforts to use Facebook as a platform to stoke
identity-based, racial, or religious resentment or violent
actions; and,
c. Responds to complaints about content that reasonably creates
fear and chills speech on Facebook.
5. Make public detailed information regarding training and support
for anti-immigrant, anti-Muslim, anti-black, and anti-LGBTQ
organizations, including the monetary value of these services;
and establish a fund to provide grants to organizations
combating hatred and bigotry.
Thank you in advance for your consideration.
Please contact Naheed Qureshiat [sic] with any questions.
We look forward to your reply.
Sincerely,
Arab American Institute (AAI)
Asian Americans Advancing Justice/AAJC
Center for Media Justice
Center for New Community
Color of Change
CREDO
Human Rights Campaign (HRC)
The Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights
League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC)
MoveOn.org
Muslim Advocates
NAACP
NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc. (LDF)
National Center for Lesbian Rights
National Hispanic Media Coalition
National LGBTQ Task Force
National Sikh Campaign
Sikh Coalition
Southern Poverty Law Center
______
February 22, 2018.
Ms. Monica Bickert,
Head of Product Policy and Counterterrorism, Facebook, 1 Hacker Way,
Menlo Park, CA 94025.
Ms. Juniper Downs,
Director, Public Policy and Government Relations, YouTube, 901 Cherry
Ave., San Bruno, CA 94066.
Mr. Carlos Monje, Jr.,
Director, Public Policy and Philanthropy, U.S. & Canada, Twitter, 1355
Market Street, San Francisco, CA 94103.
Ms. Bickert, Ms. Downs, and Mr. Monje: The undersigned civil rights
and advocacy organizations write to share our concerns regarding your
recent testimony at the United States Senate Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation hearing titled, ``Terrorism and Social
Media: #IsBigTechDoingEnough?'' Many of the undersigned organizations
have had on-going conversations with your companies regarding the
spread of hateful and dangerous content online, and in light of this,
we watched your testimony regarding extremist content online with great
interest. We were alarmed by the continuous conflation of Muslims and
violent extremism at the hearing and the extent to which testimony
focused on conduct by Muslims, with comparatively almost no mention
about violent actions by white supremacists who target members of the
African American, LGBTQ, immigrant, Latino, Asian, Jewish, Sikh and
Muslim communities. These omissions are particularly striking in light
of the recent tragic attacks in New Mexico, Portland, and
Charlottesville.
To no avail, several of the signatories below reached out to you
prior to the hearing to request that your companies avoid stigmatizing
and singling out the Muslim community by failing to address other forms
of extremism in your testimony. All three of your statements for the
record failed to do so; they referenced only violent extremism
committed by those claiming to be acting in the name of Islam and
highlighted efforts at countering extremism that focus on Muslim
communities. Facebook's written testimony, for example, did not mention
white supremacist violence, but repeatedly cited ISIS and al-Qaeda.\1\
And, in response to questioning from Senator John Thune (R-SD), the
Facebook representative volunteered Boko Haram--another group claiming
to act in the name of Islam--as an example of a group whose content has
been banned by their company.\2\ Later, when Senator Tom Udall (D-NM)
directly asked the Facebook witness what the company is doing to
curtail the explosion of white supremacists online, once again,
Facebook failed to mention white supremacy in the response. In fact, in
response to questioning regarding domestic extremism--specifically
violence by white nationalists and white supremacists--the Google
witness was the only panelist to specifically mention ``white
supremacy,'' albeit briefly.\3\ It is striking that such complex
questions seem to consistently elicit simple, and near-uniform answers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Bickert, M. (2018, January 17). Hearing before the United
States Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
Retrieved January 22, 2018, from https://www.commerce.senate.gov/
public/_cache/files/a9daccb8-5f07-42a6-b4c3-20ad0b9ba26d/
FC0A5B87F787273A7FA793B458C03E41.bickert-testimony-final.pdf.
\2\ Terrorism and Social Media: #IsBigTechDoingEnough. (2018,
January 17). Retrieved January 22, 2018, from https://www.c-span.org/
video/?c4709695%2Fbickert-response.
\3\ Terrorism and Social Media: #IsBigTechDoingEnough. (2018,
January 17). Retrieved January 22, 2018, from https://www.c-span.org/
video/?c4709693%2Fms-bickert-response.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Furthermore, it was very unhelpful that each of your companies
chose to highlight your support or participation in violent extremism
initiatives designed to target Muslims and others as examples of the
work you are doing to fight extremism. For example, Twitter's testimony
stated that the company has participated in more than 100 CVE trainings
over the last few years including summits at the White House. We are
concerned that most of these events were focused primarily on
activities by Muslims. In addition, all three companies continue to
emphasize their sponsorship of Tech Against Terrorism events, one of
which, in the San Francisco Bay Area, focused exclusively on extremism
by Muslims. Other Tech Against Terrorism events have given some
attention to white supremacy, but not nearly enough and not on a par
with the attention given to Muslims and extremism. In one example, the
Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC), one of our Nation's leading experts
on hate groups and white supremacy, was invited to a Tech Against
Terrorism conference in Brussels and given less than a week's notice of
the event. When SPLC requested to participate via video conference due
to the short notice, they received no response. If there is a true
commitment by the companies to address white supremacy and other forms
of violent extremism unrelated to Islam through this initiative, more
lead time is necessary to appropriately engage relevant experts and
stakeholders. Additionally, as recently as last week, presentations by
Facebook, Google, and Twitter at an event organized by the Department
of Homeland Security focused heavily on activities designed to address
extremism by those claiming to act in the name of Islam.
At a time when anti-Muslim, anti-Black, anti-LGBTQ, anti-immigrant
and anti-Jewish sentiment have fueled a marked increase in violent
attacks on individuals in each of these communities, a responsible
discussion regarding violent extremism must include a focus on white
supremacists and other non-Muslim violent extremists. On far too many
occasions, discussions about terror do not acknowledge that no ideology
owns violent extremism. The failure to recognize white supremacy and
other forms of violent extremism unrelated to Islam in discussions
regarding extremism is irresponsible and reckless, and your failure to
adequately address this publicly during the Senate hearing stigmatizes
Muslims and other affected communities when the facts on this issue are
clear. In their 2017 annual report on extremism in the United States,
the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) concluded that the number of murders
committed by white supremacists in the United States doubled from the
previous year, nothing 71 percent of extremist-related murders in the
past decade have been carried out by right-wing extremists, a majority
of whom were born in the United States.\4\ And in 2017, 53 percent of
extremist-related murders in the United States were perpetrated by
white supremacists.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ ADL Report: White Supremacist Murders More Than Doubled in
2017. (2018, January 17). Retrieved January 22, 2018, from https://
www.adl.org/news/press-releases/adl-report-white-supremacist-murders-
more-than-doubled-in-2017.
\5\ Williams, J. (2017, October 02). White American men are a
bigger domestic terrorist threat than Muslim foreigners. Retrieved
January 22, 2018, from https://www.vox.com/world/2017/10/2/16396612/
las-vegas-mass-shooting-terrorism-islam.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We have raised at least some of our concerns either with your
parent companies, or with your companies directly. One recent example,
is the letter sent on October 31st, 2017, by 19 civil rights groups to
Facebook citing the company's inadequate response to hate speech and
bigotry directed toward members of the African-American, LGBTQ, and
Muslim community on its platform, as well as problematic CVE
activities.\6\ Given your companies' size, influence, and role in all
discussions of hateful and violent content on-line, we again call on
you to join us in a comprehensive and inclusive dialog on extremism and
extremist violence.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Simpson, S. (2017, October 31). Civil Rights Groups Urge
Facebook to Address Longstanding Issues with Hate Speech and Bigotry.
Retrieved January 22, 2018, from https://www.muslimadvocates.org/
19civilrightsgroupslettertofacebook/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As we continue this important dialog, we urge each of your
companies to:
Submit amended testimony for the hearing regarding the
dangers posed by white supremacist groups and the measures your
organization will be taking as a result;
Bring on an independent third-party team to conduct a
thorough and public audit of the civil rights impact of your
policies and programs, including an assessment of processes
related to addressing extremism by white supremacists and other
hate-based content on your platforms that encourages harassment
and violence towards many communities;
Assign and publicly name a senior member of the executive
team with authority to oversee addressing hate on the platform
company-wide;
Hire or contract with a diverse team of experts on white
supremacist groups to develop methods for detecting and
responding to such groups, and to address hateful conduct and
content by these groups;
Create a committee of outside advisors with expertise in
identifying and tracking hate who will be responsible for
producing an annual and publicly available report on the
effectiveness of the steps taken by the company; and,
Disclose publicly any new plans that have been developed to
address extremism, including whether those plans will target
Muslims or seriously address white supremacists.
Thank you for your consideration of our views. We look forward to
hearing from you.
Sincerely,
Arab American Institute
Bend the Arc Jewish Action
Center for Media Justice
Color of Change
CREDO
Emgage
Media Matters for America
MoveOn.Org
Muslim Advocates
NAACP
NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc. (LDF)
National LGBTQ Task Force
National Sikh Campaign
Sikh Coalition
Southern Poverty Law Center
______
December 18, 2018.
Mark Zuckerberg,
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Facebook, 1 Hacker Way, Menlo
Park, CA 94025.
Dear Mr. Zuckerberg: We write to express our profound
disappointment regarding Facebook's role in generating bigotry and
hatred toward vulnerable communities and civil rights organizations.
For years, many of us have engaged directly with your company in good
faith, seeking change from within the company that we hoped would
address a range of civil rights, privacy, and safety problems resulting
from abuse and mismanagement of the platform, including engaging in an
on-going audit of the civil rights impact of your policies and
programs, as well as how the platform has been used by hate groups,
political entities, and others to stoke racial or religious resentment
or violence. In particular, we asked you to take immediate action to
stop abuse of the platform. Recent news demonstrates, however, that
Facebook was not only looking the other way in response to our
concerns, but also has been actively working to undermine efforts by
those who seek to hold the company responsible for abuses on the
platform.
As you know, a recent investigation by the New York Times \1\
details information about Facebook's responses to a series of crises--
including crises around how the company manages and responds to hateful
content. In the face of clear evidence that Facebook was being used to
broadcast viral propaganda and inspire deadly bigoted campaigns, the
company's leadership consistently either looked the other way, or
actively worked to lobby against meaningful regulation, shifted public
opinion against its allies, and personally attacked its critics.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``Delay, Deny and Deflect: How Facebook's Leaders Fought
Through Crisis,'' The New York Times, November 14, 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Though Facebook has had significant time, opportunity and the
benefit of input from experts and advocacy groups to address the
problems on the platform, your company chose to target civil rights
groups and our allies instead of changing the way you do business.
Compounding this mistake, you retained the services of Definers Public
Affairs to investigate, undermine, and attack our allies, mimicking the
tactics of the worst, disreputable political operatives and hate
groups. Out of your need to treat those leveling legitimate critiques
against Facebook as your enemies, you jeopardized the safety and
security of people who have dedicated their lives to the common good.
This decision crossed all lines of common decency.
Furthermore, it's an absolute disgrace that Facebook sought to
deflect criticism and discredit advocates by exploiting anti-Semitic
campaigns against philanthropist George Soros. A research document
circulated by Definers wrongfully identified Mr. Soros as the force
behind a broad anti-Facebook movement. According to the Times, Definers
urged reporters to explore the financial connections between Mr.
Soros's family or philanthropy and progressive groups hoping to somehow
use this information to undercut advocates pursuing accountability for
bigotry on the platform. Unbelievably, Facebook sought to have their
cake and eat it too; while you weaponized anti-Semitism directed at Mr.
Soros, you attacked legitimate criticism of the company as anti-
Semitic.
Equally troubling are your claims over the years that problems with
the platform or the company's approach have been inadvertent, and that,
per a statement quoted in the article, ``our entire management team has
been focused on tackling the issues we face.'' What is now clear,
however, is direct evidence of malicious and calculated campaigns to
undermine Facebook's critics.
Your response as the company's chairman and CEO was also
disconcerting. You plead ignorance, that you had no idea that this was
happening. But the public has given your company the benefit of the
doubt for far too long and ignorance is no longer an excuse. It's
become abundantly clear that, as currently constituted, your leadership
team is unable to adequately address the valid concerns of the civil
rights community. It is now time for significant changes in, not only
your policies, but also your leadership structure. At this time, we
demand that Facebook immediately:
1. Reorganize Facebook's board in order to enable greater
accountability of the leadership team and to allow more diverse
voices at the decision-making table. Specifically:
a. You, Mr. Zuckerberg, should step down as chairman of the
board as long as you serve as the chief executive officer
to allow the board to provide independent oversight and
guidance for the management team.
b. Sheryl Sandberg should step down from the board of directors
as long as she serves as chief operating officer in order
to allow the board to provide independent oversight and
guidance for the management team.
c. Facebook should expand its board of directors by at least
three members to diversify the board; these new members
should reflect the diversity of your global community of
users.
d. The board should appoint an independent and permanent civil
rights ombudsman to conduct consistent and on-going reviews
of the civil rights implications of Facebook's policies and
practices; this ombudsman shall also serve as a member of
the board of directors.
2. Publicly identify and apologize to all organizations targeted by
Definers Public Affairs. In the spirit of transparency, release
all internal documents pertaining to opposition research
generated by Definers, including all research on civil rights
and advocacy organizations.
3. Remove Facebook's Vice President of Global Public Policy, Joel
Kaplan, from his position.
4. Make public all findings and recommendations of the civil rights
audit without revisions or redactions by January 31, 2019.
Thank you in advance for your consideration. We would like to meet
with you to discuss our concerns and recommendations. Please contact
Naheed Qureshi of Muslim Advocates at [sic] with any questions and to
coordinate a meeting.
Sincerely,
Muslim Advocates
Arab American Institute
Asian Americans Advancing Justice--Atlanta
Bend the Arc Jewish Action
Center for Human Technology
Center for Media Justice
Community Responders Network
CreaTV San Jose
CREDO
Emgage
Equality Labs
Freedom From Facebook
HOPE not hate
Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility
MCN--Muslim Community Network
Media Matters for America
Million Hoodies Movement for Justice
MomsRising
MoveOn
MPower Change
Muslim Youth Collective
NAACP
National LGBTQ Task Force
National Network for Arab American Communities/The Campaign
to TAKE ON HATE
South Asian Americans Leading Together (SAALT)
Southern Poverty Law Center
The Sikh Coalition
UltraViolet
United We Dream
Urbana-Champaign Independent Media Center
Voting Rights Forward
Women's Alliance for Theology, Ethics, and Ritual (WATER)
cc: Sheryl Sandberg, Marc Andreessen, Erskine B. Bowles, Kenneth I.
Chenault, Susan Desmond-Hellmann, Reed Hastings, Peter A. Thiel,
Jeffrey Zients.
______
Statement of the ADL (Anti-Defamation League)
June 26, 2019
about adl
Since 1913, the mission of the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) has
been to ``stop the defamation of the Jewish people and to secure
justice and fair treatment for all.'' For decades, ADL has fought
against bigotry and anti-Semitism by exposing extremist groups and
individuals who spread hate and incite violence.
Today, ADL is the foremost non-governmental authority on domestic
terrorism, extremism, hate groups, and hate crimes. Through our Center
on Extremism (COE), whose experts monitor a variety of extremist and
terrorist movements, ADL plays a leading role in exposing extremist
movements and activities, while helping communities and Government
agencies alike in combating them. ADL's team of experts--analysts,
investigators, researchers, and linguists--use cutting-edge
technologies and age-old investigative techniques to track and disrupt
extremists and extremist movements world-wide. ADL provides law
enforcement officials and the public with extensive resources, such as
analytic reports on extremist trends and Hate Symbols \1\ and Terror
Symbols databases. Through our Center for Technology and Society (CTS),
ADL serves as a resource to tech platforms, civil society organizations
and government, and develops proactive solutions to the problems of
cyber hate, on-line harassment, and misuses of technology. Launched in
2017 and headquartered in Silicon Valley, CTS aims for global impacts
and applications in an increasingly borderless space. It is a force for
innovation, producing cutting-edge research to enable on-line civility,
protect vulnerable populations, support digital citizenship and engage
youth. CTS builds on ADL's century of experience building a world
without hate and supplies the tools to make that a possibility both on-
line and off-line.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ADL, Hate on DisplayTM Hate Symbols Database,
available at https://www.adl.org/hatesymbolsdatabase.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On October 27, 2018, Robert Bowers perpetrated the deadliest attack
against Jews in American history when he stormed a Pittsburgh synagogue
armed with an assault rifle and three handguns.\2\ Shouting ``All Jews
must die,'' Bowers killed 11 people in their place of worship. Less
than 5 months later, Brenton Tarrant perpetrated the deadliest attack
against Muslims in New Zealand's history, slaughtering 50 people who
had gathered for prayer at two mosques.\3\ A little over a month later,
John Earnest attacked the Jewish community at a synagogue in Poway,
California killing 1 congregant and injuring 3 others.\4\ In the wake
of these horrific crimes, Jewish and Muslim communities world-wide and
concerned citizens across the globe began searching for clues about
attacks that seemed to come out of nowhere.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Jay Croft and Saeed Ahmed, ``The Pittsburgh synagogue shooting
is believed to be the deadliest attack on Jews in American history, the
ADL says,'' CNN, October 28, 2018, available at https://www-m.cnn.com/
2018/10/27/us/jewish-hate-crimes-fbi/index.html.
\3\ ADL, ``White Supremacist Terrorist Attack at Mosques in New
Zealand,'' March 15, 2019, available at https://www.adl.org/blog/white-
supremacist-terrorist-attack-at-mosques-in-new-zealand.
\4\ https://www.adl.org/blog/poway-attack-illustrates-danger-right-
wing-extremists-pose-to-jews-muslims.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In hindsight, however, these killings are wholly unsurprising,
given that both attackers were enmeshed in on-line communities that
exposed them to content designed to teach and amplify hate and make
them potentially violent. Bowers was an engaged and active member of a
fringe on-line community called Gab, which, like similar on-line
forums, is a bastion of hatred and bigotry.\5\ Gab has seen a surge in
racist and anti-Semitic postings since the 2016 Presidential election.
Tarrant and Earnest, too, were part of a fringe on-line community
called 8chan, one of the most notoriously hateful on-line communities
on the internet.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ ADL, ``Gab Was Down For a Week, Forcing Extremists to Consider
Their Alternatives,'' November 5, 2018, available at https://
www.adl.org/blog/gab-was-down-for-a-week-forcing-extremists-to-
consider-their-alternatives.
\6\ https://www.adl.org/news/article/how-facebook-and-twitter-help-
amplify-fringe-websites.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ADL has been researching white supremacy and other forms of hate
on-line. We have been working to identify how to more effectively
address this growing threat.
adl and on-line hate
ADL has been working to combat on-line hate since 1985, with its
``Computerized Networks of Hate'' report which explored how dial-up
computer bulletin boards served as a communications tool for white
supremacists who have a modem and a home computer.
Since then, ADL has worked with the technology industry at each
turn of its rapid expansion to help counter hate and extremism on-line.
In the 1990's, ADL published reports on the state of on-line hate such
as ``The Web of Hate: Extremists Exploit the Internet''\7\ and
``Poisoning the Web: Hatred on-line.'' In 2012, ADL convened the
``Anti-Cyberhate Working Group'' which consisted of leading
stakeholders from both technology companies in Silicon Valley as well
as civil society discuss the burgeoning problem of hate on social
media, and explored ways to mitigate this threat through policy. In
2014, inspired by this group, ADL released ``Best Practices for
Responding to Cyberhate,'' which was endorsed by leading tech companies
and became a guidepost for the industry.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ ADL, ``The Web of Hate: Extremists Exploit the Internet,''
available at https://www.adl.org/sites/default/files/documents/assets/
pdf/combating-hate/ADL-Report-1996-Web-of-Hate-Extremists-exploit-the-
Internet.pdf.
\8\ ADL, ``Best Practices for Responding to Cyberhate,'' available
at https://www.adl.org/best-practices-for-responding-to-cyberhate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ADL has continued to consult with technologists and policy makers
on issues of on-line hate in the years following, and, in 2017 ADL
launched the Center for Technology and Society (CTS).\9\ CTS is the
leading advocacy and research center headquartered in Silicon Valley
focused on fighting hate and harassment on-line. Since its launch, CTS
has contributed considerably to the advocacy on cyber hate spearheaded
by ADL, convening the Cyberhate Problem Solving lab with Facebook,
Microsoft, Twitter, and Google.\10\ The lab includes managers at these
companies from both the policy teams as well as the engineering teams
that put policies into practice. CTS has significantly expanded on
ADL's research work on on-line hate. This includes projects like the
on-line Hate Index with UC Berkeley's D-Lab--a cutting-edge project
that combines social science and machine learning techniques to develop
a new way for AI to understand language and context in order to help
identify and measure on-line hate speech.\11\ CTS also worked with our
Belfer Fellow, Samuel Woolley, to produce original research on how
disinformation tactics were used to spread anti-Semitism on-line in
advance of the 2018 midterm elections.\12\ Moreover, in an effort to
keep up with new forms of interactive digital technology, CTS
collaborated with Implosion Labs to understand the potential for hate
in the emerging ecosystem of social virtual reality.\13\ CTS has also
expanded its focus to fight hate, bias, and harassment in video games.
CTS has worked with our Belfer Fellow Dr. Karen Schrier on ways in
which games can foster empathy and reduce bias, developed a guide for
game developers to explore issues of identity through game design,\14\
and recently released a white paper exploring research at the
intersection of identity, bias, empathy, and game design.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ https://www.adl.org/news/press-releases/adl-to-build-silicon-
valley-center-to-monitor-fight-cyberhate-omidyar-network-2.
\10\ https://www.adl.org/news/press-releases/facebook-google-
microsoft-twitter-and-adl-announce-lab-to-engineer-new.
\11\ https://www.adl.org/resources/reports/the-on-line-hate-index.
\12\ https://www.adl.org/resources/reports/computational-
propaganda-jewish-americans-and-the-2018-midterms-the-amplification.
\13\ https://www.adl.org/resources/reports/hate-in-social-virtual-
reality.
\14\ https://www.adl.org/media/12529/download.
\15\ https://www.adl.org/designing-ourselves.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In February 2019, CTS released a survey report that focused on the
American experience of on-line hate and harassment.\16\ The report
considered how people were harassed on-line, which individuals and
groups were targeted, the serious and lasting impact and effect on
targets' lives, and how respondents want Government and the tech
industry to address this pervasive and important issue.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ https://www.adl.org/on-lineharassment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
internal processes: managing hate on a social media platform
A significant number of Americans use mainstream social media
platforms as a part of their day-to-day life. As we have outlined, the
terrorist attack in Christchurch highlighted the role that mainstream
social media companies play in amplifying the spread of violent,
extreme, and hateful content on-line. It is clear that the public,
Government, and civil society lack important knowledge about social
media platforms' ability and responsibility to detect and decrease
violent, extremist, and hateful content.
In the wake of this horrific tragedy and others that have involved
social media, we know more attention needs to be paid to the following
issues: The process by which mainstream social media platforms manage
violent and hateful content; the limitations hindering our ability to
understand and evaluate platforms' efforts to decrease the prevalence
of hate on-line; the weaknesses on each platform that allow for
hateful, extreme, and violent content to reach users despite efforts by
the platforms; and the need for more information and transparency
regarding how effective tech companies' current practices are in
countering hate, violence, and extremism on their platforms.
When we refer to ``mainstream social media companies,'' we are
primarily referring to Facebook (which owns Instagram), Google (which
owns YouTube), Twitter, and Snapchat. These American companies own and
operate platforms that have the largest number of monthly active
users.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Aaron Smith and Monica Anderson, ``Social Media Use in 2018,''
Pew Research Center, March 1, 2018, available at https://
www.pewinternet.org/2018/03/01/social-media-use-in-2018/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mainstream social media platforms are not bound by the laws of a
particular country. Instead, when moderating hate, violence and
extremism, each of the mainstream social media platforms is governed by
two sets of rules. First is the individual platform's forward-facing
rules, often called ``community guidelines.'' Second is an internal,
more expansive and granular set of unnamed rules, used to review and
analyze content through a process called ``content moderation.''\18\
These content moderation guidelines are typically developed,
maintained, reviewed, and revised by the Policy, Security or Trust and
Safety teams at a tech company.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Kate Klonick, ``The New Governors: The People, Rules, And
Processes Governing on-line Speech,'' available at https://
docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF00/20180905/108642/HHRG-115-IF00-20180905-
SD011.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The internal, more expansive rules governing content moderation are
enforced continuously by staff or contractors on an operations team. In
April 2018, Facebook became the first tech company to state that they
were publicly releasing their internal community guidelines; however,
this claim is unverifiable.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Monika Bickert, ``Publishing Our Internal Enforcement
Guidelines and Expanding Our Appeals Process,'' Facebook Newsroom,
April 24, 2018, available at https://newsroom.fb.com/news/2018/04/
comprehensivecommunity-standards/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Historically, the majority of content reviewed through the content
moderation process is reported to the platform by its users. If the
content moderation process is predominantly reactive--meaning
problematic activity is only flagged once it is reported to the
platform by users--the burden is placed entirely on users and the
platform is merely providing customer service in addressing--and
selectively at that--user reports of hateful content. (User flagging of
problematic content has also been employed to address other types of
problematic content, such as copyright violations.) In the mean time,
as a result of their business models and algorithms many of the larger
platforms continued to monetize and promote harmful content in search
of increasing user engagement. Ultimately, this model allowed platforms
to de-prioritize addressing the existence of hateful content on their
platforms.
Notably, when mandated by law or when trying to avoid Government
regulation, tech companies have shown the ability to coordinate and
take proactive measures to moderate certain kinds of objectionable
content. For example, in the areas of child pornography and
international terrorism, the mainstream tech platforms have worked
together--using technology that allows them to tag and catalog certain
images and videos and coordinate across platforms--to proactively
remove problematic content.\20\ A recent working paper questioned the
efficacy of such efforts following the events of Christchurch.\21\
Nevertheless, tech companies have shown meaningful success in terms of
mitigating ISIS-related terrorism content.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ 9 [sic] Kaveh Waddell, ``A Tool to Delete Beheading Videos
Before They Even Appear on-line,'' The Atlantic, June 22, 2016,
available at https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2016/06/a-
tool-to-delete-beheading-videosbefore-they-even-appear-on-line/488105/.
\21\ https://www.ivir.nl/publicaties/download/
Hash_sharing_Heller_April_2019.pdf.
\22\ Nitasha Tiku, ``Tech Platforms Treat White Nationalism
Different From Islamic Terrorism,'' WIRED, March 20, 2019, available at
https://www.wired.com/story/why-tech-platforms-dont-treat-all-
terrorism-same/
?utm_source=twitter&utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=wired-
&utm_brand=wired&utm_socialtype=owned; J.M. Berger, ``Nazis vs. ISIS on
Twitter: A Comparative Study of White Nationalist and ISIS On-line
Social Media Networks,'' GW Program on Extremism, September 2016,
available at https://extremism.gwu.edu/sites/g/files/zaxdzs2191/f/
downloads/Nazis%20v.%20ISIS.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is worth noting that the proliferation of harmful content and
the ineffectiveness to date of the tech companies' responses have led
to calls to weaken or eliminate Section 230 of the Communications
Decency Act of 1996. That is the law that protects tech platforms from
being liable for content posted by users--so called user-generated
content. This law is the fundamental bedrock for much of what has been
transformative for good in the development of an open internet
promoting free speech, community, access to knowledge, education, and
creativity. For example, Section 230 enabled platforms like Wikipedia,
the on-line encyclopedia, to be created and to thrive. Without the
protections of Section 230 many innovations and smaller companies,
including not-for-profit sites like Wikipedia, likely could not exist.
So ADL is not calling for the elimination or ``swiss-cheesing'' of
Section 230 protections.
At the same time, immunity from liability for user-generated
content--along with a dominant business model that monetizes engagement
(and often harmful but impactful content)--as well as the lack of other
regulations or meaningful self-governance helps foster a purely
reactive culture among large social media platforms. That places the
onus on users to bring problematic content to the attention of the
companies. And as we now know, that model failed egregiously to find
and mitigate harmful content and did not adequately protect our
democracy from manipulation.
However, one-size-fits-all-regulation concerning content moderation
will have unintended consequences--including removing extremist and
unlawful content to places where it cannot easily be found and
preempted or prosecuted by law enforcement. It will have serious
potential unintended consequences. In addition, it will almost
certainly make it very expensive to comply with internet regulations
and thus lead to the ironic effect of consolidating monopoly market
positions of the very tech giants whose behavior has rightly concerned
Congress, since few companies would be able to afford to comply with
regulations or defend against countless lawsuits based on user content.
Turning back to content moderation as it works when the onus is on
users, once a user (or a group like ADL) has reported a piece of
content, the process by which a company decides whether that piece of
content violates the platform's guidelines, and what actions to take as
a result, is unclear. It is completely a black box, and is not made
transparent in the companies' transparency reports or in any other way.
What is clear is that the final decision regarding what constitutes a
violation of platform rules, including determinations regarding
classifying specific content as anti-Muslim, anti-Semitic, or racist,
is made solely and independently by the platform.
Some platforms have also provided the ability for users to appeal
decisions made by the platform,\23\ which will result in a second
review of the content, and second determination by the platform--or if
Facebook's new initiative gets off the ground,\24\ by a sort of
independent Supreme Court--as to whether that piece of content violates
the platform rules. In the case of the New Zealand massacre, Facebook
stated that 200 people watched the live-streamed video of the attack,
and no one reported it to the platform, until it was brought to the
company's attention by the authorities in New Zealand.\25\ Indeed, the
entire 17 minutes of the video remained up as it was being live-
streamed. While Facebook has recently made some changes to its live-
streaming function as a result of this,\26\ the efficacy of those
efforts is not clear.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Ian Wren, ``Facebook Updates Community Standards, Expands
Appeals Process,'' NPR, April 24, 2018, available at https://
www.npr.org/2018/04/24/605107093/facebook-updates-community-standards-
expands-appeals-process; Jacob Kastrenakes, ``Twitter promises to
respond more quickly to people who report abuse,'' The Verge, October
17, 2017, available at https://www.theverge.com/2017/10/17/16492100/
twitter-updated-abuse-hate-harassment-ban-rules; Claudine Beaumont,
``YouTube users can appeal against `violations,' '' The Telegraph,
April 30, 2019, available at https://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/
google/7876926/YouTube-users-can-appeal-against-violations.html.
\24\ Chris Sonderby, ``Update on New Zealand,'' Facebook Newsroom,
March 18, 2019, available at https://newsroom.fb.com/news/2019/03/
update-on-new-zealand/.
\25\ Ibid.
\26\ https://newsroom.fb.com/news/2019/05/protecting-live-from-
abuse/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Some of this process of content moderation can be automated through
technology, including machine learning. This is especially true when
there is little ambiguity regarding the nature of the content, as in
the case of spam or child pornography. Tech companies also regularly
include ``violent content'' as one category of content that can be
easily caught through automated technological methods. The attack in
New Zealand and social media's role in the spread of the live-streamed
video of the event calls this claim into question. CTS recently wrote a
piece discussing efforts companies can undertake to improve their
efforts around live-streaming.\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ https://www.adl.org/news/article/livestreaming-hate-problem-
solving-through-better-design.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Because hate speech or coded extremist activity require more
context and nuance in review, this content is typically reviewed by a
human moderator. Oftentimes, the automated tool and the human
moderators work in tandem to detect and review complicated and nuanced
hateful content. There, the tool will identify content that requires
human judgment and will then route the content to the human reviewer.
Once routed, the human reviewer will analyze the instance and either
make a decision according to the platform rules or escalate for further
review.
Once a piece of content is determined to have violated the rules of
a particular platform, the platform then decides the appropriate
consequences for violating the rules. Consequences range from the
individual piece of a content being removed, to the user being
suspended for a certain period of time, to the user (or community)
being banned from the platform altogether. Each platform has its own
unique approach to analyzing violations of its platform rules and
implementing consequences. Certain platforms have also experimented
with alternate types of consequences. For example, Reddit has explored
placing offensive or objectionable communities in quarantine, making it
harder for users not explicitly seeking out that content to find it,
such as in the case of 9/11 Truthers and Holocaust Deniers.\28\ Most
recently, YouTube has taken a number of types of content--including
white supremacist and Holocaust denial content--which it previously
handled by placing in ``limited state'' and instead decided to remove
these categories of content from the YouTube platform.\29\ This may
speak to the lack of efficacy of this particular alternative method of
``limited state,'' if reducing the ability of this content to be found
was not enough to reduce the harm caused by it. Barring more
information as to the nature of policy change, we can only surmise as
to the effectiveness of these alternative approaches.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ Xeni Jardin, ``Reddit `quarantines' white supremacist, incel,
holocaust denier, and other gross subreddits,'' Boing, September 28,
2018, available at https://boingboing.net/2018/09/28/reddit-
quarantines-major-w.html.
\29\ https://youtube.googleblog.com/2019/06/our-ongoing-work-to-
tackle-hate.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Each company has specific and unique methods when handling hateful
content on its platforms--from the definition of what is hateful and
other rules, to content moderation practices, to actions and
consequences. And each company shares its practices with varying
degrees of openness or transparency. That said, this overview should
provide a surface-level understanding of how mainstream social media
platforms function in terms of managing hate, violence, and extremism
on-line, when there is no legal (or compelling business) mandate to do
so.
evaluating efforts by companies
Evaluating the effectiveness of mainstream social media platforms'
content moderation processes, however, is hard to gauge, especially in
light of the scale at which these platforms operate. Platform content
moderation is taking place on an on-going basis and will only become
more important and more difficult as these platforms continue to grow.
How well content moderation can scale is an open question, as platforms
grow, as billions of new users come onto the internet, as what might be
otherwise praiseworthy privacy innovations have the unintended
consequence of making content moderation harder, and as disruptive
technologies come on-line--such as virtually undetectable ``deep
fakes'' that generate hate and violence while defeating detection.
Already, in January 2019, it was reported that Facebook had 2.27
billion monthly active users globally, while YouTube had 1.9
billion.\30\ As of December 2018, Facebook reported that of the 30,000
employees or contractors working on safety and security at Facebook,
half of those are focused on reviewing content.\31\ In late 2017,
YouTube stated that it was increasing the number of individuals
reviewing content to 10,000 people.\32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ Statista, ``Most famous social network sites 2019, by active
users,'' January 2019, available at https://www.statista.com/
statistics/272014/global-social-networks-ranked-by-number-of-users/.
\31\ Ellen Silver, ``Hard Questions: Who Reviews Objectionable
Content on Facebook--And Is the Company Doing Enough to Support Them?''
Facebook Newsroom, July 26, 2018, available at https://newsroom.fb.com/
news/2018/07/hard-questions-content-reviewers/.
\32\ Sam Levin, ``Google to hire thousands of moderators after
outcry over YouTube abuse
videos,'' The Guardian, December 5, 2017, available at https://
www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/dec/04/google-youtube-hire-
moderators-child-abuse-videos.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At-scale information on the effectiveness of these efforts is
currently only available via self-reported statistics from the
companies, each with varying degrees of opacity and no form of on-
going, independent, external auditing. More research on the nature of
the problem is available from outside academics and civil society;
however, this research also has no agreed-upon definitions or set of
metrics to evaluate hateful and extreme content. Further, these groups
have limited access to platform information or data, including on the
prevalence of hateful content on a given platform. Some of the
researchers are bound by non-disclosure agreements.
In spite of these limitations, there are two limited methods for
understanding mainstream social media companies' efforts to address
hateful, violent, and extreme content: Reports released by the tech
companies, and external studies from academics and civil society.
reporting by companies
One method of company reporting on hate is the transparency reports
that tech companies release on a regular basis, without being legally
required to do so. Transparency reports contain a set of metrics, set
by each tech company, regarding moderation practices across self-
selected content areas on their platforms. For example, Facebook's
first transparency report in 2013 reported solely on the number of
times governments asked Facebook for information on users, and the
number of times Facebook responded.\33\ Google's first transparency
report from 2010 provided similar statistics, focused on Government
requests to Google's suite of products, which included but did not
disaggregate YouTube.\34\ In 2018, both Facebook and Google/YouTube
provided their first public statistics regarding their content
moderation practices related to the enforcement of their community
guidelines.\35\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai, ``Facebook Releases First
Transparency Report,'' Mashable, August 27, 2013, available at https://
mashable.com/2013/08/27/facebook-transparency-report/#j4SvneYzzPqx.
\34\ Google, Transparency Report, available at https://
web.archive.org/web/20100924044616/ http://www.google.com:80/
transparencyreport/.
\35\ 2 [sic] Guy Rosen, ``Facebook Publishes Enforcement Numbers
for the First Time,'' Facebook newsroom, May 15, 2018, available at
https://newsroom.fb.com/news/2018/05/enforcement-numbers/; Catherine
Shu, ``YouTube releases its first report about how it handles flagged
videos and policy violations,'' TechCrunch, available at https://
techcrunch.com/2018/04/23/youtube-releases-its-first-report-about-how-
it-handles-flagged-videos-andpolicy-violations/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
They have since provided several updates on the enforcement of
their community guidelines, which contain most of the same shortcomings
CTS articulated earlier this year:\36\ The limited, vague, and
sometimes nonexistent, metrics in these transparency reports do not
provide material information either to users, looking to frequent a
particular platform, or to external researchers in academia or civil
society looking to understand and combat the phenomena of hate on-line.
For example, none of the figures provided by the companies can answer
basic questions such as: ``How much hate is there on platform X? Are
there indications that the approaches to mitigating this problem by the
company are working?'' or ``Is this platform a safe space for people
who identify as X?'' More concerning is the fact that these metrics are
self-chosen and self-reported, so that there is no independent
verification that they are either meaningful or accurate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ https://www.adl.org/blog/we-need-real-transparency-about-hate-
on-social-media.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additional reporting related to hate on-line has been conducted by
the companies in relation to the ``Code of Conduct on Countering
Illegal Hate Speech On-line'' which was signed by Facebook, Twitter,
Google/YouTube and Microsoft and the European Union in 2016.\37\ In
this agreement tech platforms agreed to work to together with the
European Union to address terrorism and hate speech on-line. Most
notably, the code of conduct stipulates a 24-hour turnaround on reports
of ``illegal hate speech.'' In February 2019, the tech companies
reported that 89 percent of flagged content is assessed within 24 hours
and 72 percent of the content deemed to be illegal hate speech is
removed. This is compared to 40 percent and 28 percent respectively
when the Code was launched in 2016.\38\ Once again, there is no
information available about what communities are being impacted and how
these figures relate to the prevalence of hate across an entire
platform, let alone across platforms. Additionally, once again, these
figures are self-reported by the companies, and are not verified by any
independent third party. Nor are there agreed-upon and externally
audited metrics about resultant (or corollary) reductions in the
impact, in addition to incidence of hateful content.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ European Commission, Code Of Conduct On Countering Illegal
Hate Speech on-line http://ec.europa.eu/justice/fundamental-rights/
files/hate_speech_code_of_conduct_en.pdf; Commission of the European
Communities Press.
\38\ Commission of the European Communities Press Release, IP/19/
805, February 4, 2019, available at http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_IP-19-805_en.htm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
external study
The other limited pathway available to help understand the
phenomena of hate on mainstream social media platforms is through
external studies conducted by academic researchers and/or civil
society. The advantage to this kind of study is that it exists outside
of the corporate structure of tech companies, and thus can engage more
freely in research and public communication regarding findings.
However, because the phenomena of hateful content is so context
dependent, there are currently no common frameworks, metrics or
definitions to apply to these studies, thus making it hard to compare
results. For example, in 2018, reports were released by ADL, the
Community Security Trust (CST) in the United Kingdom and the World
Jewish Congress on the nature of anti-Semitism on-line. Each report had
its own methodology in terms of defining anti-Semitism and each were
looking at different and incomplete parts of various on-line platforms.
At present, most studies of these kinds are based on data available
from Twitter and Reddit. Both Twitter and Reddit provide the public
with access to a portion of their data, while still respecting user
privacy. This allows researchers to independently examine and measure
the nature of hate on these platforms. However, the scale of the
platforms is so vast and the resources of these external groups and
individuals so limited that conducting any kind of analysis that is
generalizable to any platform as a whole is extremely difficult and
time-consuming.
on-line hate and harassment: the american experience
Since its launch, CTS has taken an extensive look at the phenomena
of hate on-line. Through various independent studies, CTS has worked to
increase the public's understanding of how hate manifests on-line and
has provided new ways to think about potential solutions to this
monumental and multi-faceted problem.
In February 2019, CTS released the results of its survey on on-line
hate and harassment in the United States.\39\ The survey found that 53
percent of Americans experienced some form of on-line harassment,
whereas 37 percent of Americans reported experiencing severe
harassment, which includes physical threats, sexual harassment,
stalking and sustained harassment. Of people who were targeted by
harassment on-line based on their identity, the most targeted
communities were the LGBTQ community (63 percent), Muslims (35
percent), Latinx (30 percent), African-Americans (27 percent) and women
(24 percent)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ ADL, ``On-line Hate and Harassment: The American Experience,''
available at https://www.adl.org/on-lineharassment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notably, an overwhelming majority of respondents from across the
political spectrum supported strengthening laws against perpetrators of
on-line hate and harassment, strengthening laws applying to platforms,
and providing more training to law enforcement on how to handle on-line
hate and harassment.
The survey model of understanding the problem of hate on-line
avoids the limitations of the data provided by the platforms and the
definitions agreed to by external researchers by allowing respondents
to self-report and define their own experience of on-line hate. For
example, the platform where respondents said they most often
experienced hate and harassment was Facebook, followed by Twitter and
YouTube. Getting this kind of cross-platform comparative results on the
experience of users regarding hate on-line through the data publicly
available from these companies and platforms is currently impossible. A
survey-based approach, however, is a very broad measure, and cannot get
at the absolute level of prevalence of hate and harassment on any
particular on-line platform at any one time.
computational propaganda, jewish-americans and the 2018 midterms: the
amplification of anti-semitic harassment on-line
In November 2018, ADL released the report ``Computational
Propaganda, Jewish-Americans and the 2018 Midterms: The Amplification
of Anti-Semitic Harassment on-line.'' The report focused on how tactics
of disinformation, such as the use of automated accounts or bots to
spread content, are being utilized to spread anti-Semitism on-line. The
study consisted of both qualitative interviews with leaders and public
figures in the Jewish community and a quantitative analysis of 7.5
million Twitter messages from August to September 2018.
The report found that nearly 30 percent of accounts engaging in
anti-Semitic behavior were in fact bots, and that those bots made up
over 40 percent of the anti-Semitic content in that time period. The
qualitative results found that for the Jewish public figures who
participated in the study, experiencing threats of violence and deluges
of anti-Semitism had become part of their internal calculus for
engaging in public life. For some, it drove them to speak out more
loudly and vigorously; others, often citing concern over the harassment
of family members, friends and romantic partners, sought to make
adjustments to their on-line activity.
This type of study shows both the strengths and limits of studying
on-line hate with data currently available from the companies. Given
the data available from Twitter, the author, Sam Woolley, was able to
look deeply at a particular moment in time on a platform, leading up to
a particular event and to perform analysis of certain activities on the
platform related to hate within that time frame. The limitation of this
study is that we cannot generalize to the whole of one platform, such
as Twitter, even within the narrow subject matter of how disinformation
tactics spread anti-Semitism. To do so would require significantly more
effort and resources. Without getting a great deal closer to
understanding the prevalence and impact of particular hateful content,
among other data points, it is difficult to devise the best mitigation
tactics or to measure their effectiveness.
the on-line hate index
In an effort to provide a set of metrics or a common language as to
the nature of hate on-line, ADL has been working in partnership with UC
Berkeley's D-Lab on a project called the on-line Hate Index. The on-
line Hate Index combines social science practices with machine learning
techniques to create an academically rigorous way to understand the
phenomena of hate on-line.
For a machine learning algorithm to actually learn, it requires
large amounts of data that is labeled as to what it is or what it is
not. For a machine learning algorithm to learn to detect hate speech
on-line, it would need a large data set with some comments labeled as
hateful and some labeled as not. At present, there are not many
datasets that exist like this, and the ones that do exist are not very
expansive. The on-line Hate Index project is working to provide a tool
which will be available to the public that allows on-line comments to
be labeled systematically and rigorously from a social science
perspective, incorporating a myriad of community perspectives, so that
there is a clear set of metrics and understandings as to the nature of
hate on-line not only from the perspective of the speaker, but from the
targets.
This approach is novel in the sense that it is not directly
engaging in research on the problem, but rather creating a methodology
whereby future research of hate on-line can be conducted in a more
systematic and uniform way. The issue here is, again, the tool will
only be as good as the data to which it has access. The limited data
currently provided by tech platforms limits the ability of innovative
researchers such as the team at UC Berkeley's D-Lab from creating a
shared understanding of the problem in the research community.
policy recommendations
The challenges discussed above are complex and wide-ranging and
require a whole-of-society response. There is no magic bullet. Indeed,
there is not even a collective set of magic bullets. A constantly
iterative interdisciplinary approach will be needed, drawing upon
education in K-12 and in universities, engagement of various
professions and industries (including, perhaps venture capital firms),
a change in the divisive and polarizing rhetoric that has become
mainstream at the highest levels of government, the training of
engineers, including those developing games, the creation of tools and
better coordination between humans and those tools, the inclusion of
targeted communities and the groups that represent them, innovative
marketing campaigns, litigation, and legislation, and reform in self-
governance, to name a handful. How to balance content moderation and
privacy and free expression concerns will remain challenging, to say
the least.
Nonetheless, we must start somewhere, and quickly. Below are some
initial recommendations for government and tech platforms to address
hate on-line and the threat that it poses to Americans and people
around the world.
on-line hate: policy recommendations for government
Strengthen Laws Against Perpetrators of On-line Hate
Hate and harassment have moved from on the ground to on-
line, but our laws have not kept up. Many forms of severe on-
line misconduct are not consistently covered by current cyber
crime, harassment, stalking, and hate crime laws. While many of
these issues can and should be enacted and enforced at the
State level, Congress has an opportunity to lead the fight
against cyber hate by increasing protections for targets as
well as penalties for perpetrators of on-line misconduct.
Some actions Congress can take include:
Revising Federal law to allow for penalty enhancements
based on cyber-related conduct
Updating Federal stalking and harassment statutes' intent
requirement to account for on-line behavior where intent or
targeting is not present in the traditional sense but the
harm to the individual is just as devastating;
Legislating specifically on cyber crimes such as doxing,
swatting, and non-consensual pornography. ADL endorsed the
on-line Safety Modernization Act, which was introduced in
the last Congress to fill these gaps.
Urge Social Media Platforms to Institute Robust Governance
Government officials have an important role to play in
encouraging social media platforms to institute robust and
verifiable industry-wide self-governance. This could take many
forms, including Congressional oversight or passage of laws
that require certain levels of transparency and auditing. As
noted, one-size-fits-all laws specifying particular types of
content moderation are unlikely to be effective. The internet
plays a vital role in allowing for innovation and democratizing
trends, and that should be preserved. At the same time the
ability to use it for hateful and severely harmful conduct
needs to be effectively addressed. An escalating series of
regulations, depending upon a platform's successful self-
regulation, may be an option. There are other areas of law to
which we can look to find systems that allow individual
companies to meet required thresholds in the ways best suited
for the manner in which they operate.
Improve Training of Law Enforcement
Law enforcement is a key responder to on-line hate,
especially in cases when users feels they are in imminent
danger. Increasing resources and training for these departments
is critical to ensure they can effectively investigate and
prosecute cyber cases and that targets know they will be
supported if they contact law enforcement.
on-line hate recommendations for industry
Enhance Transparency
Platforms must report meaningful statistics to the public
about the prevalence of hate on their platforms. The metrics of
these reports should be determined in consultation with trusted
third parties so that they will be of value to the communities
most impacted by hate on-line.
Improve Accountability
Any public reporting done by tech companies regarding hate
on-line, whether through transparency reports or reporting
through other initiatives, should be reviewed and verified by
trusted third parties. Additionally, platforms should submit to
an external audit of hate on their platforms, to allow for a
fully independent analysis of the effectiveness of a company's
policies and practices in terms of mitigating hate on-line.
Provide Data
Platforms should, while respecting the privacy of their
users, provide meaningful data to external researchers to
advance understanding of the problem of hate on-line and to
promote innovation in solutions to mitigate the problem.
Ensure Strong Policies Against Hate
Privacy-by-design has become a best practice over the past
years. At the risk of being a bit facile, so must ``anti-hate-
by-design.'' Every social media platform must have clear and
transparent terms of service that address hateful content and
harassing behavior, and clearly define consequences for
violations. These policies should include, but should not be
limited to:
Making clear that the platform will not tolerate hateful
content or behavior on the basis of protected
characteristics.
Prohibiting abusive tactics such as harassment, doxing,
and swatting.
Establishing an appeal process for users who feel their
content was flagged as hateful or abusive in error.
Strengthen Enforcement of Policies
Social media platforms should assume greater responsibility
to enforce their policies and to do so accurately at scale.
This means:
Improving the complaint process so that it provides a more
consistent and speedy resolution for targets. We know from
research that content moderators regularly make mistakes
when it comes to adjudicating hateful content.
Relying less on complaints from individual users, and
instead proactively, swiftly, and continuously addressing
hateful content using a mix of artificial intelligence and
humans who are fluent in the relevant language and
knowledgeable in the social and cultural context of the
relevant community.
Design to Reduce Influence and Impact of Hateful Content
Social media companies should design their platforms and
algorithms in a way that reduces the influence of hateful
content and harassing behavior. Steps should include:
Making hateful content more difficult to find in search
and algorithmic recommendations. This means, for example,
never recommending hatemongers' tweets, suggesting them as
friends, or auto-playing their videos.
Removing advertisements from hateful content.
Not allowing hateful content to be monetized for profit.
Labeling content suspected to be from automated ``bot''
accounts, given the use of bots for spreading hate.
Expand Tools and Services for Targets
Given the prevalence of on-line hate and harassment,
platforms should offer far more user-friendly services, tools,
and opportunities for individuals facing or fearing on-line
attack. This includes:
Greater filtering options that allow individuals to decide
for themselves how much they want to see likely hateful
comments. What goes into default settings should also be
considered.
Protections for individuals who are being harassed in a
coordinated way.
User-friendly tools to help targets preserve evidence and
report problems to law enforcement and companies.
Enhanced industry support for counter-speech initiatives,
including fostering, aggregating and promoting positive
messages responding to offensive content.
conclusion
We implore you and all public leaders to consistently call out
bigotry and extremism at every opportunity. We all have a
responsibility to make clear that America is no place for hate.
We at ADL look forward to working with Members of the committee and
the tech industry to understand and combat hate on-line, and to ensure
justice and fair treatment to all in digital spaces.
Chairman Thompson. I thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony and Members for their questions.
The Members of the committee may have additional questions
for the witnesses, and we ask that you respond expeditiously in
writing to those questions.
The other point I would like to make, for Facebook, you
were 30 hours late with your testimony. Staff took note of it.
For a company your size, that was just not acceptable for the
committee. So I want the record to reflect that.
Without objection, the committee record shall be kept open
for 10 days.
Hearing no further business, the committee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:30 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Monika Bickert
Question 1. Does your company currently make data on on-line terror
content and misinformation--including the amount and types of content
you remove--available for academics and other stakeholders to research?
In what ways or what partnerships? Will you commit to making such data
available to researchers?
Answer. To track our progress and demonstrate our continued
commitment to make Facebook safe and inclusive, we regularly release
our Community Standards Enforcement Report. This report shares metrics
on how Facebook is performing in preventing and removing content that
goes against our Community Standards. We also release a ``prevalence''
metric that estimates how much violating content has been posted on the
platform. The report is focused on the following categories:
Terrorist propaganda (ISIS, al-Qaeda and affiliates)
Adult nudity and sexual activity
Bullying and harassment
Child nudity and sexual exploitation of children
Fake accounts
Hate speech
Regulated goods (drugs and firearms)
Spam
Violence and graphic content.
For the first time in our May 2019 report, we also began sharing
data on our process for appealing and restoring content to correct
mistakes in our enforcement decisions. That report can be viewed at
https://transparency.facebook.com/community-standards-enforcement. We
continue to look for ways to expand and enhance the report moving
forward.
We have also launched the Content Policy Research Initiative
(CPRI), which invites experts and researchers to help inform
development of our content policies and assess possible product
solutions to countering hateful and harmful content. At present, CPRI
is focused on:
Hate speech and harmful speech
Preventing off-line harm
Bullying and harassment
Fairness in global enforcement.
CPRI is comprised of both funding opportunities to support external
research on content policy issues, as well as workshops where we openly
share internal research methodology, discuss how we measure violations
on the platform, explain policy making and processes, and work to
identify areas that are ripe for collaboration with the research
community. For more information about CPRI, see https://
research.fb.com/programs/content-policy-research/#About.
Question 2. Private posts containing objectionable content pose a
unique challenge for moderation. How does your company reconcile data
privacy with the challenges of moderating content that violates your
terms of service, including terrorist content and misinformation?
Answer. Although the visibility of material varies for the general
public based on the setting in which it is posted, our systems can
proactively detect and remove violating content, including terrorist
content, to help improve on-line safety. We do this by analyzing
specific examples of bad content that have been reported and removed to
identify patterns of behaviors. Those patterns can be used to teach our
software to proactively find other, similar problems.
Question 3. Does your company currently share AI training data
related to counterterrorism with other social media companies? If not,
is there a plan to share such data in the future?
Answer. We are 1 of 4 founding members of the Global Internet Forum
to Counter Terrorism (GIFCT). As part of this industry partnership, we
are jointly focused on tech innovation--one of the key pillars of
GIFCT's work. The partnership is crucial to combating terrorist content
on on-line platforms. GIFCT is committed to working on technological
solutions to help thwart terrorists' use of our services, including
through a shared industry hash database, where companies can create
``digital fingerprints'' for terrorist content and share it with other
participating companies. The database, which became operational in the
spring of 2017, now includes 15 companies that contribute to it, more
than 200,000 visually distinct image hashes, and more than 10,000
visually distinct video hashes. It allows the 15 member companies to
use those hashes to identify and remove matching content--videos and
images--that violate our respective policies or, in some cases, block
terrorist content before it is even posted. Each company has different
policies, practices, and definitions as they relate to extremist and
terrorist content. If content is removed from a company's platform for
violating that platform's individual terrorism-related content
policies, the company may choose to hash the content and include it in
the database. GIFCT also has created an on-line resource for smaller
tech companies to seek support and feedback.
We recognize that our work is far from done, but we are confident
that we are heading in the right direction. We will continue to provide
updates as we forge new partnerships and develop new technology in the
face of this global challenge.
Question 4. How is your company working together with other
companies to share technology, information, and resources to combat
misinformation? Is there an analogue to the Global Internet Forum to
Counter Terrorism (GIFCT) for misinformation on your platforms?
Answer. We believe that tech companies, media companies, newsrooms,
and educators all need to work together to address the societal problem
of misinformation. We are engaged with partners across these industries
to help create a more informed community.
In doing so, we have greatly expanded our efforts to fight false
news: We are getting better at removing fake accounts and coordinated
inauthentic behavior; we are using both technology and people to fight
the rise in photo- and video-based misinformation; we have deployed new
measures to help people spot false news and get more context about the
stories they see in News Feed; and we have grown our third-party fact-
checking program to include 54 certified fact-checking partners who
review content in 42 languages. And we are making progress. Multiple
research studies suggest that these efforts are working and that
misinformation on Facebook has been reduced since the U.S. Presidential
elections in 2016.
But misinformation is a complex and evolving problem, and we have
much more work to do. With more than a billion things posted to
Facebook each day, we need to find additional ways to expand our
capacity. The work our professional fact-checking partners do is an
important piece of our strategy. But there are scale challenges
involved with this work. There are simply not enough professional fact-
checkers world-wide, and fact-checking--especially when it involves
investigation of more nuanced or complex claims--takes time. We want to
be able to tackle more false news, more quickly.
As we have worked to expand our misinformation efforts over the
past 2 years, we have also been doing extensive research and talking to
outside experts to identify additional approaches that might bolster
our defenses. One promising idea we have been exploring involves
relying on groups of people who use Facebook to point to journalistic
sources that can corroborate or contradict the claims made in
potentially false content.
We are also consulting a wide range of academics, fact-checking
experts, journalists, survey researchers, and civil society
organizations to understand the benefits and risks of ideas like this.
We are going to share with experts the details of the methodology we
have been thinking about to help these experts get a sense of where the
challenges and opportunities are, and how they will help us arrive at a
new approach. We will also share updates from these conversations
throughout the process and find ways to solicit broader feedback from
people around the world who may not be in the core group of experts
attending these roundtable events.
We all must work together to find industry solutions that
strengthen the on-line news ecosystem and our own digital literacy.
That is why we are collaborating with others who operate in this space.
For instance, through the Facebook Journalism Project, we seek to
establish stronger ties between Facebook and the news industry. The
project is focused on developing news products, providing training and
tools for journalists, and working with publishers and educators on how
we can equip people with the knowledge they need to be informed readers
in the digital age.
Taking the fight against misinformation to the next level is an
important task for us. There are elections around the world month after
month, only adding to the everyday importance of minimizing false news.
We plan to move quickly with this work, sharing some of the data and
ideas we have collected so far with the experts we consult so that we
can begin testing new approaches as soon as possible.
Question 5. What is your company doing to ensure that your human
content moderators are provided with all the resources they need in
order to carry out their jobs, including mental health resources and
adequate pay?
Answer. We are committed to providing support for our content
reviewers, as we recognize that reviewing certain types of content can
be hard. That is why everyone who reviews content for Facebook goes
through an in-depth, multi-week training program on our Community
Standards and has access to extensive support to ensure their well-
being. This includes on-site support with trained practitioners, an on-
call service, and health care benefits from the first day of
employment.
Facebook actively requests and funds an environment that ensures
this support is in place for the reviewers employed by our partners,
with contractual expectations around space for resiliency and wellness,
wellness support, and benefits including health care, paid time off,
and bonuses.
In 2015, we introduced a new set of standards for people who do
contract work in the United States and since 2016, we have also
required vendors in the United States to provide comprehensive health
care to all of their employees assigned to Facebook. In the years
since, it has become clear that $15 per hour does not meet the cost of
living in some of the places where we operate. After reviewing a number
of factors including third-party guidelines, we are committing to
providing compensation that reflects local costs of living. This means
a raise to a minimum of $20 per hour in the San Francisco Bay Area, New
York City, and Washington, DC, and $18 per hour in Seattle. We will be
implementing these changes by mid-next year, and we are working to
develop similar standards for other countries.
For workers in the United States that review content on Facebook,
we are raising wages even more. Their work is critical to keeping our
community safe, and it is often difficult. That is why we have paid
content reviewers more than minimum wage standards, and why we will
surpass this new living wage standard as well. We will pay at least $22
per hour to all employees working for our vendor partners based in the
Bay Area, New York City, and Washington, DC; $20 per hour to those
living in Seattle; and $18 per hour in all other metro areas in the
United States. As with all people who do contract work, we are working
to develop similar international standards. This work is on-going, and
we will continue to review wages over time.
In addition to pay, we collaborate with our vendor partners to
ensure they are providing a holistic approach to well-being and
resiliency that puts the needs of their employees first. We have a team
of clinical psychologists across three regions who are tasked with
designing, delivering, and evaluating resiliency programs for everyone
who works with objectionable content. This group works closely with our
partners and each of their dedicated resiliency professionals to help
build resiliency programming standards for their teams and share best
practices. These programs are important as support and resiliency is so
personal to each and every person. Everyone has their own way to build
resilience and we, and our partners, work hard to ensure that resources
are in place to help do that.
We are also employing technical solutions to limit exposure to
graphic material as much as possible. For the first time, we have added
preferences that let reviewers customize how they view certain content.
For example, they can now choose to temporarily blur graphic images by
default before reviewing them. We made these changes after hearing
feedback that reviewers want more control over how they see content
that can be challenging.
In April, we hosted all of our vendor partners at a summit to
discuss on-going improvement and commitment to the work in these areas.
We also formed an Advisory Working Group specific to resiliency issues.
The group includes a subject-matter expert from each vendor partner to
ensure that we are sharing across partners and setting standards going
forward.
Content review at our size can be challenging and we know we have
more work to do. This is an important issue and we are committed to
getting this right and to supporting our content reviewers in a way
that puts their well-being first.
Question 6. Prior to introducing new policies or products on your
platforms, what processes does your company have in place to anticipate
and plan for unintended consequences, harmful side effects, or
exploitation by bad actors, including terrorists and those seeking to
spread misinformation?
Answer. Our Community Standards are a living set of guidelines--
they must keep pace with changes happening on-line and in the world.
The core of our policy development process is a twice-monthly, global
meeting where we debate and discuss potential changes to our Community
Standards. In preparation for these meetings, members of our content
policy team reach out to internal and external experts, analyze data,
conduct research, and study relevant scholarship to inform our policy
proposals. This multi-step effort allows us to account for both a range
of perspectives and opinions across the globe, as well as unintended
consequences and efforts to thwart our policies. When our policies are
written or updated, we share those updates on our Community Standards
website. More information about this process is available at https://
newsroom.fb.com/news/2019/04/insidefeed-community-standards-
development-process/ and https://www.facebook.com/commun- itystandards/
additional_information.
Question 7. Facebook's latest Transparency Report contains some
metrics for understanding Facebook's efforts to combat hate speech on
its platform, but the report says that Facebook can't measure the
prevalence of hate content. This is concerning because users, advocacy
organizations, and Congress can only make sense of Facebook's
enforcement performance if it can be compared to the prevalence of hate
on the platform. What is preventing Facebook from reporting on the
prevalence of hate content on your platform? Can Facebook report on
U.S.-specific data? Does Facebook plan to report on this in the future?
Community Standards Enforcement Report: Hate Speech, Facebook,
https://transparency.facebook.com/community-standards-enforcement#hate-
speech (accessed July 9, 2019).
Answer. We cannot currently estimate the prevalence of hate content
on Facebook. But our prevalence measure is expanding to cover more
languages and regions and to account for cultural context and nuances
for individual languages.
Measuring prevalence is difficult in some scenarios because it
requires sampling content randomly. This prevalence methodology
requires a very large number of content samples to estimate a precise
measure for violations that are viewed very infrequently, such as
Terrorist Propaganda. For these types of violations, we can only
estimate the upper limit of violating views--meaning that we are
confident that the prevalence of violating views is below that limit.
Question 8. How do you anticipate making GIFCT effective in the
next 5 years? Is there a plan to increase the resources devoted to
GIFCT? Is there a plan to have a permanent staff and a physical
location?
Answer. The Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism (GIFCT) was
founded to improve the ability of technology companies to identify and
remove terrorist content. It is not a panacea, and has never been
presented as such. Many of its programs are designed to help smaller
technology companies improve their enforcement efforts.
When GIFCT was founded in 2017, we worked in 3 workstreams--
employing and sharing technology, facilitating knowledge sharing, and
supporting research. We have made major progress in these areas. Our
shared hash-database includes hashes from more than 200,000 visually
distinct pieces of content; we have engaged more than 120 technology
companies in 11 workshops on 4 continents; and the research network we
sponsored has published 7 papers on a range of issues, including
lessons learned from regulation of the financial industry and a
comparative study of how countries in the Five Eyes define and counter
terrorism. Over the course of 2019, we will be holding workshops in
Jordan, California, India, and the United Kingdom, along with a high-
level event with the United Nations' General Assembly in September.
In the wake of the Christchurch attacks, we made the decision to
add a fourth major workstream: Developing the ability to cooperate in a
crisis. That commitment was drawn from elements of the Christchurch
Call and led to an announcement on July 24 at the GIFCT Annual Summit
about a new Content Incident Protocol to be used by the 4 founding
GIFCT companies. The Protocol includes the ability to quickly spin up
dedicated mechanisms within our hash-sharing database to share
information relevant to a crisis scenario.
Strengthening GIFCT is critical going forward and we are working
with our partner companies to consolidate the consortium and ensure it
can play a stronger role in the years to come. At the same time, policy
makers must understand that the vast majority of the work that Facebook
does to identify and remove terrorist content is not dependent on
GIFCT. Rather, it relies on internal efforts and technology. GIFCT is a
critical tool to leverage those efforts across industry. But the most
important enforcement work we do on Facebook is driven internally.
More information about GIFCT is available on its website:
www.gifct.org.
Question 9. Have members of GIFCT agreed on a common standard for
prohibited terrorist content? If so, what are those standards and how
do you ensure they are updated?
Does GIFCT meet regularly to discuss trends in terrorist content?
In addition to combatting ISIS and al-Qaeda content, does GIFCT focus
on content related to other designated foreign terrorist organizations
as well as right-wing extremist groups, such as white supremacist
extremists? If not, is there a plan to do so?
Answer. GIFCT members must prohibit terrorism in their Terms of
Service, enable user reports of terrorism, agree to collaborate on
technology, and commit to transparency reports. GIFCT also supports
Tech Against Terrorism, an NGO that provides coaching for companies
that need to develop these elements.
The United Nations has been debating the definition of
``terrorism'' for decades and even U.S. agencies define terrorism
differently. The hash-sharing database is structured around the United
Nations' Consolidated Sanctions list, with the exception of material
produced during a crisis. Hash-sharing is ultimately a referral
mechanism, but each company enforces against content per its own
policies.
Facebook's internal definitions of terrorism are available in our
public-facing Community Standards. We remove content that supports
Foreign Terrorist Organizations and define terrorism based on the
behavior of groups and individuals. This means that we have long listed
a wide-range of organizations--jihadis, right-wing, and left-wing--as
terrorists.
Questions From Honorable Lauren Underwood for Monika Bickert
Question 1. During the hearing, you committed to providing in
writing details on Facebook's partnership with Life After Hate,
including financial support, and on any plans Facebook has to provide
Life After Hate with continuous funding for the duration of Facebook's
partnership with them. Please provide this information.
Answer. We support Life After Hate's mission and, as Monika Bickert
testified, they are ``doing great work with us.'' We provided Life
After Hate with an initial grant when we set up the redirect
initiative. We are currently working with the organization to help it
manage the increased volume as a result of our productive partnership.
We are awaiting their proposal to upscale our support and expect to
have additional funding for them in the near future.
Question 2a. During the hearing, you committed to provide in
writing the percentage of Facebook users who click on links to
``additional reporting'' that Facebook displays next to content that
contains disinformation.
Please provide this information, broken down by each month since
Facebook began displaying links to additional reporting next to content
that contains disinformation.
Question 2b. Please provide a complete list, as well as a breakdown
by percentage, of the websites that Facebook's suggested ``additional
reporting'' links to.
Answer. We do not capture metrics that would allow us to determine
what percentage of Facebook users click on links that provide
additional reporting. But we recognize that this is an important issue.
False news is bad for people and bad for Facebook. Therefore, to help
people make informed decisions about what to read, trust, and share, we
built products that give people more information directly in News Feed.
We also demote false news, which is one of our best weapons because
demoted articles typically lose 80 percent of their traffic.
We are continuing to evaluate these methods to ensure that they are
providing a clear signal to people about the credibility of fact-
checked content when users encounter such content on Facebook.
We have found this strategy to be successful. For example, we saw
that when we started showing related articles to people--and in doing
so, made the context from fact-checkers front and center in News Feed--
people were less likely to share the false stories.
We know there is more to do, and we are prioritizing fighting
misinformation. We would be happy to brief you or your staff to provide
you with more information about our efforts in this area.
Question 3a. During the hearing, you stated that Facebook has
``launched some recent measures'' to combat vaccine hoaxes and
disinformation, and that you would have additional measures in
partnership with ``major health organizations'' in place ``soon.''
Please provide a detailed description of all measures that Facebook
currently has in place to combat vaccine hoaxes and disinformation on
Facebook, Instagram, and WhatsApp.
Question 3b. Please provide a detailed description and an exact
date of implementation for those additional future measures.
Question 3c. Please provide a list of the ``major health
organizations'' that Facebook is working with to combat vaccine
disinformation and hoaxes.
Answer. We are working to tackle vaccine misinformation on Facebook
by reducing its distribution and providing people with authoritative
information on the topic. Our efforts include:
Reducing the ranking of groups and pages that spread
misinformation about vaccinations in News Feed and Search.
These groups and pages are not included in recommendations or
in predictions when you type into Search.
When we find ads that include misinformation about
vaccinations, we reject them. We also have removed related
targeting options, like ``vaccine controversies.'' For ad
accounts that continue to violate our policies, we may take
further action, such as disabling the ad account.
We do not show or recommend content that contains
misinformation about vaccinations on Instagram Explore or
hashtag pages.
We are exploring ways to share educational information about
vaccines when people come across misinformation on this topic.
We have also removed access to our fundraising tools for
pages that spread misinformation about vaccinations on
Facebook.
As part of our effort to combat vaccine misinformation, we work
with global health organizations, such as the World Health Organization
and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which have
publicly identified verifiable vaccine hoaxes. If these vaccine hoaxes
appear on Facebook, we take action against them. For example, if a
group or page admin posts vaccine misinformation, we exclude the entire
group or page from recommendations, reduce these groups' and pages'
distribution in News Feed and Search, and reject ads with this
misinformation.
We also believe in providing people with additional context so they
can decide whether to read, share, or engage in conversations about
information they see on Facebook. We are exploring ways to give people
more accurate information from expert organizations about vaccines at
the top of results for related searches, on pages discussing the topic,
and on invitations to join groups about the topic.
Question 4. Before Facebook announced its digital currency, Libra,
did Facebook evaluate or otherwise conduct ``red-teaming'' to assess
potential use of Libra for gang activity, terrorism, child abuse, or by
other bad actors?
Answer. We made the deliberate decision to announce the plans for
Libra early after an initial consultative phase with regulators,
central banks, and other organizations. The time between now and launch
is designed to be an open, collaborative process. We know that we
cannot do this alone and that engaging with regulators, policy makers,
and experts is critical to Libra's success. We will take the time to
get this right. The Libra Association will set standards for its
members to maintain anti-money-laundering and anti-fraud programs, and
to cooperate with legitimate law enforcement investigations. The
Association will also develop monitoring programs and work with vendors
who have expertise in identifying illicit activity on public
blockchains. That said, most of the work of preventing illicit activity
will happen at the service-provider level. These service providers will
include payment services and marketplaces that are already trusted
today by millions of people to complete their transactions safely, and
that have major investments in people and technology to fight fraud and
prevent illicit activity.
The service provider for which Facebook will be responsible is
Calibra, a Facebook subsidiary. Calibra will incorporate know-your-
customer and anti-money-laundering methodologies used around the world,
including those focused on customer identification and verification,
and risk-based customer due diligence, while developing and applying
technologies such as machine learning to enhance transaction monitoring
and suspicious activity reporting. Calibra's efforts will be
commensurate with its risk profile based on several factors, such as
Calibra's product features, customer profiles, geographies, and
transaction volumes.
Questions From Ranking Member Mike Rogers for Monika Bickert
Question 1. During the hearing, Professor Strossen raised a number
of concerns about the dangers of moderating speech. Rather than
censorship, she offered a number of suggestions to empower users. What,
if anything, are your companies doing to provide more filtering tools
to enhance the ability of users to control the content they see?
Answer. The goal of News Feed is to connect people with the posts
they find most relevant. We want to ensure that people see the content
that is important to them--whether that is posts from family and
friends or news articles and videos from pages they follow.
We have built, and are continuing to build, new controls so that
people can tell us directly what content they want to prioritize, take
a break from, or get rid of in their News Feed. If our users want to
make sure they see everything from a certain person, they can use the
``See First'' feature to put that person's posts at the top of their
Feed (for more information, see https://www.facebook.com/help/
1188278037864643). If they have heard too much from someone, users can
``Unfollow'' that person (for more information, see https://
www.facebook.com/help/190078864497547). If users just want to take a
break from someone, the ``Snooze'' feature removes that person from
their News Feed for 30 days (for more information, see https://
www.facebook.com/help/538433456491590).
Question 2. Do you have recommendations for ways to more
effectively address the extremist content found on many of the off-
shore, fringe social media sites?
Answer. One idea is for third-party bodies to set standards
governing the distribution of harmful content and measure companies
against those standards. Regulation could set baselines for what is
prohibited and require companies to build systems for keeping harmful
content to a bare minimum.
Facebook already publishes transparency reports on how effectively
we are removing harmful content. We believe every major internet
service should do this quarterly, because it is just as important as
financial reporting. Once we understand the prevalence of harmful
content, we can see which companies are improving and where we should
set the baselines.
We are also a founding member of the Global Internet Forum to
Counter Terrorism (GIFCT), through which we partner with others in the
tech industry to combat terrorism and violent extremism on-line. Our
work is focused on four key areas, one of which is sharing knowledge
with smaller tech companies and bringing other sectors' expertise to
the table.
In this vein, we have partnered with Tech Against Terrorism to host
11 workshops in 9 countries on 4 continents. As a result, we have
engaged with over 120 tech companies, over 25 NGO's, and 12 government
bodies. And just recently, we rolled out a cross-platform counter-
violent extremist toolkit that we jointly developed with the Institute
for Strategic Dialogue. The toolkit will assist civil society
organizations in developing on-line campaigns to challenge extremist
ideologies, while prioritizing their safety, and will be available on-
line soon. We know that the technology industry is not the best or most
appropriate messenger when it comes to pushing back on violent
extremists, which is why it is so important to support civil society
organizations that have the credibility and knowledge to combat,
respond to, and counter the promotion of violent extremism on-line.
Question 3. Can you describe the appeals process within your
platform for users to challenge content removal decisions? How quickly
does this process occur and how do you incorporate lessons learned when
your company reverses a removal decision?
Answer. In April 2018, we introduced the option to request re-
review of individual pieces of content that were removed for adult
nudity or sexual activity, hate speech, or graphic violence. We have
since extended this option so that re-review is now available for
additional content areas, including dangerous organizations and
individuals (a content area that includes our policies on terrorist
propaganda), bullying and harassment, and regulated goods. We are also
making this option available to individuals who have reported content
that was not removed.
In order to request re-review of a content decision we made, in
most instances you are given the option to ``Request Review.'' We try
to make the opportunity to request this review clear, either via a
notification or interstitial, but we are always working to improve.
Typically, re-review takes place within 24 hours.
Transparency in our appeals process is important, so in our May
2019 Community Standards Enforcement Report, we began including how
much content people appealed and how much content was restored after we
initially took action. Gathering and publishing those statistics keeps
us accountable to the broader community and enables us to continue
improving our content moderation. For more information, see https://
transparency.facebook.com/community-standards-enforcement.
Question 4. Moderating terror and extremist content on social media
platforms is a complex issue with no perfect solution. One consistent
recommendation the committee has received from a variety of outside
experts is the value of greater transparency in your respective content
removal policies. What is your response to calls for you to open up
your platforms for academics for research purposes, particularly
allowing them to review the content you remove?
Answer. We are committed to transparency at Facebook. That is why
we decided to publish our internal guidelines. Facebook's Community
Standards are available at https://www.facebook.com/
communitystandards/.
We publish these internal guidelines for two reasons. First, the
guidelines help people understand where we draw the line on nuanced
issues. Second, providing these details makes it easier for everyone,
including experts in different fields, to give us feedback so that we
can improve the guidelines--and the decisions we make--over time. The
content policy team at Facebook, which is responsible for developing
our Community Standards, seeks input from experts and organizations
outside Facebook so we can better understand different perspectives on
safety and expression, as well as the impact of our policies on
different communities globally.
To track our progress and demonstrate our continued commitment to
making Facebook safe and inclusive, we regularly release a Community
Standards Enforcement Report, which includes metrics on how Facebook is
performing in preventing and removing content that violates our
Community Standards. In total, we are now including metrics across 9
policies within our Community Standards: Adult nudity and sexual
activity, bullying and harassment, child nudity and sexual exploitation
of children, fake accounts, hate speech, regulated goods, spam, global
terrorist propaganda, and violence and graphic content. For more
information, see https://transparency.facebook.com/community-standards-
enforcement.
We are also moving forward with plans to establish an independent
Oversight Board so people in the community can appeal our content
decisions. We know that our systems can feel opaque and people should
have a way to hold us accountable and make sure that we are enforcing
our standards fairly. This independent Oversight Board will look at
some of our hardest cases, and the decisions it makes will be binding.
We have spent the first half of this year working with experts on
speech and safety, running workshops around the world, and asking for
public input on how this could work. We published a report with all the
feedback we have gotten so far at the end of June. For more
information, see https://newsroom.fb.com/news/2019/06/global-feedback-
on-oversight-board/.
And with regard to the call from academics that we open up our
platform for research purposes, we launched the Content Policy Research
Initiative (CPRI), which invites experts and researchers to help inform
development of our content policies and assess possible product
solutions to countering hateful and harmful content. At present, CPRI
is focused on:
Hate speech and harmful speech
Preventing off-line harm
Bullying and harassment
Fairness in global enforcement.
CPRI is comprised of both funding opportunities to support external
research on content policy issues as well as workshops where we openly
share internal research methodology, discuss how we measure violations
on the platform, explain policy making and processes, and work to
identify areas that are ripe for collaboration with the research
community. For more information about CPRI, see https://
research.fb.com/programs/content-policy-research/#About.
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Nick Pickles
Question 1. Does your company currently make data on on-line terror
content and misinformation--including the amount and types of content
you remove--available for academics and other stakeholders to research?
In what ways or what partnerships? Will you commit to making such data
available to researchers?
Answer. Twitter is a uniquely open service. The overwhelming
majority of content posted is publicly available and made available
through our free public and commercial application programming
interfaces (``APIs''). We make public Tweet data available to Twitter
users, developers, researchers, and other third parties. We encourage
developers and others to create products using this public data for
purposes that serve the public interest and the general Twitter
community. Such uses have included saving lives during flooding in
Jakarta, helping the U.S. Geological Survey track earthquakes, and
working with the United Nations to achieve its Sustainable Development
Goals. This service is a hallmark of our commitment to transparency,
collaboration, and innovation.
Moreover, in October 2018, we published the first comprehensive
archive of Tweets and media associated with suspected state-backed
information operations on Twitter and since then we have provided two
further updates covering a range of actors. Thousands of researchers
from across the globe have now made use of these datasets, which
contain more than 30 million Tweets and more than 1 terabyte of media,
using our archive to conduct their own investigations and to share
their insights and independent analysis with the world.
By making this data open and accessible, we seek to empower
researchers, journalists, governments, and members of the public to
deepen their understanding of critical issues impacting the integrity
of public conversation on-line, particularly around elections. This
transparency is core to our mission.
Additionally, for the past 7 years, our biannual Twitter
Transparency Report (transparency.twitter.com) has highlighted trends
in requests made to Twitter from around the globe. Over time, we have
significantly expanded the information we disclose adding metrics on
platform manipulation, Twitter Rules enforcement, and our proactive
efforts to eradicate terrorist content, violent extremism, and child
sexual exploitation from our service.
We have now suspended more than 1.5 million accounts for violations
related to the promotion of terrorism between August 1, 2015, and
December 31, 2018. According to our most recent Twitter Transparency
Report, in 2018, a total of 371,669 accounts were suspended for
violations related to promotion of terrorism. We continue to see more
than 90 percent of these accounts suspended through proactive measures.
The trend we are observing year-over-year is a steady decrease in
terrorist organizations attempting to use our service. This is due to
zero-tolerance policy enforcement that has allowed us to take swift
action on ban evaders and other identified forms of behavior used by
terrorist entities and their affiliates. In the majority of cases, we
take action at the account creation stage--before the account even
Tweets. We are encouraged by these metrics but will remain vigilant.
Our goal is to stay one step ahead of emergent behaviors and new
attempts to circumvent our robust approach.
Finally, the Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism (GIFCT)
facilitates, among other things, information sharing; technical
cooperation; and research collaboration, including with academic
institutions. GIFCT's partnership with the Royal United Services
Insitute (RUSI) to establish the Global Research Network on Terror and
Terrorism highlights the industry's commitment to working closely with
academics and researchers. The Network is a consortium of academic
institutions and think tanks that conducts research and shares views on
on-line terrorist content; recruiting tactics terrorists use on-line;
the ethics and laws surrounding terrorist content moderation; public-
private partnerships to address the issue; and the resources tech
companies need to adequately and responsibly remove terrorist content
from their platforms.
This network is providing valuable insights and feedback. For
example, one recent paper from the network, used Twitter's open API to
evaluate attempts by Daesh (also known as the Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria, ISIS) to use Twitter to disseminate its on-line magazine,
Rumiyah. The researchers found: ``Twitter was effective in its response
to Daesh's attempts to use its platform as a gateway to Rumiyah . . . a
high proportion of the user accounts that posted outlinks to PDFs of
Rumiyah were suspended and the tweets that these accounts posted
received relatively few retweets.'' See Stuart Macdonald, Daniel
Grinnell, Anina Kinzel, and Nuria Lorenzo-Dus, Global Research Network
on Terrorism and Technology: Paper No. 2, A Study of Outlinks Contained
in Tweets Mentioning Rumiyah (2019) (on-line at https://rusi.org/sites/
default/files/20190628_grntt_paper_2_0.pdf).
Question 2. Private posts containing objectionable content pose a
unique challenge for moderation. How does your company reconcile data
privacy with the challenges of moderating content that violates your
terms of service, including terrorist content and misinformation?
Answer. Unlike many other internet companies and social media
platforms, Twitter is public by its nature. People come to Twitter to
speak publicly, and public Tweets are viewable and searchable by
anyone. We are committed to providing a service that fosters and
facilitates free and open democratic debate, and we do so by making it
possible for people to react to, comment on, and engage with content
that they or other accounts choose to share, in accordance with the
Twitter Rules.
Twitter employs extensive content detection technology to identify
and police harmful and abusive content embedded in various forms of
media on the platform. We use PhotoDNA and hash matching technology in
the context of child sexual exploitation, and we use proprietary
internal technology to identify terrorist accounts, including URL
analyses. We use these technologies to identify previously identified
content in order to surface it for agent review, and we continually
expand our databases of known violative content.
Question 3. Does your company currently share AI training data
related to counterterrorism with other social media companies? If not,
is there a plan to share such data in the future?
Answer. Machine learning plays an important role across a multitude
of our product surface areas. We strive to give our users control and
transparency over these, by allowing them to opt out of the algorithmic
time line and safe search, for example. Making Twitter more healthy
requires making the way we practice machine learning more fair,
accountable, and transparent.
To continually advance the state of machine learning, inside and
outside Twitter, we are building out a research group at Twitter to
focus on a few key strategic areas such as natural language processing,
reinforcement learning, machine learning ethics, recommendation
systems, and graph deep learning.
Additionally, studying the societal impact of machine learning is a
growing area of research in which Twitter has been participating. We
are partnering with researchers at the University of California
Berkeley to establish a new research initiative focused on studying and
improving the performance of ML in social systems, such as Twitter. The
team at UC Berkeley will closely collaborate with a corresponding team
inside Twitter. As a company, Twitter is able to bring data and real-
world insights to the table, but by partnering with UC Berkeley we can
create a research program that has the right mix of fundamental and
applied research components to make a real practical impact across
industry.
Today, the consequences of exposing algorithmic decisions and
machine learning models to hundreds of millions of people are poorly
understood. Even less is known about how these algorithms might
interact with social dynamics: People might change their behaviour in
response to what the algorithms recommend to them, and as a result of
this shift in behaviour the algorithm itself might change, creating a
potentially self-reinforcing feedback loop. We also know that
individuals or groups will seek to game or exploit our algorithms and
safeguarding against this is essential.
By bringing together the academic expertise of UC Berkeley with our
industry perspective, we are looking to do fundamental work in this
nascent space and apply it to improve Twitter.
We welcome efforts to increase collaboration in this area, both
with industry and governments. The work of the GIFCT to foster
technical collaboration will enable us to build on work already done,
and policy makers could support these efforts with greater legal
protections for companies sharing content of this nature.
Question 4. How is your company working together with other
companies to share technology, information, and resources to combat
misinformation? Is there an analogue to the Global Internet Forum to
Counter Terrorism (GIFCT) for misinformation on your platforms?
Answer. The challenges posed by misinformation are serious and
wide-ranging. We are carefully considering how our approach should
evolve to respond to the growing range of threats the public
conversation faces in this regard. In particular, the public
conversation occurring on Twitter is never more important than during
elections, the cornerstone of our democracy. Any attempts to undermine
the integrity of our service is antithetical to our fundamental rights
and undermines the core tenets of freedom of expression.
We remain vigilant about malicious foreign efforts to manipulate
and divide people in the United States and throughout the world,
including through the use of foreign disinformation campaigns that rely
upon the use of deepfakes. In April 2019, we issued a new policy
regarding election integrity governing 3 categories of manipulative
behavior and content related to elections. First, an individual cannot
share false or misleading information about how to participate in an
election. This includes but is not limited to misleading information
about how to vote or register to vote, requirements for voting,
including identification requirements, and the official, announced
date, or time of an election. Second, an individual cannot share false
or misleading information intended to intimidate or dissuade voters
from participating in an election. This includes but is not limited to
misleading claims that polling places are closed, that polling has
ended, or other misleading information relating to votes not being
counted.
We also do not allow misleading claims about police or law
enforcement activity related to polling places or elections, long
lines, equipment problems, voting procedures or techniques which could
dissuade voters from participating in an election, and threats
regarding voting locations. Finally, we also do not allow the creation
of fake accounts which misrepresent their affiliation, or share content
that falsely represents its affiliation to a candidate, elected
official, political party, electoral authority, or Government entity.
If we see the use of any manipulated content to spread
misinformation in violation of our policies governing election
integrity, we will remove that content.
The solutions, which will require both product and policy
interventions, will need to protect the rights of people to engage in
parody, satire, and political commentary while protecting the integrity
of the public conversation. As Mr. Pickles testified at the hearing:
``We are continuing to explore how we may take action--through both
policy and product--on these types of issues in the future. We continue
to critically examine additional safeguards we can implement to protect
the conversation occurring on Twitter.''
Our existing efforts to make available a comprehensive archive of
Tweets and media associated with suspected state-backed information
operations we remove from Twitter is also a valuable tool. Our industry
peers can leverage the range of signals we publish including links,
media, and account indicators. The datatsets we have published include
more than 30 million Tweets and more than 1 terabyte of media.
Twitter cannot address these issues alone. The challenges we face
as a society are complex, varied, and constantly evolving. Every entity
has a role to play--including how the media chooses to cover examples
of manipulated media. A whole-of-society approach includes educators
and media literacy groups to promote better understanding of these
issues. This is a long-term problem requiring a long-term response, not
just the removal of content.
Question 5. What is your company doing to ensure that your human
content moderators are provided with all the resources they need in
order to carry out their jobs, including mental health resources and
adequate pay?
Answer. In addition to an increased investment in machine learning,
our efforts to improve the health of the public conversation do include
global content review teams made up of agency partners. These teams are
sometimes exposed to material that is sensitive and potentially
distressing in nature.
The well-being of those who review content is a primary concern for
our teams and our highest priority is to ensure our staff and
contractors are treated with compassion, care, and respect. We are
continually evaluating our partners' standards and remain committed to
protecting the well-being of the teams tasked with this important and
challenging role. We have a full suite of support services available
for our employees, including content moderators. As part of our work
with third parties, we require in our contracts the provision of
support services, including a period of time after an individual
changes roles.
In the long term, one of the most valuable investments we can make
is in technology and tooling. The more we can leverage these to
minimise the exposure to content, the less frequently our employees and
contractors will come into contact with it. We will continue to support
those engaged in these roles.
Question 6. Prior to introducing new policies or products on your
platforms, what processes does your company have in place to anticipate
and plan for unintended consequences, harmful side effects, or
exploitation by bad actors, including terrorists and those seeking to
spread misinformation?
Answer. We draft and enforce the Twitter Rules to keep people safe
on our service, and to protect the health of the public conversation.
The Twitter Rules apply to everyone. In general, we create our rules
with a rigorous policy development process; it involves in-depth
research, analysis of the behavior of individuals on Twitter and
historical violation patterns, and immersion in academic material.
We appreciate these issues are complex, and we value the input of
external voices in developing our approach. As part of the internal
development process, we consult with a wide range of stakeholders and
we focus consideration regarding the risk of gaming, subverting, or
otherwise abusing our policies and product changes. We supplement this
work with conversations with outside experts and organizations where
appropriate.
For example, many scholars have examined the relationship between
dehumanization and violence. In September 2018, we tried something new
by asking the public for feedback on a policy before it became part of
the Twitter Rules. Our goal is to test a new format for policy
development whereby the individuals who use Twitter have a role in
directly shaping our efforts to protect them. We wanted to expand our
hateful conduct policy to include content that dehumanizes others based
on their membership in an identifiable group, even when the material
does not include a direct target.
We asked for feedback to ensure we considered a wide range of
perspectives and to hear directly from the different communities and
cultures who use Twitter around the globe. In 2 weeks, we received more
than 8,000 responses from people located in more than 30 countries.
Following our review of public comments, in July 2019, we expanded
our rules against hateful conduct to include language that dehumanizes
others on the basis of religion.
Questions From Ranking Member Mike Rogers for Nick Pickles
Question 1. During the hearing, Professor Strossen raised a number
of concerns about the dangers of moderating speech. Rather than
censorship, she offered a number of suggestions to empower users. What,
if anything, are your companies doing to provide more filtering tools
to enhance the ability of users to control the content they see?
Answer. Twitter provides a variety of tools to individuals on our
service to enable them to control the content they see. At the most
basic level, individuals on Twitter control the content they see by
choosing which accounts to follow. They can unfollow an account at any
time, or choose to receive a notification for every Tweet an account
sends.
We also enable individuals on the service to control their
individual experience through tools such as the ability to block and
mute. If an individual has reported a Tweet, we will hide it behind a
notice and give the individual the choice on whether or not he or she
want to view the content again. We will also hide content behind an
interstitial if an individual has muted or blocked an account and their
Tweets are shared by someone else.
Individuals may also mute a conversation they do not wish to be a
part of, or mute a specific word, hashtag, or phrase. The individual
can control how long this stays in place.
We also offer a range of advanced filters for notifications that
individuals on Twitter can customize. This includes the option to hide
notifications from accounts that an individual does not follow or who
do not follow the individual, from those that have not confirmed an
email address or phone number, those who have not set a profile
photograph, or from all new accounts.
We also give people control over what they see in search results
through a ``Safe Search'' option. This option excludes potentially
sensitive content from search results, such as spam, adult content, and
the accounts an individual has muted or blocked. Individual accounts
may mark their own posts as sensitive as well. Twitter's safe search
mode excludes potentially sensitive content, along with accounts an
individual may have muted or blocked, from search results. Safe Search
is enabled by default, and people have the option to turn safe search
off, or back on, at any time.
In December 2018, Twitter introduced a sparkle icon located at the
top of individuals' time lines to more easily switch on and off reverse
chronological time line, allowing them to view tweets without
algorithmic ranking. As described above, the algorithms we employ are
designed to help people see the most relevant Tweets. The icon now
allows individuals using Twitter to easily switch to chronological
order ranking of the Tweets from only those accounts they follow. This
improvement allows individuals on Twitter to see how algorithms affect
what they see, and enables greater transparency into the technology we
use to rank Tweets.
We additionally empower individuals on the service to control their
experiences through notices, or instititals. Our systems and teams may
add notices on Tweets to give individuals on the service more context
or notice before an individual on Twitter clicks on the Tweet. Twitter
may add a notice to an account or Tweet to provide more context on the
actions our systems or teams may take. In some instances, this is
because the behavior violates the Twitter Rules. We may place some
forms of sensitive media like adult content or graphic violence behind
an interstitial advising viewers to be aware that they will see
sensitive media if they click through the filter. This allows us to
identify potentially sensitive content that some people may not wish to
see.
Question 2. Do you have recommendations for ways to more
effectively address the extremist content found on many of the off-
shore, fringe social media sites?
Answer. Although Twitter strictly enforces our policies removing
terrorist and extremist content that violates our Rules, it does not
eliminate the ideology underpinning them. Quite often, it moves these
views into darker corners of the internet where they cannot be
challenged and held to account. As Twitter and our peer companies
improve in our efforts, this content continues to migrate to less
public and more private platforms and messaging services. We are
committed to learning and improving, but every part of the on-line
ecosystem has a part to play.
There are a range of approaches policy makers could consider.
Broadening the range of companies who are part of the discussion is
essential if we are to form a robust view on how to tackle these
issues. Widening the discussion will also bring important perspectives
to the fore about the nature and challenges of content moderation at
scale. The role of financial incentives is also useful to consider. For
example, a recent report from the Global Disinformation Index project
focused on the ways the on-line ecosystem is being abused by bad actors
to monetize disinformation. The same may be true of the monetization of
terrorist content on some parts of the on-line ecosystem. See Global
Disinformation Project, Cutting the Funding of Disinformation: The Ad-
Tech Solution (May 2019) (on-line at https://disinformationindex.org/
wp-content/uploads/2019/05/GDI_Report_Screen_AW- 2.pdf).
We acknowledge that we have a role to play and acknowledge that we
will never reach a point where we are finished tackling these issues.
Tech companies and content removal on-line cannot alone, however, solve
these issues. They are systemic and societal and as such they require
an whole-of-society approach. We welcome the opportunity to continue to
work with our industry peers, Government, academics, and civil society
to find the right solutions.
Question 3. Can you describe the appeals process within your
platform for users to challenge content removal decisions? How quickly
does this process occur and how do you incorporate lessons learned when
your company reverses a removal decision?
Answer. Content moderation on a global scale is a new challenge not
only for our company, but also across our industry. When an action is
taken in error, we act promptly to correct them. We now offer people
who use Twitter the ability to more easily file an appeal from within
the Twitter app when we tell them which Tweet has broken our rules.
This makes the appeal process quicker and easier for users. We
anticipate this new process will enable us to respond 60 percent faster
to appeals.
We also allow individuals to file a report through a web form that
can be accessed at http://help.twitter.com/appeals. We also continue to
improve our transparency around the actions we take, including better
in-app notices where we have removed Tweets for breaking our rules. We
also communicate with both the account who reports a Tweet and the
account which posted it with additional detail on our actions. These
steps are all a part of our continued commitment to transparency, and
we will continue to better inform individuals who use Twitter on our
work in these areas.
If an account was suspended or locked in error, an individual can
appeal. First, the individual must log in to the account that is
suspended and file an appeal. The individual must describe the nature
of the appeal and provide an explanation of why the account is not in
violation of the Twitter Rules. Twitter employees will engage with the
account holder via email to resolve the suspension.
Question 4. Moderating terror and extremist content on social media
platforms is a complex issue with no perfect solution. One consistent
recommendation the committee has received from a variety of outside
experts is the value of greater transparency in your respective content
removal policies. What is your response to calls for you to open up
your platforms for academics for research purposes, particularly
allowing them to review the content you remove?
Answer. In regard to the removal of accounts, our biannual Twitter
Transparency Report highlights trends in enforcement of our Rules,
legal requests, intellectual property-related requests, and email
privacy best practices. The report also provides insight into whether
or not we take action on these requests. The Transparency Report
includes information requests from governments world-wide and non-
government legal requests we have received for account information.
Removal requests are also included in the Transparency Report and
include world-wide legal demands from governments and other authorized
reporters, as well as reports based on local laws from trusted
reporters and non-governmental organizations, to remove or withhold
content.
As part of our commitment to educate users about our rules and to
further prohibit the promotion of terrorism or violent extremist
groups, we have updated our rules and associated materials to be
clearer on where these policies apply. We agree that our rules should
be clear and understandable. Recently we completed a process to refresh
our rules and ensure that they are easier to understand. This includes
each specific rule being short enough to Tweet.
In addition, we have improved the supporting information in our
help center, which adds context and examples to the Rules. With regard
to terrorism and violent extremism, there is a dedicated page in our
help center accessed at https://help.twitter.com/en/rules-and-policies/
violent-groups.
We have now suspended more than 1.5 million accounts for violations
related to the promotion of terrorism between August 1, 2015, and
December 31, 2018. In 2018, a total of 371,669 accounts were suspended
for violations related to promotion of terrorism. We continue to see
more than 90 percent of these accounts suspended through proactive
measures.
With regard to academic access, Twitter is a uniquely open service.
The overwhelming majority of content posted is publicly available and
made available through our free public and commercial application
programming interfaces (``APIs''). We make public Tweet data available
to Twitter users, developers, researchers, and other third parties. We
encourage developers and others to create products using this public
data for purposes that serve the public interest and the general
Twitter community.
Questions From Chairman Bennie G. Thompson for Derek Slater
Question 1. Does your company currently make data on on-line terror
content and misinformation--including the amount and types of content
you remove--available for academics and other stakeholders to research?
In what ways or what partnerships? Will you commit to making such data
available to researchers?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Private posts containing objectionable content pose a
unique challenge for moderation. How does your company reconcile data
privacy with the challenges of moderating content that violates your
terms of service, including terrorist content and misinformation?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. Does your company currently share AI training data
related to counterterrorism with other social media companies? If not,
is there a plan to share such data in the future?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. How is your company working together with other
companies to share technology, information, and resources to combat
misinformation? Is there an analogue to the Global Internet Forum to
Counter Terrorism (GIFCT) for misinformation on your platforms?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. What is your company doing to ensure that your human
content moderators are provided with all the resources they need in
order to carry out their jobs, including mental health resources and
adequate pay?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. Prior to introducing new policies or products on your
platforms, what processes does your company have in place to anticipate
and plan for unintended consequences, harmful side effects, or
exploitation by bad actors, including terrorists and those seeking to
spread misinformation?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Lauren Underwood for Derek Slater
Question 1a. During the hearing, you committed to providing in
writing information on what percentage of users who view YouTube videos
with information cues actually click on the link for more information.
Please provide this information, broken down by each month since
YouTube's CEO announced the policy in March 2018.
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1b. During the hearing, you stated that information cues
link to an on-line encyclopedia, in addition to Wikipedia. Please
provide a complete list, as well as a breakdown by percentage, of the
websites that YouTube's information cues link to.
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. Does YouTube vet the Wikipedia articles that it links
to in ``information cues'' to ensure their accuracy, or work with
Wikipedia to ensure that the articles are locked against malicious
edits?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2b. During the hearing, you stated that YouTube ``has a
process to make sure that [YouTube is] displaying accurate
information'' in information cues. Please provide a detailed
description of that process.
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Ranking Member Mike Rogers for Derek Slater
Question 1. During the hearing, Professor Strossen raised a number
of concerns about the dangers of moderating speech. Rather than
censorship, she offered a number of suggestions to empower users. What,
if anything, are your companies doing to provide more filtering tools
to enhance the ability of users to control the content they see?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Do you have recommendations for ways to more
effectively address the extremist content found on many of the off-
shore, fringe social media sites?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. Can you describe the appeals process within your
platform for users to challenge content removal decisions? How quickly
does this process occur and how do you incorporate lessons learned when
your company reverses a removal decision?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. Moderating terror and extremist content on social media
platforms is a complex issue with no perfect solution. One consistent
recommendation the committee has received from a variety of outside
experts is the value of greater transparency in your respective content
removal policies. What is your response to calls for you to open up
your platforms for academics for research purposes, particularly
allowing them to review the content you remove?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question From Ranking Member Mike Rogers for Nadine Strossen
Question. During the hearing, you highlighted the importance of
transparency by mainstream social media companies. Can you provide
more: (1) Background on the importance of transparency and (2)
recommendations for how transparency measures could be implemented by
these companies? Additionally, do you have (3) recommendations for
transparency measures for the Global Internet Forum to Counter
Terrorism (GIFCT)?
Answer.
(1) Background on the importance of transparency
In enforcing their ``content moderation'' policies, determining
what speakers and speech will be allowed on their platforms--and which
will not be allowed--the dominant social media companies
(``companies'') exercise vast censorial power that even exceeds the
scope of censorial power that in the past only Government has wielded.
However, as private-sector entities, these companies are not subject to
the Constitutional constraints that limit Government power, including
requirements to respect not only freedom of speech and press, but also
privacy, due process/fair procedures, and equality. This means that the
companies may also exercise their vast power in ways that undermine our
democratic self-government. For example, they could discriminatorily
suppress certain speakers or ideas based on partisan political
preferences, or they could promote disinformation about political
candidates and public policy issues.
For these reasons, it is essential that steps be taken to curb the
companies' powers to suppress users' freedoms. However, it is also
essential that any such steps are respectful of the companies' own
rights and freedoms. For example, the companies' own free speech rights
would be infringed by Government regulations dictating what speech they
could or could not permit on their platforms--to the same extent that
such Government regulations would infringe on the free speech rights of
more traditional media, such as newspapers and broadcasters.
Recognizing these countervailing free speech concerns, many experts
who have studied these issues have concurred that, as a baseline
minimum approach for protecting the rights of platform users--and
associated democratic concerns--the companies should design and
implement their content moderation policies in a manner that complies
with certain basic process standards, including transparency.
Concerning transparency in particular, the companies should disclose
what their content moderation policies are, and how they are enforced,
both in the aggregate and in particular cases. The companies should not
only provide information about how their content moderation policies
are enforced in general, or in particular categories (as explained
further in the next section), but they should also provide information
to individual users whose content is removed. (This kind of
individualized disclosure/transparency is often referred to as
``notice,'' invoking a fundamental due process/fairness concept.)
Government officials could and should use their ``bully pulpit'' to
encourage companies to provide aggregate and individualized information
consistent with the goal of transparency; civil society organizations
and the companies' customers should do likewise. In fact, many
Government officials, civil society organizations, and individual
experts--not only in the United States, but also in other countries and
in international agencies--have advocated such transparency. A number
of the companies have endorsed at least the general concept of enhanced
transparency, and have undertaken some compliance efforts.
As New America's Open Technology Institute has commented, the
companies' disclosure of data about from whom they get takedown
requests, and how they respond to such requests, ``is a vital first
step toward enabling the public to hold [them] accountable in their
roles as arbiters of speech, and also hold accountable the governments
and private parties that seek to censor on-line speech.''\1\ Moreover,
this reporting ``helps the public identify where they think the
[c]ompanies are doing too much--or not enough--to address content
issues,'' and also benefits the Companies, including by ``helping to
build trust with their users and policy makers.''\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.newamerica.org/oti/blog/announcing-otis-new-
transparency-reporting-toolkit-focused-on-content-takedowns/.
\2\ Spandana Singh & Kevin Bankston, ``The Transparency Reporting
Toolkit: Content Takedown Reporting,'' New America, Oct. 2018, at 6.
https://www.newamerica.org/oti/reports/transparency-reporting-toolkit-
content-takedown-reporting/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(2) Recommendations for how transparency measures could be implemented
Transparency about overall content takedown practices
The Santa Clara Principles (2018)
In May 2018, a group of expert organizations and individuals issued
``the Santa Clara Principles,'' which they described ``as initial steps
that companies engaged in content moderation should take to provide
meaningful due process to impacted speakers and better ensure that the
enforcement of their content guidelines is fair, unbiased,
proportional, and respectful of users' rights.''\3\ Since then, the
Santa Clara principles have been endorsed--at least in spirit--by
diverse experts, including the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the
Promotion and Protection of the Right to Freedom of Opinion and
Expression, and some of the Companies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://santaclaraprinciples.org/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In terms of transparency, these Principles declared that
``companies should publish the numbers of posts removed and accounts
permanently or temporarily suspended due to violations of their content
guidelines.'' The Principles further specified that, at a minimum,
``this information should be broken down along each of these
dimensions'':
Total number of discrete posts and accounts flagged
Total number of discrete posts removed and accounts
suspended
Number of discrete posts and accounts flagged, and number of
discrete posts removed and accounts suspended, by category of
rule violated
Number of discrete posts and accounts flagged, and number of
discrete posts removed and accounts suspended, by format of
content at issue (e.g., text, audio, image, video, live stream)
Number of discrete posts and accounts flagged, and number of
discrete posts removed and accounts suspended, by source of
flag (e.g., governments, trusted flaggers, users, different
types of automated detection); and
Number of discrete posts and accounts flagged, and number of
discrete posts removed and accounts suspended, by locations of
flaggers and impacted users (where apparent).
Finally, the Santa Clara Principles called for this data to ``be
provided in a regular report, ideally quarterly, in an openly licensed,
machine-readable format.''
The Transparency Reporting Toolkit: Content Takedown
Reporting (2018)
Especially detailed recommendations for transparency reporting have
been provided by the Open Technology Institute and Harvard University's
Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society. In 2016, both
organizations released the ``Transparency Reporting Toolkit,'' which
``aimed to make it easier for companies to create and improve their
transparency reports around government demands for user data and to
make transparency reporting more consistent, easier to understand and
more effective.''\4\ In October 2018, the Open Technology Institute
issued a new transparency reporting toolkit that focused expressly on
content takedowns (``2018 Toolkit''). Based on extensive consultations
with a broad, diverse array of companies and civil society experts, the
2018 Toolkit identified general ``best practices'' for content takedown
reporting regarding any kind of content, as well as additional, more
specific best practices for reporting about certain types of content
takedown (copyright-related, network shutdowns and service
interruptions, and ``right to be forgotten'' delistings).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.newamerica.org/oti/policy-papers/transparency-
reporting-toolkit-reporting-guide-and-template/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Below I will list the general best practices that the 2018 Toolkit
recommends, all of which it explains in more detail:
Issuing reports for clearly and consistently delineated
reporting periods
Issuing reports specific to the type of demand
Reporting on types of demands using specific numbers
Breaking down demands by country
Reporting on categories of objectionable content targeted by
demands
Reporting on products targeted by demands
Reporting on specific government agencies/parties that
submitted demands
Specifying which laws pertain to specific demands
Reporting on the number of accounts and items specified in
demands
Reporting on the number of accounts and items impacted by
demands; and
Reporting on how the company responded to demands.
The foregoing best practices focus on quantitative transparency.
The 2018 Toolkit also discussed some additional best practices that
seek to improve the qualitative transparency surrounding content
takedowns. These include:
Defining terms clearly
Providing meaningful explanations of internal policies
Offering case studies to illustrate the company's practices
and the issues it faces
Reporting on specific notices where reasonable and permitted
by law
Providing meaningful numbers that reflect how many pieces of
content or accounts were taken down, blocked or otherwise
restricted based on automated flagging or review
Linking relevant reports to one another
Publishing reports at static and functioning URLs
Publishing data in a structured data format
Publishing reports using a non-restrictive Creative Commons
license; and
Offering a Frequently Asked Questions section for the
report.
Transparency about takedown of particular content: notice
The Santa Clara Principles also set out basic recommendations for
implementing this fundamental, individualized facet of transparency.
First:
``In general companies should provide detailed guidance to the
community about what content is prohibited, including examples of
permissible and impermissible content and the guidelines used by
reviewers. Companies should also provide an explanation of how
automated detection is used across each category of content.''
Additionally, ``[c]ompanies should provide notice to each user
whose content is taken down or account is suspended about the reason
for the removal or suspension.'' This required notice to individual
users must include the following details, at a minimum:
URL, content excerpt, and/or other information sufficient to
allow identification of the content removed
The specific clause of the guidelines that the content was
found to violate
How the content was detected and removed (flagged by other
users, governments, trusted flaggers, automated detection, or
external legal or other complaint); and
Explanation of the process through which the user can appeal
the decision.
Moreover, the Principles provide that ``[t]he identity of
individual flaggers should generally not be revealed, however, content
flagged by government should be identified as such, unless prohibited
by law.'' Finally, they specify:
``Notices should be available in a durable form that is accessible even
if a user's account is suspended or terminated. Users who flag content
should also be presented with a log of content they have reported and
the outcomes of moderation processes.''
[3] Recommendations for transparency measures for the Global Internet
Forum to Counter Terrorism (GIFCT)
Before laying out the recommendations for transparency measures for
GIFCT, which have been urgently called for by a wide array of experts,
I will briefly summarize GIFCT's operations. GIFCT was formed by
Facebook, Microsoft, Twitter, and YouTube, and publicly announced in
2016. It created a hash database (``the database'') that contains
digital hash ``fingerprints'' of images and videos that the
participants have identified as ``extreme terrorist material,'' based
on their own internal content moderation standards--not based on any
legal definition. The participating companies then use automated
filtering tools to identify and remove duplicates of the hashed images
or videos.
GIFCT raises serious human rights problems, as well as serious
questions about its efficacy in countering terrorism; none of these
important issues can be definitively evaluated because of the lack of
transparency about GIFCT's operations. Accordingly, it is imperative
that the companies disclose sufficient information to facilitate
assessment of GIFCT's costs and benefits in terms of both countering
terrorism and respecting freedom of speech and other human rights.
The foregoing critiques of GIFCT's lack of transparency have been
made by multiple, diverse observers, including a large group of expert
organizations and individuals from many different countries, in a joint
February 4, 2019 letter to the European Parliament. Underscoring their
shared commitment to the goal of countering terrorist violence, and not
questioning GIFCT operators' positive intent to promote that goal,
these experts stressed that ``lawmakers and the public have no
meaningful information about how well'' the database actually ``serves
this goal, and at what cost to democratic values and individual human
rights.''
I will quote here some of this letter's key points about needed
transparency for meaningful evaluation and accountability:
``Almost nothing is publicly known about the specific content that
platforms block using the database, or about companies' internal
processes or error rates, and there is insufficient clarity around the
participating companies' definitions of `terrorist content.'
Furthermore, there are no reports about how many legal processes or
investigations were opened after the content was blocked. This data
would be crucial to understand to what extent the measures are
effective and necessary in a democratic society, which are some of the
sine qua non requisites for restriction of fundamental rights.''
This letter noted some well-publicized failures of algorithmic
removals of alleged ``terrorist content'' that actually constituted
important material ``for news reporting, combating terrorist
recruitment on-line, or scholarship,'' because algorithmic filters
``are blind to . . . contextual differences'' between material with
otherwise similar ``terrorist content.'' However, among the information
that has not yet been disclosed is ``whether major platforms like
YouTube or Facebook adequately correct for'' such problems ``through
employees' review of filtering decisions.''
The letter urged the European Parliament not to adopt any
regulation that would incorporate GIFCT precisely because of the
absence of transparency:
``The European public is being asked to rely on claims by platforms or
vendors about the efficacy of the database . . . or else to assume that
any current problems will be solved by hypothetical future technologies
or untested, post-removal appeal mechanisms. Such optimistic
assumptions cannot be justified given the serious problems researchers
have found with the few filtering tools available for independent
review.''
conclusion
Members of Congress and others cannot meaningfully assess the
impact of the companies' efforts to counter on-line terrorist content
(including through GIFCT), misinformation, or any other controversial,
potentially problematic content, in the absence of detailed information
about the companies' content moderation policies. In particular, policy
makers and the public cannot assess either: (i) How effective such
efforts are in reducing the targeted content, or (ii) how much
legitimate, even valuable content is also removed in the process. In
short, no meaningful cost-benefit analysis can be done of the aggregate
results of content moderation policies without much more information,
of the sort I have outlined. Likewise, individual users whose
expression has been suppressed cannot exercise the important right to
appeal such suppression without detailed information of the sort also
laid out. Members of Congress, as well as other public officials,
NGO's, and the companies' customers should all continue to advocate for
such increased transparency.
[all]