- ONLINE PLATFORMS AND MARKET POWER, PART 3: THE ROLE OF DATA AND PRIVACY IN COMPETITION
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
ONLINE PLATFORMS AND MARKET POWER,
PART 3: THE ROLE OF DATA AND PRIVACY IN COMPETITION
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ANTITRUST, COMMERCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
of the
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
OCTOBER 18, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-59
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available http://judiciary.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-840
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
JERROLD NADLER, New York, Chairman
ZOE LOFGREN, California
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia,
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
Ranking Member
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
Wisconsin
Georgia
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
KAREN BASS, California
JIM JORDAN, Ohio
CEDRIC L. RICHMOND, Louisiana
KEN BUCK, Colorado
HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama
ERIC SWALWELL, California
MATT GAETZ, Florida
TED LIEU, California
MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
TOM McCLINTOCK, California
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida
DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona
J. LUIS CORREA, California
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania,
BEN CLINE, Virginia
Vice Chair
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
SYLVIA R. GARCIA, Texas
W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado
LUCY McBATH, Georgia
GREG STANTON, Arizona
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
DEBBIE MUCARSEL-POWELL, Florida
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
Perry Apelbaum, Majority Staff Director & Chief Counsel
Brendan Belair, Minority Staff Director
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ANTITRUST, COMMERCIAL
AND ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island, Chair
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado, Vice-Chair
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
Georgia
Wisconsin, Ranking Member
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland
KEN BUCK, Colorado
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
MATT GAETZ, Florida
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania
W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
LUCY McBATH, Georgia
Slade Bond, Chief Counsel
Daniel Flores, Minority Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
OCTOBER 18, 2019
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Chairman, Committee on the
Judiciary......................................................
1
The Honorable James Sensenbrenner, Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law................
3
Honorable David Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust,
Commercial and Administrative Law..............................
4
WITNESSES
The Honorable Rohit Chopra, Commissioner, Federal Trade
Commission
Oral Testimony...............................................
37
Prepared Testimony...........................................
40
Tommaso Valletti, Professor of Economics, Imperial College
Business School
Oral Testimony...............................................
48
Prepared Testimony...........................................
50
Jason Furman, Professor of the Practice of Economic Policy,
Harvard Kennedy School
Oral Testimony...............................................
56
Prepared Testimony...........................................
58
Roslyn Layton, Visiting Scholar, American Enterprise Institute
Oral Testimony...............................................
64
Prepared Testimony...........................................
66
LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING
A letter by the George Mason University Mercatus Center from The
Honorable James Sensenbrenner, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law...................
6
A letter by the CTIA, the Internet and Television Association,
and the Broadband Association from The Honorable James
Sensenbrenner, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Antitrust,
Commercial and Administrative Law..............................
10
A letter by the Electronic Privacy Information Center from The
Honorable James Sensenbrenner, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law...................
13
A letter by Netchoice from The Honorable James Sensenbrenner,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and
Administrative Law.............................................
19
A letter by the CTIA, the Internet and Television Association,
and the Broadband Association from The Honorable Ken Buck,
Member, Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and
Administrative Law.............................................
93
A letter by 20 child advocacy groups from The Honorable Ken Buck,
Member, Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and
Administrative Law.............................................
96
A statement for the record by Ranking Member Doug Collins from
The Honorable Kelly Armstrong, Member, Subcommittee on
Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law...................
106
A statement for the record by Rod Sims, Chair of the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission, from the Honorable David
Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and
Administrative Law.............................................
122
A statement for the record by Dina Srinivasan from the Honorable
David Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust,
Commercial and Administrative Law..............................
132
A letter by Consumer Reports from the Honorable David Cicilline,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and
Administrative Law.............................................
138
A statement for the record by Maurice Stucke and Ariel Ezrachi
from the Honorable David Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law...................
141
A statement for the record by Margrethe Vestager, European Union
Commissioner for Competition, from the Honorable David
Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and
Administrative Law.............................................
168
APPENDIX
A statement for the record by Shoshana Zuboff from the Honorable
David Cicilline, Chairman, Subcommittee on Antitrust,
Commercial and Administrative Law..............................
176
ONLINE PLATFORMS AND MARKET POWER,
PART 3: THE ROLE OF DATA AND PRIVACY IN COMPETITION
----------
FRIDAY, OCTOBER 18, 2019
House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial
and Administrative Law
Committee on the Judiciary
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:41 a.m., in
Room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. David Cicilline
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Cicilline, Nadler, Johnson,
Jayapal, Demings, Scanlon, Sensenbrenner, Buck, Gaetz,
Armstrong, and Steube.
Staff Present: Madeline Strasser, Chief Clerk; Moh Sharma,
Member Services and Outreach Advisor; Amanda Lewis, Counsel;
Joseph Van Wye, Professional Staff Member; Lina Khan, Counsel;
Slade Bond, Chief Counsel; Daniel Flores, Minority Chief
Counsel; and Andrea Woodard, Minority Professional Staff.
Chairman Nadler [presiding]. The subcommittee will come to
order. Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare
recesses at any time.
We welcome everyone to the third in our series of hearings
investigating competition in digital markets, this one on the
role of data and privacy in competition.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
I should state the obvious: I'm not the chairman of the
subcommittee; I'm the chairman of the full committee. The
chairman of the subcommittee will be here in a few minutes.
Digital technologies have provided Americans with a
remarkable array of services. It has never been easier to share
news and information, to publish content, and to communicate
with loved ones all at a moment's notice. But as with
technological revolutions of the past, this transformation has
upended the balance of power across our economy. It is
important for Congress to study and understand how these
imbalances are affecting Americans, what is causing these
asymmetries of power, and whether these new and growing
inequalities are compatible with our democratic values. The
committee's ongoing oversight of competition in digital markets
is a key part of this process.
Today's hearing will examine the role that data plays in
creating and maintaining inequalities of power and how this
affects competition. As previous hearings have shown, a growing
share of commerce and communications is now controlled by a
small number of companies. Because these platforms are, in
essence, large intermediaries, they are perfectly positioned to
closely track each transaction in communication that passes
through their channels.
While intermediaries have long collected information on the
economic activity that flows through their platforms, the large
firms of the digital economy have unprecedented ability to
track and surveil users across the internet. This data
collection includes information not only about a person's
shopping and reading habits, but also about the time that they
wake up and go to sleep, a precise location of each hour of the
day, and the content of their most private communications.
Because several of these platforms derive the vast majority
of their revenue through digital advertising, these firms also
have an incentive to collect as much information as possible so
they can target consumers with precision. This trove of
personal information can also be used by companies in even more
nefarious ways to discriminate based on the user's race,
gender, or income, or otherwise to intrude on personal privacy.
In light of these trends, there are at least two questions
that I hope will be addressed in today's hearing. First, how
are digital technologies and the constant data collection they
enable affecting competition? Is there something unique about
digital markets that enables firms to acquire and maintain
market power in novel ways?
In digital markets, maximizing data collection can provide
a company with a significant competitive advantage. A large and
constantly growing set of user data allows firms both to
improve existing products and services and to expand into new
lines of business, often with a competitive edge. Frequently,
the most dominating companies in the digital economy are those
that have captured the most data from as many sources as
possible.
In recent years, scholars have described this dynamic as
leading to winner-take-all markets where the first company to
establish a competitive lead wins the market, crushing any
potential competition. In other words, competitors of digital
markets have a strong incentive to collect as much information
on users as possible, as quickly as possible, as part of a
long-term strategy to compete in the marketplace and to achieve
market dominance.
This raises serious questions about whether it is good for
society for unrelenting data collection to be the key dimension
on which companies are looking to outcompete one another. The
fact that several major digital platforms make most of their
profits by selling targeted advertisements heightens those
incentives.
The second question that I hope will be addressed in
today's hearing is how data collection increases the number of
ways that dominant companies can abuse their market power. Does
the collection and use of data enable new forms of conduct that
lawmakers and regulators should recognize as anticompetitive?
For example, platforms and service intermediaries for commerce
have critical insight into their rivals' business models, a
dynamic that raises significant competition concerns.
With these issues in mind, I look forward to hearing from
our esteemed panel of witnesses today.
I yield back the balance of my time, and I now recognize,
for his opening statement, the distinguished ranking member and
former chairman of the committee, Mr. Sensenbrenner of
Wisconsin.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today, we continue our oversight of the state of
competition in the tech sector. To date, our primary focus has
concerned large online platforms. The specific topics we
address today, the roles that data and data privacy play in
competition, and the ways in which we can better protect the
privacy of consumers' online data largely concern these same
platforms.
Data is, in many ways, the life blood of the internet.
Numerous issues are swirling around the use of this data. For
example, these include allegations that, one, platform's needs
for very large accumulations of data can operate as a barrier
to market entry by new platforms. Two, platforms holding large
databases can leverage that data to compete unfairly with
third-party competitors that are dependent upon their
platforms. Three, incumbent platforms have pursued mergers with
emerging competitors in order to kill off competition for data
acquisition and market shares.
It is my hope our hearing can help us determine fact from
fiction when it comes to these allegations. As I have stressed
before, antitrust laws do not exist to punish success, but to
foster it. Congress and antitrust enforcement agencies need to
be careful not to overreach to extend or apply antitrust laws
in ways that end up punishing success, suppressing innovation,
and ultimately, limiting consumer welfare. This applies not
just to issues concerning competition for data, but also
applies to issues concerning privacy. If we're going to address
data and consumers' data privacy through legislation, we must
get it right.
I do not say this in a vacuum. Governments in the United
States and Europe have already begun to lay down laws to
address these issues. The most prominent example to date is the
European Union's General Data Protection Regulation, or GDPR.
Following in its footsteps has been California's recently
passed California Consumer Privacy Act, or CCPA, which is
substantially modeled on the GDPR.
And testimony offered before the Senate Judiciary Committee
in March by one of our witnesses today, Dr. Roslyn Layton,
constituted a powerful indictment of the GDPR. However well-
intentioned, the GDPR is already producing substantial
collateral damage to consumer welfare, innovation, and the
health of the digital economy. It is likely that the CCPA will
have the same effects. All of these effects are avoidable. It
is imperative that we in the United States identify and put in
place a better means of protecting consumers' privacy online.
I hope our witnesses today can help us work our way through
these important issues.
And before yielding back, let me ask unanimous consent to
insert in the record a number of statements and submissions to
the record that I have received. One from the Mercatus Center
of George Mason University.
Mr. Cicilline [presiding]. Without objection.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Second, a joint statement by the
national CTA, CTIA, and USTelecom.
Mr. Cicilline. Without objection.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. A letter that has been sent to the
chairman and myself from epic.org.
Mr. Cicilline. Without objection.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. A letter for the record from Carl Szabo,
vice president and general counsel of NetChoice.
Mr. Cicilline. Without objection.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. And I now yield back the balance of my
time.
[The information follows:]
MR. SENSENBRENNER FOR THE RECORD
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the gentleman for yielding back, and
I thank the chairman of the full committee for opening the
hearing. I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
In June, this committee launched a historic bipartisan
investigation into the state of competition in the digital
marketplace. The purpose of this investigation is to document
anticompetitive conduct online, to examine whether dominant
firms are engaging in anticompetitive conduct, and to assess
whether our antitrust laws and current enforcement levels are
adequate to address these problems.
Since launching the investigation, the committee has held a
series of bipartisan hearings, briefings, and member
roundtables as part of this top to bottom review. Most
recently, we have requested documents, communications, and
information relevant to the investigation from the four
dominant platforms.
On Monday, the committee received the first tranche of
responses to the requests, tens of thousands of documents, and
we expect to receive and review additional materials as part of
this request in the weeks ahead. We'll also continue to hold
hearings and roundtables and conduct oversight to ensure that
the goals of the investigation are met.
As I've said before, this work is essential to the
committee's legislative mandate and constitutional
responsibility to conduct oversight of our antitrust laws and
competition policies to ensure that they're working. Congress,
not the courts, agencies, or private companies enacted the
antitrust laws, and Congress must be responsible for
determining whether current laws or enforcement levels are
keeping up with the digital markets.
We have much work ahead of us, but I'm immensely proud of
the efforts of my colleagues, Chairman Nadler and Ranking
Members Collins and Sensenbrenner, along with their dedicated
staff, and look forward to continuing this important bipartisan
work together.
Today's hearing is an important opportunity to advance our
understanding of a key component of competition online, the
role of data and privacy. Over the past year, several leading
international competition authorities and antitrust experts
have published groundbreaking reports that have focused on this
issue.
As these reports have noted, data is at the heart of
competition online. For example, an exhaustive report by the
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission concluded, and I
quote, that ``the breadth and depth of user data collected by
the incumbent digital platforms provides them with a strong
competitive advantage, creating barriers to rivals entering and
expanding in relevant markets, and allowing the incumbent
digital platforms to expand into adjacent markets,'' end quote.
The United Kingdom's Digital Competition Expert Panel,
which was chaired by Professor Jason Furman, one of our
esteemed witnesses here today, similarly reported that large
troves of data, when combined with network effects, may tip
markets in favor of a single dominant platform, killing off
competition.
Data also plays an important role in the ability of
startups to attract venture capital to compete with dominant
firms in these markets. As part of a broader review of
competition in the digital economy, a panel of experts led by
Professor Fiona Scott Morton for the Stigler Center at the
University of Chicago, reported that investors often evaluate
startups based on their access to data. As they explained, I
quote, ``a new entrant starved of data, quantitatively and
qualitatively speaking, relative to a tech giant is at a
significant competitive disadvantage, and investors will be
unlikely to invest as they view that data deficit as
insurmountable,'' end quote.
This has real consequences for entrepreneurs and startups
that get locked out of the market and never get a chance to
compete on the merits to offer new and innovative services.
There's also broad agreement among antitrust experts that data
can be abused by platforms for anticompetitive purposes. In
some instances, these tactics have created an innovation kill
zone around dominant firms. Whether its Facebook's use of Onavo
to spy on its competitors, Amazon's ability to identify and
clone popular products being sold in its marketplace, or the
weaponization of API to block competitors, we know that the
abuse of data has serious ramifications for competition.
This hearing also presents an important opportunity to
examine the role of privacy and antitrust enforcement and
competition online. There's a growing consensus among enforcers
in the United States and abroad that privacy is an important
dimension of competition online. While many online services
claim to be free, we know that people pay in the form of their
personal information and their attention, which are both
critical for online advertising revenue.
In a statement submitted for the record for today's
hearing, Dina Srinivasan notes that market consolidation allows
dominant platforms to harm consumers, and I quote, by not--not
by escalating prices, but rather by diminishing quality by
eroding privacy terms, end quote.
Furthermore, as the U.K.'s Digital Competition Expert Panel
has also reported, the misuse of data and harm to privacy is
not only an indicator of low quality caused by a lack of
competition, but it also can be used to cement a firm's
dominance in the market as well. In other words, in a market
that has vibrant competition, firms have strong incentives to
respond to consumer demand by improving the privacy safeguards
for their products. But without competition, incumbents have no
incentive to deliver users' privacy.
I recently had the pleasure of discussing this with
Shoshana Zuboff at the Harvard School of Business, who has
recently written about the rise of surveillance capitalism. A
point that she made that struck me is that the pattern of
automating consumer behavior for more clicks and better
predictions is itself a market externality. There is no
consumer demand for this service.
Americans don't want to have their information
systematically mined just so they can be shown another
advertisement or nudged toward a political candidate, but in
many cases, there is no escape from the surveillance because
there's no alternative. People are stuck with bad options or no
options at all, which is evidence of a market failure.
Furthermore, companies that want to compete by offering
services and products that do not rely on user surveillance are
disadvantaged by this business model, which, in turn,
reinforces the market dominance of the dominant firms. It's
increasingly clear that the relationship between competition
and privacy is not either/or. They are mutually reinforcing
concepts that must be at the forefront as we consider proposals
to restore the internet to its full promise, and I approach
today's hearing with these concerns in mind.
Before closing, I'd like to take one moment to thank
Commissioner Vestager of the European Commission and Chairman
Rod Sims of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
for their statements submitted for today's hearing. Chairman
Sims was originally scheduled to testify at this hearing, but
due to an unfortunate change in our schedule, he's unable to
attend today. Nevertheless, I want to thank him and his team
for all of their hard work in advance of this hearing on this
issue.
And now it is my pleasure to introduce today's witnesses
for today's hearing. Our first witness is the Honorable Rohit
Chopra, the Democratic commissioner at the Federal Trade
Commission since 2018. Before joining the FTC, Commissioner
Chopra was instrumental in establishing the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau. He worked on the agency's implementation
team after the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act in 2010, and
became the CFPB's first student loan ombudsman. He went on to
serve as assistant director of the CFPB, and made significant
inroads towards addressing the student loan crisis in the
United States.
He was nominated by President Trump to serve as an FTC
Commissioner on February 28, 2018, and was confirmed
unanimously by the Senate on April 26, 2018. Commissioner
Chopra received his B.A. from Harvard University and his MBA
from the University of Pennsylvania.
Our second witness, Mr. Tommaso Valletti, has been a
professor of economics at the Imperial College of London since
2007. Before that, he served as the chief competition economist
for the European Commission for 3 years, where he focused
extensively on competition and digital markets. He has served
as a professor of economics and management at the University of
Rome, where he still serves as a visiting professor of
economics. Professor Valletti is also currently a research
fellow at the Centre for Economic Policy Research and the
Mannheim Centre of Competition and Innovation.
He received both his masters and Ph.D. from the London
School of Economics. In addition to his work as an economist,
Professor Valletti also received his flute diploma from the
Conservatorio di Musica in Torino.
[Speaking foreign language.]
Our third witness is Jason Furman--that was an applause
line; no--our third witness is Jason Furman, a professor of the
practice of economic policy at the Harvard Kennedy School.
Before joining the Kennedy School's faculty in 2017, Professor
Furman served as chair of the Council of Economic Advisers
during President Obama's second term. From 2009 to 2013,
Professor Furman was an assistant to the President and
principal deputy director of the National Economic Council. He
currently serves as a nonresident senior fellow at the Peterson
Institute for International Economics, as well as an adviser on
digital market units for the U.K. Government.
Professor Furman received his B.A., M.A., and Ph.D. from
Harvard University, as well as his master's of science from the
London School of Economics.
Our final witness on the panel is Roslyn Layton. Dr. Layton
is currently a visiting scholar with the American Enterprise
Institute. She also serves as a visiting researcher at Aalborg
University and as the vice president of Strand Consult in
Copenhagen. Before her tenure with AEI, Dr. Layton worked as
the director of search agency services at IBM Coremetrics. She
has been published dozens of times in numerous publications,
including Forbes, the U.S. News & World Report, and The Hill,
and served on President Trump's transition team in 2016,
helping to establish his Federal Communications Commission.
Dr. Layton received her B.A. from American University, her
MBA from the Rotterdam School of Management, and her Ph.D. from
Aalborg University.
We welcome all of the incredibly distinguished witnesses on
our first panel. Thank you for participating in today's
hearing. And now if you would please rise, I will begin by
swearing you in.
Please raise your right hands. Do you swear or affirm under
penalty of perjury that the testimony you're about to give is
true and correct to the best of your knowledge, information,
and belief, so help you God?
Let the record show the witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
Thank you. You may be seated.
Please know that each of your written statements will be
entered into the record in its entirety. Accordingly, I ask you
summarize your testimony in 5 minutes. To help you stay within
that time, there's a timing light on your table. When the light
switches from green to yellow, you have 1 minute to conclude
your testimony. When the light turns red, it signals your 5
minutes has expired.
Commissioner Chopra, you may begin.
TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE ROHIT CHOPRA, COMMISSIONER, FEDERAL
TRADE COMMISSION; TOMMASO VALLETTI, PROFESSOR OF ECONOMICS,
IMPERIAL COLLEGE BUSINESS SCHOOL; JASON FURMAN, PROFESSOR OF
THE PRACTICE OF ECONOMIC POLICY, HARVARD KENNEDY SCHOOL; AND
ROSLYN LAYTON, VISITING SCHOLAR, AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE
TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE ROHIT CHOPRA
Mr. Chopra. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Sensenbrenner, and members of the subcommittee. My name is
Rohit Chopra, and I serve as the Federal Trade Commissioner.
Oversight from Congress is a pillar of sound, transparent
government, and I've been honored to testify many, many times
before Members of Congress, including before Chairman Elijah
Cummings, whose energy and passion will be missed by so many of
us.
Today's topic could not be more important or timely, as it
seems almost daily we learn of problems stemming from the lack
of competition. To this end, I think we need to focus on four
ways that companies undercut competition: concentration,
conflicts of interest, contracts, and capture.
Market power is concentrated with a few giants in so many
industries. Conflicts of interest allow these dominant firms to
sometimes rig the market in their favor at the expense of
upstarts and new businesses that fairly compete. One-sided
take-it-or-leave-it contracts and online terms of service
impose self-serving regulations on consumers and small
businesses. And all too often, the government is too captured
by those incumbents who use their power to dictate their
preferred policies.
In my testimony, I discuss how competition in the
technology market is structured around data, a valuable asset
with very unique economic features we need to take into
account. Our personal data is powering the profits and
dominance of tech companies that offer basic services like
email, search, or photo sharing that are not truly free.
Fortunately, many of my colleagues around the world are also
pushing forward. Reports from regulators in Australia, the
United Kingdom, the European Union are must reads for this
committee and everyone concerned about the future of our
digital economy.
In the United States, as you know, our efforts are a work
in progress, and I agree that we need to take a fresh look at
our policies and guidance. And as we do, it is important that
the Federal Trade Commission conduct a rigorous review of
quantitative market data and an analysis of the financial
incentives driving market-distorting behavior.
Since joining the Commission, I have argued that the FTC
should be using our authority under section 6(b) of our act to
get the data we need to effectively police these markets and
report our findings to you and the public.
When it comes to enforcement, I am more optimistic now that
scores of States attorneys general, both Republican and
Democrat, are teaming up to investigate anticompetitive conduct
in the digital economy. In this moment, it is all hands on
deck, and I stay in constant communication with them. Decades
ago, our State AGs played a pivotal role in ending Microsoft's
choke hold over the future of the internet. And without that
action, there would likely be no Google, no Facebook, and no
Amazon.
While the FTC's recent settlements with Facebook and
Google's YouTube included fines that made for great headlines,
they did little to fix the core problems that fueled these
companies' data abuses. Big fines are not big penalties for the
world's biggest companies, and as we have seen time and again,
when a company can simply pay a fine from its ill-gotten gains,
this isn't a penalty; this is an incentive.
As Congress, Federal antitrust enforcers, and State
attorneys general all pursue their investigations, we will need
to pursue remedies that reduce concentration, eliminate
conflicts of interest, rescind abusive contract terms against
small businesses and consumers, and limit capture. For example,
recent scholarship has revealed that antitrust actions that
separated lines of business or required interoperability of
standards or ordered more patents available for public use
after anticompetitive conduct, all led to massive innovation,
small business entry, and economic growth. These are useful
tools in the toolbox for policymakers and enforcers to consider
when looking to both remedy and prevent harm.
In conclusion, while some believe that lax enforcement and
absentee government are the ingredients of innovation, history
teaches us it's the opposite. Without a vigilant and active
government promoting competition, markets cannot thrive.
Sometimes that means providing corporations with benefits like
limited liability, license contracts, and other opportunities,
but free and fair markets won't work without meaningful
consequences for law breakers, and inaction is a price we
simply cannot afford to pay.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement of Mr. Chopra follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Commissioner.
I now recognize Dr. Valletti for 5 minutes.
TESTIMONY OF TOMMASO VALLETTI
Mr. Valletti. Mr. Chairman, ranking member, and members of
the subcommittee, good morning, and thank you very much for
inviting me. My name is Tommaso Valletti, and I am professor of
economics at Imperial College in London. Between September 2016
and August 2019, I was the chief competition economist of the
European Commission. In that role, I led the economic analysis
of several cases, involving digital platforms, including
Google, Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Microsoft, and others.
Today, I would like to make four points. My first point is
obviously about data. Some commentators have argued that data
is a new oil. Others have gone to the opposite extreme by
claiming data is as common as water, as air. These sweeping
generalizations are not very useful. It is self-evident that
data is key to digital platforms, and also, only a few
gatekeepers are in a position to control the tracking and
linking of behaviors across platforms, online services, and
websites. They can combine several data sets and create
superprofiles of individuals. This is the market for individual
attention where the analysis has to be conducted.
As an example, if we open, all of us, in this very moment
our Facebook accounts, if you had one, and we just looked at
the ads popping up, you would see totally different ads. This
is completely different from traditional media; there would be
individual ads.
Unfortunately, the debate over the practical importance of
data is not helped by the lack of published empirical studies
in the field of competition economics. The large digital
players have not made any data available through independent
researchers ever. I know already the cynical rebuttal to this,
paraphrasing Mozart, that one could say, come on, ``cosi fan
tutte''; they're all like that. This will not be true. I can
think of telecoms, of pharma, of airlines that can immediately
name several data sets, often anonymized, that would be
available to independent researchers to analyze competition in
those sector. It really is paradoxical we know so little from
this so-called data economy, which is sitting on unprecedented
amounts of data.
My second point concerns the extent to which enforcers
should consider privacy concerns under competition law. My
answer is yes. Privacy is at the core of the economics of
digital platforms, and competition is shaped around it.
Competition, generally speaking, takes place along several
dimension, price being only one of them. Quality, choice,
innovation are also important aspects for competition and for
consumers. In fact, when dealing with digital platforms, it
does not make sense to focus on prices as prices have been set
at zero by choice.
The business model is to give something away for free in
order to monetize in other related market; advertising, in
particular. Hence, quality will often be very relevant focus of
competition. Lack of competition, conversely, will lead to
reduced quality. In this case, a reduction in privacy
protection.
My third point is that privacy degradation can lead to real
consumer harm. This can arise in different ways: Data breach,
identity theft, but also consumer profiling that is not done in
the interest of consumers. Part of the problem is that digital
incumbents have the ability to impose terms of service that are
not well understood but still accepted by consumers because of
a lack of alternatives. This is already an indication of market
power.
Who has actually read lengthy and obscure privacy terms?
What do they mean? Think of common phrases like ``we may
collect your information for marketing purposes'' or ``we may
share your data with trusted businesses.'' Consumers see the
instant benefits of clicking yes, but cannot assess the
implications of giving away their data that are bundled by
design to the service. These practices increase information
asymmetries and undermine the role played by consumers and by
competition.
My last point and my conclusion to all this is that
antitrust cases involving data and privacy can be run. Lower
quality can be seen in competition law terms as an exploitative
conduct. In Europe, this is captured by the current law. In
other jurisdictions, it is not. Like in the U.S., it is not.
Still, it would be wrong to ignore exploitative conducts. Data,
privacy, and competition are not separable. Diminished
competition on privacy should be considered in any assessment
of the state of competition and of market power of online
platforms.
Lower data protection can also lead to the standard
category of exclusionary behavior. Here, the chain goes from
dominance to bad privacy terms. You get a data advantage
compared to rivals. Money is being made. This money can be used
to exclude competitors or to leverage into neighboring markets.
Actually, tying with other digital products can further enforce
the data advantage of the dominant incumbent by cross-linking
the data collected across services, creating quite a vicious
circle. These are conducts that could, in my personal opinion,
should be investigated.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The statement of Mr. Valletti follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Dr. Valletti.
I now recognize Dr. Furman for 5 minutes.
TESTIMONY OF JASON FURMAN
Mr. Furman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, ranking members, and
members of the committee. My name is Jason Furman. I'm a
professor of the practice of economic policy at the Harvard
Kennedy School. I recently chaired the U.K.'s Digital
Competition Expert Panel, which produced a report unlocking
digital competition. One of our recommendations was that the
U.K. establish a digital markets unit, and I'm currently
serving as an unpaid adviser to the U.K. Government as they
move forward with accepting that recommendation that my panel
made.
Today, of course, I'm testifying with my own views and
ideas drawing on the report that we did. I thank you for your
kind comments about it.
I want to make four points in my testimony. The first is
that the major digital platforms are highly concentrated and
that that concentration is likely to persist. It's due to a
combination of factors: economies of scale and scope, the way
that data can serve as a barrier to entry, behavioral biases on
the part of consumers who don't shift the way we think they
should, the importance of access to capital and brands.
Many of those individually are present in many markets, but
the combination of them and the extremes of all of them is
unique to the digital platforms and makes it very difficult to
have competition in the market. The question of whether there
can be competition for the market is a more speculative one,
but there's a number of reasons, including the persistence of
the major platforms, to believe that that competition for the
market will be difficult absent policy changes.
My second point, which was covered by Tommaso, is that this
has cost to consumers. The services aren't free. Consumers
might have been compensated; they're paying in the form of
data, they're losing out on quality and variety, and the lack
of competition stunts innovation. The question is what we
should do about this. Some of the reasons why you have only a
few platforms is because of the benefits that consumers get
from scale and scope. You want to preserve the ability of
consumers to have those benefits. Some of the reason, though,
is because of unfair competition and because of what's not
organic growth due to efficiency but mergers that have been
improved often without very much scrutiny.
So the key to policy is to preserve the good while enabling
as much competition, because competition is the source of
innovation and lets the private sector drive that innovation.
To that end, my third point, is that merger enforcement
needs to be more robust in the digital sector. Much of the
growth we've seen has not been organic growth due to
efficiency, but has been acquisitions. There have been
essentially no errors in blocking an acquisition that would
have been beneficial to consumers, but there probably have been
errors in allowing acquisitions to go forward that have
ultimately harmed consumers.
An approach should include more resources for the DOJ
Antitrust Division and the FTC so that they have the technical
expertise to deal with this. That merger analysis can't just
focus on short-run, static effects, but also on potential
competition, innovation, and take very seriously data as a
barrier to entry. And third, the increasingly high bar for
blocking mergers probably needs to be addressed in a
legislative manner with some form of shifting the burden of
proof.
Finally, my fourth point is that even with all of that,
merger enforcement, that won't be sufficient to deal with, you
know, the horses that have already left the barn. Antitrust
scrutiny can help, but it can also be slow. It can have a hard
time addressing, you know, behavioral remedies, and that's why
I proposed in the U.K., and I think it would make sense in the
United States, the establishment of a digital markets unit. I'm
agnostic about whether this is a new body or whether it's an
existing body, like the FTC. What's important is the functions.
The first would be a code of conduct to ensure no
anticompetitive conduct that was backed up by enforcement
authority. The second function would be systems with open
standards and data mobility, which would enable more entry and
competition. And the third function would be a greater degree
of data openness. And I think with this approach, we could
avoid some of the more extreme market disruptive steps, ensure
consumers get all the benefits of fair competition, but also
enable new entrance to compete, enter the market, and even
deliver further benefits above and beyond what we've seen to
date.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Furman follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Dr. Furman.
I recognize Dr. Layton for 5 minutes.
TESTIMONY OF ROSLYN LAYTON
Ms. Layton. Good morning, and thank you.
Chairman Nadler, Chairman Cicilline, and Ranking Member
Sensenbrenner, I'm honored to join these distinguished
panelists today and to contribute to this important inquiry on
data and privacy. And I also want to recognize and thank the
committee staffers for all their work to prepare for this
hearing. And this testimony represents my own views.
As Professor Valletti lays out, we know very little about
the economics of privacy, the number and severity of privacy
violations, the quantification of harm, and how many violations
regulation would deter. Without these key points of
information, it's ill-advised to build a command and control
regulatory regime which presumes that regulators are in the
know. The best numbers that I have comes from Sasha Romanosky
at RAND, who estimates that there are a few hundred information
privacy violations per year, which is actually a small number
given the size of the digital economy.
Given that good policy information's not available,
regulatory advocates look for other arguments to justify their
preferred approach, such as competition. Now many well-
intentioned policies are promoted on this premise that they
will level the playing field, but we must look at the actual
effects, not just the theory and argumentation, however
compelling it may be.
Now, my testimony introduces an engineering concept of
control points. Just as a linchpin keeps a wheel from sliding
off an axle, harnessing a control point is a powerful,
efficient way to govern a system.
Now, Commissioner Chopra suggests that there's a corporate
royalty controlling our economy. Well, similarly, there's a
regulatory royalty controlling our politics.
The conventional wisdom that the regulation follows market
failure, the reality is that regulation follows market success.
It's no surprise that antitrust authorities around the world
and across the U.S. are looking at the American tech sector,
because that's where the money is. This is a source of
political power because it brings revenue to various States
through litigation fees. And we can see the activities of state
attorneys general who wish to make national policy by using the
bully pulpit of their State. Fortunately, Congress can temper
the self-interested actors so that no one State can dictate the
commercial terms of our national economy.
I'm extremely grateful that this Congress is considering
updating the privacy framework for the digital age. We can
learn a lot from the European Union, which has had a two-decade
natural experiment in regulating the tech economy. The long-
term trends and outcomes are clear by looking at the European
Commission Digital Scoreboard and the Euro stats surveys. While
large enterprise moves along, small and medium-sized companies
have a hard time growing. They don't invest in information
technology and they transact little across borders.
After 18 months of the GDPR in effect, we can see that the
largest advertising platforms have gained market share, while
their fledgling ad tech rivals have lost ground. GDPR imposes a
set of fixed costs across all enterprises. Only the largest
players can afford the costly requirements of lawyers' fees,
chief privacy officers, audits, impact assessments, software
updates and so on. Less than half of all companies can comply
with these regulations that cost $3 million per firm. And one-
fifth of companies will never comply. And consumers are no
better off. Online trust is at its lowest point since 2006.
In contrast, the United States welcomed 40,000 new internet
startups last year alone. We have been fortunate to have a
single national market from our founding and a 220-year
tradition of carefully constructed bottom up privacy rules that
were democratically decided and based upon real world harms.
The CCPA with its 77 regulations on enterprise has 22 more
obligations than the GDPR. A preliminary cost-benefit analysis
prepared by the California Department of Justice suggests that
costs exceed benefits by a factor of 14. It notes $70 billion
in startup and running cost for compliance. Most of these costs
go to privacy lawyers and consultants. The consumer benefits
are estimated generously at a mere $5 billion.
Now, it's hard to see what's progressive about giving a
windfall to the privacy bar at the expense of consumers and
small business. These are companies with 500 employees or less.
They make up 99 percent of the California businesses. These are
the companies who are going to bear the brunt of regulations
which are dreamed up by the regulatory royalty in a mere month.
Now, the appeal to justify this regulation on human rights
is part of an attempt to avoid the forthright discussion about
the costs.
Now, in closing, there's a right way and there's a wrong
way to do privacy protection. GDPR and CCPA are the wrong ways.
Good regulation should cost little to implement. It should be
easy to understand. I appreciate that this committee is
considering alternatives. If we're concerned about competition,
we should stop adopting rules that unwittingly strengthen the
largest players. In the end, I'm optimistic because the market
we're talking about today is maybe a third of our national
economy. The other 70 percent of our economy is where our
opportunities are. That is where the data revolution has not
come. That is where we have the opportunities to grow, where we
can transform lagging industries in health and transportation.
So the important part is if we want these kind of new
companies to emerge, we have to--and we want to replace the
status quo, we have to make sure that we don't kill it in the
cradle by regulation that stops the innovator at the gate.
[The statement of Ms. Layton follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Dr. Layton.
And we'll now proceed under the 5-minute rule. I now
recognize the chair of the full committee, Mr. Nadler, for 5
minutes.
Chairman Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Professor Valletti, over the last 10 years, the five
largest tech platforms have acquired over 400 companies
globally without any real challenge from antitrust enforcers.
Professor, is there any evidence to suggest that this de facto
exemption from antitrust scrutiny was a mistake?
Mr. Valletti. Well, this is my personal opinion, of
course----
Mr. Cicilline. Would you please use your microphone?
Mr. Valletti. Yeah, sorry. This is my personal opinion, of
course. I do think that there has been a sort of antitrust
immunity, in general, in the tech sector for far too long.
Google and Facebook have acquired hundreds of companies, as you
said, and very few have been vetted. There's some technical
reasons sometimes. For instance, you notify some mergers only
by the certain threshold, and the threshold is dictated on the
turnover of companies in the past 3 years when it comes to
digital platforms, but also pharmaceutical companies. These
turnovers are not yet there and so you don't have the tools to
intervene.
But yes, I do think we have severely underenforced in the
merger area, which means not necessarily that those mergers
were bad, but we should have investigated them for sure.
Chairman Nadler. Professor Chopra, would you comment on the
same question?
Mr. Chopra. Well, I actually wonder quite a bit what would
our world look like if Google had not bought YouTube or Amazon
had not bought Zappos or many of these acquisitions that many
believed could grow on their own to be their own big giant. And
I agree that underenforcement can really kill innovation and
kill entry, because when it's harder and harder to break in,
that's just bad for small business and it's bad for all of us.
Chairman Nadler. Thank you.
And, Professor Valletti, what should antitrust enforcers be
doing to ensure the dominant platforms are not swallowing up
actual and potential competitors?
Mr. Valletti. The simplest answer is run cases or open
cases and investigate. The point is that--there is a response
that some entrepreneurs want to be bought. This is an exit
strategy. They want to cash on their own innovation. My point
is not that this shouldn't happen, but simply that dominant
companies should not be allowed to buy those. They can be
bought by someone else.
So what can be done is to run more cases, open, use
financial evaluation, run through internet documents. The
chairman before mentioned Onavo, a spyware that Facebook was
using to buy some rivals. So there's a lot of things that we
can do to improve.
Chairman Nadler. Thank you. And you've also argued that a
dominant platform can use its privacy policy to entrench its
dominance. Can you explain how that strategy works?
Mr. Valletti. So there are different ways. One way could
be, for instance, a company which is dominant doesn't have
alternatives. That's why it is dominant, because you cannot
find alternatives. So this dominant company, you need the
service, we'll ask you to sign up for whatever they ask you.
You don't see through the terms, you don't know where your data
is going, you don't know what's going to happen with your data.
Your data are going to be used to monetize somewhere else,
maybe even with yourself in a future period, in the present
period with--I don't know. If it is something genetic, it will
be even--your offsprings.
So money is going to be made from this hypertargeted
advertising. Once you have money, you can do lots of strategies
to preserve your dominance.
Chairman Nadler. Okay. Can you explain why you view privacy
an appropriate factor to consider under competition law?
Mr. Valletti. Yes. Because the locals of competition are
multifaceted. Can be prices, can be innovation, can be quality.
And since consumers seems okay about privacy, I would say this
is one of the primary things that a healthy competitive market
should actually give, healthy privacy to individuals.
Chairman Nadler. Thank you.
And, Professor Furman, in your view, is big data creating
entry barriers that prevent entrepreneurs from raising capital
and breaking into technology markets?
Mr. Furman. Yes, I think big data is creating entry
barriers. And if you tried to guess what the next industry is
going to be, we've had a succession from IBM to Microsoft to
Google, et cetera. The next is likely to be AI machine
learning, and the companies best poised to take advantage of
that are the ones that are the large incumbents now. So the
wave of disruption----
Chairman Nadler. They're larger because they have the data.
Mr. Furman. Because they have the data, exactly, which is
what's needed for this next stage in the economy.
Chairman Nadler. And that may lead to my next question,
which is, why is data still a barrier to entry even though it's
nonrivalrous?
Mr. Furman. It's nonrivalrous, but there are companies that
keep that data and keep that data to themselves. They have
economies of scale. There's things you can do once you have
large amounts of data that are even much, much more than you
could do with a medium or a small amount of data. And I think a
lot of that is a function of public policy choices we've made
about what data is and is not open.
Chairman Nadler. To compete with them, a new entrant would
have to assemble its own data starting from way back?
Mr. Furman. Yes, they would, Congressman.
Chairman Nadler. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Cicilline. The gentleman yields back.
Votes have been called. We're going to have the gentleman
from Colorado, Mr. Buck, be recognized for 5 minutes, then
we'll adjourn, with the indulgence of the witnesses, and come
back immediately after votes. And we apologize for the
interruption.
Mr. Buck.
Mr. Buck. Thank you.
And I want to thank the chair of the committee and the
chair of the subcommittee for holding this hearing. I really
appreciate this opportunity.
Dr. Layton, couple of quick questions, and I'm going to go
real basic because that's about my understanding of this area.
If I am sitting in front of my desktop and I want to go to the
U.S. House of Representatives' website, I type in something on
my browser, U.S. House, up pops the area. I click on that, and
a resolver--I want to make sure my friends understand I used
the word ``resolver,'' not revolver. I'm not trying to get into
a gun debate here, but a resolver then takes me to the website
that I'm looking for. And my understanding is that recently we
have had a change in that to add encryption to the area.
Can you explain why the change was necessary and where
we're going with that?
Ms. Layton. So I think the issue that you're talking about
is the DNS over HTTPS protocol. It's a new standard being
proposed by Google and Mozilla. Just let me frame this, this
issue. I've discussed it in my testimony, but I think that it's
a great example of where we have a challenge with our privacy
regulation between the person's right to privacy and the
public's right to know.
So we've seen from GDPR and other things like this that a
number of valuable resources that we've had on the internet for
law enforcement, for copyright protections, for public
information, they have been masked and clouded because of
techniques taken on by regulation. But in this particular case
where you're looking at what's called the DoH, the D-O-H, is
that in an effort to encrypt the traffic, which people want to
do to protect their privacy, it is changing the architecture of
the internet, which used to be very distributed and modular. So
a number of parties would perform this redirect task that you
talk about----
Mr. Buck. When you say a number of parties, we're talking
about tens of thousands.
Ms. Layton. Tens of thousands, CBNs--and they're very
important, because individuals can put certain settings and
preferences, whether they want to block malicious content, and
also, law enforcement uses these things to find various
criminals and so on. But all of that would be subsumed into--
would be--all of that information that number of parties use
today would be lost.
Now, the reason it's done, because Google and Mozilla want
to be able to get marketing data in that process and pull that
control point, as I describe, into their own network, where
normally it would reside outside of their network. So this is
just a coding tweak that can upset that entire balance that
we've built up to date over all these decades.
Mr. Buck. So would we no longer have tens of thousands of
providers in this particular area?
Ms. Layton. I think it would eliminate the CBN industry
overnight, I mean, just by one mere coding tweak. So it's quite
staggering how much a simple click like that can--or not a
click, but a coding tweak can change it. Now, there are some
users who may like it, who they want to have--I want my whole
experience to be in Google; fair enough. But the other, for all
of those----
Mr. Buck. They have that choice now, don't they?
Ms. Layton. Well, they have a default now; you're
absolutely right. You can choose safe search, you can choose
these different settings. But what we're making worse off are
all of the law enforcement, parents, families who are trying to
set up permissions to protect their own privacy and their own--
you know, their own preferences.
Mr. Buck. Okay. And how many--do we have any idea how many
of these providers there will be in the future? Will it just be
three or four or will we once again----
Ms. Layton. Well, I mean, the sort of--I mean, you can
imagine, you could have a kind of world where, you know, Google
consumes the internet just because of the way that things are
coded. I mean, more and more things could be encrypted. Seventy
percent of the internet is encrypted today largely because
consumers want to have, you know, more privacy. But prior to
encryption, large platforms can look at the data that's there
and they are able to use that to get the marketing information.
So I don't have the number of how many DNS resolvers are
available today, but there would be many fewer. It is one of
the services offered by ISPs. It's offered by a number of other
parties out there.
Mr. Buck. Mr. Chopra, any thoughts on that?
Mr. Chopra. Well, Congressman Buck, I think you're raising
some important questions about who gets to decide this. If it's
when we just have one or two browsers that dominate the market
and can make coding tweaks maybe for self-serving purposes,
that's something we have to be wary of. Conflicts of interest
with this level of market power have to be top of mind, because
it's not just about our economy. Like Dr. Layton said, it
raises questions about how do we protect children, how do we
enforce our laws?
And to me, I think these types of regulations should be
decided by Congress, not necessarily a company with a conflict
of interest.
Mr. Buck. Okay. Thank you very much for your time.
And I yield back.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the gentleman.
The chair will now recognize the gentleman from Georgia
who's anxious to ask questions before the break.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I thank the witnesses for being here today, especially
Mr. Valletti. Dr. Valletti, long journey, thank you.
Many big tech companies have touted their data portability
as the reason they can't be anticompetitive, but few, if any,
are truly interoperable.
Professor Furman, interoperability is different from
portability, isn't it?
Mr. Furman. Yes, it is. It enables you to operate--multi-
home operate on multiple systems simultaneously.
Mr. Johnson. And would you agree that one of them promotes
more competition than the other?
Mr. Furman. Yes. I think the technical details about how--I
use the word systems with open standards and data mobility.
There's ways to do that that really enable switching and multi-
homing and ways to do it that frustrate the ability to do that.
Mr. Johnson. How can interoperability promote competition?
Mr. Furman. It enables consumers to have more choices, to
switch more easily, to use multiple services. It also enables
new entrants to come in and build on a lot of the things and
networks that you've already accumulated on the incumbents.
Mr. Johnson. And, Doctor, what would it look like to have a
social media platform be truly interoperable? And do you
believe that that can happen without government intervention?
Mr. Furman. I'll give you an example of one that is truly
interoperable right now, which is email. If email had been
invented by a single company, it would have had its own
protocols and you could only email other people who used that
same company's email and you couldn't use people that used
different email systems. I don't worry when I email someone
about what company they're on, whether they're on the email
system or not. That's a true form of interoperability that
enables more choice and more competition.
Mr. Johnson. That's a great example.
Commissioner Chopra, one could argue that privacy
violations and other monopolistic behavior is incentivized by
the ad-based model; meaning that more data a company has--the
more data that a company has, the more data a company can
collect and the more dominant it can become.
Can you speak to some of the compounding problems with the
ad-based model?
Mr. Chopra. Well, one of the objections I had to the FTC's
settlement with Facebook for the company's early and repeated
violations of a law enforcement order was their desire to
maintain their dominance by collecting more and more and more
data because, guess what, it gets more valuable as you get
more. I talk about this in my testimony. And we need to start
thinking, not just about ticky-tack privacy rules, but what's
the reason why companies invade our privacy. And one of those
reasons is the behavioral advertising model, which is not of an
ad we all get, but it's an ad targeted at one person and it's
often manipulative.
And so we have to think about how these businesses are
incentivized and structured if we want to get to the root cause
of massive surveillance in our economy today.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, I'll, in the interest of time, yield
back so that my other colleagues will have an opportunity.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the gentleman.
I want to recognize Mr. Buck for a unanimous consent
request before we recess.
Mr. Buck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I ask unanimous consent to have two letters entered into
the record addressing the issues associated with centralizing
domain name systems, the first from CTIA and CTA and USTelecom
and the second from 20 different child advocacy groups.
Mr. Cicilline. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
MR. BUCK FOR THE RECORD
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. The committee will stand in recess and come
back into session immediately after votes. And I thank the
witnesses for their indulgence.
[Recess.]
Mr. Cicilline. Ms. Jayapal.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
your very, very informative testimony.
You've all touched on this, but a common refrain that we
hear from tech companies is, during the course of this
committee's investigation but also just on my own because I
have many of them in my district, is that they can't possibly
be violating antitrust laws. And the primary argument is that
it's because many of their products are either cheap or free,
and, therefore, consumers are inherently benefiting. Now, you
all have, in different ways, talked about this. To me, the big
question, of course, is free really free? And consumers, I
think, it's increasingly clear are paying for the products that
they use. They're paying in data. They're paying in privacy
that they give up and often don't know that they're giving up.
And then, of course, the big tech companies then use that data
to build these massive empires of information about consumers
which then give them spectacular advantage over newcomer
businesses, allow these companies to scrutinize every aspect of
people's lives, create and sell the products that have the best
chance of being successful in the marketplace. It's almost a
bulletproof advantage.
Dr. Valletti, you mentioned the acquisitions and the
history of acquisitions. As of 2018, Facebook had made 67
unchallenged acquisitions, Amazon had made 97 unchallenged
acquisitions, and Google had made 214 mostly unchallenged
acquisitions, and you presided over the EC's--EU's
investigation of Google, Amazon, and Facebook. Two questions.
What kinds of access do these companies have to information
about consumers as a result of those acquisitions? And then you
talked about the thresholds being one of the potential problems
for why investigations aren't opened. Do the thresholds of
investigation need to change if we are to challenge some of
these acquisitions?
Mr. Valletti. Thank you very much for the question,
Congresswoman. Do the thresholds have to change? I'm very
pragmatic. To the extent people have the powers to look into
those acquisitions, that's fine by me, whatever is the method.
I'm even in favor, in fact, of changing a little bit the
structure of presumptions. When it comes to very strategic
platforms with such a humongous market power, I would wonder
whether, instead of asking the authorities to prove that there
is something anticompetitive and then they could rebut with
efficiencies, to change it and say: You guys are not going to
merge with anybody unless you prove to us that this is going to
create efficiency. So I would change a little bit the burden of
proof.
In terms of investigations we are in, I cannot disclose
information about any case, but my understanding of those cases
is that some of the claims--we hear a lot of times the
competition is one click away. There is all these fantastic
options available. I didn't see that in the data at all. I
didn't see anybody going and clicking on search results on page
2, so everybody being stuck with the defaults and--in the
installations, so I saw a lot of stickiness. The fact that some
of us may actually make other choices doesn't represent the
average consumer there. So it's ironic that somebody come from
academia, the ivory tower, has to tell these companies: Look,
there's a difference between theory and practice. In theory,
they can do that, but in practice, consumers never actually act
on those choices. They just follow defaults.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you.
Commissioner Chopra, several of the dominant platforms
serve both as critical gatekeepers while also competing with
the businesses that are dependent on those platforms. Amazon,
for example, runs a third party marketplace, but then it has
its own private label goods. And both in committee and when I
met with them recently, they really testified that this dual
structure doesn't pose any conflicts of interest and say that
it's common for retailers to offer private label products
alongside third party products. What do you say to that, and
what's your response to that?
Mr. Chopra. Well, I think that we hear these analogies of
comparing it to grocery store cereals and the white label
cereal, and it just doesn't work. I am so worried when I hear
from investors and venture capitalists who say I'm not even
going to fund a business that needs to distribute through these
platforms because, guess what? As soon as it takes off, it will
be copied, and all the business will be steered elsewhere, and
that worries me for all of those small firms who want to enter.
So we need to look deeply, and that's why I mentioned section
6(b) of the FTC Act to scrutinize the big picture. Of course,
individual companies, we will look. If there's anticompetitive
conduct, we have to go after it and fix it, but writ large
across these markets, we all need to understand how this works
so that we can figure out how to maintain our economy that is
vibrant and thriving.
Ms. Jayapal. And related to that, just--my time has
expired, but related to that, what are the tools the FTC is not
using that you could be using?
Mr. Chopra. Well, there are so many things that Congress
has equipped us with, and one of the pieces that I hope we will
use much more aggressively and thoughtfully is competition
rulemaking. It doesn't need to put any burden on any company,
but it can clarify the law about what's legal and what's not so
that we don't have to spend millions of dollars on paid
economists and litigators that slow down decisions and
ultimately may have harmed a lot of people in the process. We
need to resuscitate the use of that tool.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the gentlelady.
I now recognize Mr. Armstrong for 5 minutes.
Mr. Armstrong. Oh, fantastic. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Mr. Cicilline. Walk into the room, and we immediately thank
you, Mr. Armstrong.
Mr. Armstrong. Yeah.
Ms. Layton, I just want to talk a little about data
portability, and you say that it's overrated. Can you just
explain that a little bit?
Ms. Layton. So I think that we have the premise of number
portability. We know from the telecom world when you have--you
know, you're going to go from one mobile carrier to another,
you want to take your phone number. That's fine. But I think
when you look at the internet world where you have multiple
kinds of platforms, so if you have social network data, that
doesn't--from Facebook, it doesn't necessarily map to Amazon.
So there's--the data is not really valuable to another
platform.
The bigger thing, I think, and something that's come up in
this hearing, I think we're overrating the value of data
overall because as a person who worked in the analytics
industry, I had interfaced with, you know, 2,000 companies that
they actually after time, the data degrades. And if you are an
innovator, it's less interesting for you to get a platform's
data. If you're going to innovate, you want to do something new
and different. So data portability is kind of the answer to
heal all ills I think is overrated. I've also seen this in some
of the economist studies of, you know, in GDPR as well, is that
users also don't want value data portability.
Mr. Armstrong. And I think that's--you know, and I've said
that too. The basic framework is you should have control over
your own data. But since I've been here, I've learned way more
about this than before I became a member of Congress. It's part
of the reason--I mean, it's fairly complicated as to what is
there, and I think that's part of the reason. Like when you say
consumers don't really necessarily see this as a benefit, is it
because they don't understand what it is or because of how you
said----
Ms. Layton. Well, for one thing, there are switching costs.
I mean, I think it's a fair point that other panelists have
raised, but I guess what I'd say is the value to having--you
know, if we think that we should have five major search engines
and five--you know, that this is--somehow that makes it
competitive, what we--what makes competition in this industry
is new technology, doing something better and different and
more efficiently.
And so where I think we should focus on is that the
innovators look at the other parts of the economy where the
opportunities are. They're greenfields, in fact. It's not like
the way that it is today will be this way forever.
Mr. Armstrong. And then, I guess, when we talk about data
portability, we're talking about it moving, right, I mean, in
some form. And in other areas, there's an entire market niche
of whether it's insurance, litigation, bills of lading, free on
board, those types of issues. So, when you're dealing with this
data portability, has anybody looked at the liability shift as
we move from one person to the other? Because if there's a
breach, which is--I mean, part of the privacy concern is breach
of data, and it usually ends up with a credit card company or a
bank, but if it's portable, I mean, more than one person is
handling that data as it moves from--whether it's Microsoft,
Amazon, Facebook to somebody else.
Ms. Layton. Yeah. That's--that is a fair point.
Mr. Valletti. If I may just----
Mr. Armstrong. Yeah. And then my question is, along with
that portability portion, is the cost of compliance not for
large companies who, quite frankly, we've seen this--and I want
to ask you a question about a Dodd-Frank analogy before I'm
done. I mean, larger companies aren't necessarily scared of
regulation. What they want is regulatory certainty. Smaller
companies that employ four or five people, when you're dealing
with data portability, now have a compliance cost associated
with that. While we're trying to regulate this, we have to be
very concerned that we don't regulate--we don't have the
inverse effect where the cost of--the cost of regulation makes
it prohibitive.
Mr. Valletti. So I just want to jump in on this since it's
been mentioned a few times is the European experience with GDPR
and Californian solution now. Let me clarify first that this is
very new, so having empirical evidence is a longshot because
it's just been happening for a short period. GDPR, also, let's
remind ourselves it's been introduced because it is a
fundamental principle of privacy that individuals want to
ensure. So any time we do a cost-benefit analysis, surely, we
want to see the impact on firms, but, also, there is a benefit
that we get if GDPR within the privacy regulation is enforced
properly.
And the second point is I'm very skeptical when I hear some
of these numbers, which are typically coming from, you know,
institutions which are funded by Google, Facebook. European
evidence is that Google and Facebook lost after on the
advertising side after the introduction of GDPR. So it is a
cost of compliance, but whether it's only the small firms, the
narrative that you hear is from the big guys, not from the
small guys.
Mr. Armstrong. Well, except I'm going to bring an analogy
back, and I'm just going to ask Mr. Chopra this. So when I go
talk--we don't have big banks. We don't have, with the
exception of some national companies, big business in North
Dakota. I mean, we are a small business State. The single
biggest thing I've heard, and this has been long before I've
been here, in the decade or the 11 years since Dodd-Frank was
introduced, is in our realm to regulate what we do think were
really bad actors--and they were--Dakota Community Bank is
caught up in that. So are there any lessons we can learn from
how we did Dodd-Frank when we do this so in our quest to do
whatever it is, we don't sweep up the little guys in
regulation? I mean, if you have 37 compliance officers on the
fifth floor and you go to 40, it's not the end of the world. If
you have two employees, and you have to go to five employees,
you may no longer have a local bank, so----
Mr. Chopra. Yeah. One thing I would really urge you to
think about is complicated rules. They actually benefit those
who have a lot of lawyers and lobbyists to get around it and
lobby for exemptions. In my testimony, I talked about the
importance of bright line rules and even bans because, you know
what? When I--I've had those same conversations with community
bankers. They will say: If I'm banned from doing it, fine,
because that's really easy to understand. But if it's so
complicated, guess what? The largest banks in the world, they
find their way in and get their exemptions. They win, and the
small guys lose, and that's not a system or a country I want to
live in.
Mr. Furman. Mr. Chairman, I don't know if there's time for
me to add to that because----
Mr. Cicilline. No, no----
Mr. Furman [continuing]. Time.
Mr. Cicilline. As long as Mr. Armstrong is interested.
Mr. Furman. Okay. Mr. Armstrong, I think you make a very
important point, and I think you're absolutely right about
worrying about the small businesses. I think sometimes in
regulation, it's tricky because there's a tradeoff. So
something that might be harmful for any size business to do,
you make the rule, it's easier for the large one to comply than
the small one, and you end up entrenching the incumbents.
In this area about competition, you can make sure that
doesn't happen because if you're talking about rules, a code of
conduct as I've proposed for digital markets unit to do--that
you can't keep people off your platform; you have to let them
on other platforms; you can't prioritize your own products--
those rules would only apply to companies that I would just
designate as having strategic market status. Only apply to the
very largest companies.
If you're a small company and you want to prioritize your
own products, you want to keep people off your platform, you
want to make rules about what other platforms they go, you can
do any of that. We're only worried about, if you have some
bottleneck power, abusing it.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Dr. Furman.
I now recognize----
Mr. Armstrong. Can I have unanimous consent just to put
Ranking Member Collins' statement into the record?
Mr. Cicilline. Without objection.
[The statement of Mr. Collins follows:]
MR. ARMSTRONG FOR THE RECORD
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. I now recognize the distinguished gentlelady
from the State of Florida, Mrs. Demings, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much to the distinguished
gentleman from Colorado.
I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all of
you for being with us today. Thank you for your patience as we
went to cast our votes.
I want to start with Mr. Chopra. In several of your
statements and dissents, you've argued that the core problem
that leads to dominant platforms--that leads dominant platforms
to engage in serial privacy violations is their business model,
which relies on monetizing user data and incentivizes Facebook
and Google, for example, to engage in constant surveillance.
What problems do you see with the behavioral advertisement
business models?
Mr. Chopra. Well, I think we're seeing more and more
evidence that behavioral advertising, again--that is,
advertising to a demographic of one--exposes us to a whole lot
of risks, including manipulation and shenanigans in our
democracy. It is very, very profitable, though. Facebook earned
$55 billion in revenue, Google even more. The advertising
business is big, and I'm concerned that that behavioral
advertising model is inconsistent with how we have thought
about immunity online. Right now, we give broad immunities
under section 230 of the Communications Decency Act. I support
that immunity, but I don't know if it's consistent with this
behavioral ad model and surveillance.
Mrs. Demings. So, Mr. Chopra, what do you see as the
solution? What role can--how can Congress play a greater role
in dealing with this problem?
Mr. Chopra. Well, part of it, obviously, is through better
privacy protection. I'll just speak about how I looked at the
Facebook order violations, the repeated and early violations of
that order. That settlement not only completely let executives
off the hook, and they paid a small fine, and their stock went
up. There's no substantive limitations on their use and sharing
of data. And for repeat offenders, there needs to be some bans
on this type of behavior because, if they're going to break the
law, we have to look at the economic incentive that is driving
it.
Mrs. Demings. I think you said earlier that when you have
billions and billions of dollars, $5 billion in a settlement is
like--it's not much incentive to change your behavior. Is
that----
Mr. Chopra. That's right. When you--when these--these big
fines are not big penalties for big companies, and I worry it's
not a penalty; it's an incentive.
I also want to urge Congress to think about how do we beef
up individual liability. In the FTC's Facebook settlement, we
did not depose Mr. Zuckerberg or Ms. Sandberg, but guess what?
They got full immunity in the settlement. And if the court
approves that, what kind of standard are we setting? And I just
think that's fundamentally wrong.
Mrs. Demings. Dr. Valletti, I want to ask you about that,
but some have argued that heightened concerned about digital
monopolies is misguided given that companies like IBM, Yahoo,
MySpace, and BlackBerry were all once viewed as dominant but,
ultimately, were taken over by new firms. And I know we kind of
talked a little bit without naming the specific companies
earlier, but could you just kind of--do you agree with that
view, or what's your feelings about that?
Mr. Valletti. It's almost an act of faith. Do we believe in
dynamic competition? Sure, as a principle, but then I see the
empirical evidence. When it comes to some selected platforms--I
have in mind search; I have in mind social networks; I have in
mind, perhaps, electronic marketplaces--this dominance has been
going on for almost a decade. And so is that long enough to
ever worry? I think, yes. I mean, in the long run, we are all
dead, but I hope we will fix some problems before we are dead.
Mrs. Demings. Well, thank you for that bit of hope and
sunshine. In light of your--I'm going to move on to Dr. Furman.
In your view, how readily available is high quality data to
new entrants? If an entrepreneur wants to launch a new search
engine, for example, what challenges can he or she expect to
face in light of Google's existing dominance? And I know we
have kind of talked about this space, you know, protecting
privacy, competition, but I just want to make sure it's clear
to not just the people in Congress but to the listening public
as well, who are directly being impacted by the decisions made.
Mr. Furman. Yes, Congresswoman. Google has a very good
algorithm. Google also has a huge amount of data about how
consumers search to train that algorithm. A bright kid in a
garage could come up with a good algorithm, but they wouldn't
have anything like that type of data in order to make it work
nearly as well as Google works today.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chair, if I could just--I'd also like to hear from
Ms. Layton, just any response to either of the questions that I
asked that you would just like to respond to.
Ms. Layton. Well, thank you. I appreciate that opportunity.
I would agree with Dr. Furman that, when we look at artificial
intelligence, that this is a greenfield. He's absolutely
correct that a scientist sitting in the garage or in the lab
could come up with a life-changing or transformative kind of
algorithm.
In contrast to the other panelists, I don't believe that
data is a bottleneck because of having been a person working in
the industry, that the data that you collect, it degrades over
time. So, if you're a new innovator, you will look for the
spaces where you can--where there are opportunities. It's less
interesting to look in the past. You want to look to the future
to say: How would I--where could be a place where I would add
value in the future? Healthcare. It is one of the most
inefficient industries. It takes up one-fifth of our GDP. That
is where we need to have data to make it more efficient and
lower the cost.
So what I would like us to do is to look forward. I don't
want us to adopt regulations that deter today's scientists from
making tomorrow's innovations because they have to have all
these permissions and releases from everyone. Now, they may not
look at personal data. There's other areas where there's no
personal data involved, you know, quantum computing, astronomy,
and so on. And they may go in those fields, but probably the
biggest area where we can create the benefit is on human
health. And so, for example, in Iceland, they have this amazing
registry of genomic data that was collected over many decades.
GDPR is putting all of that up in the air. Can you find the
cancer treatments? Can you look at a lot of the new
innovations? We don't know now because that was not collected
under the GDPR environment. So, there again, that is a question
that I would have. So health is an area where we need to see,
are we putting the bottleneck on the innovation?
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Commissioner Chopra, one of the questions that we are
grappling with in this investigation is whether or not our
antitrust agencies like the FTC have fallen short as an
effective sort of cop on the beat in this digital marketplace
and whether or not that is due to insufficient legal authority,
whether it's due to weak leadership, or as I like to refer to
it, the need for enthusiastic and creative leadership. Is it
partly the result of regulatory capture? What is your view?
What should we be thinking about as we look at this
insufficient or sort of inadequate enforcement of our antitrust
agencies, particularly FTC? What do you see as the source of
that?
Mr. Chopra. Mr. Chairman, one of the things I reflect on a
lot is, how did the FTC miss much of the subprime mortgage
crisis that originated in the nonbank sector. The FTC was
really the only cop on the beat there, and we saw what
happened. So one of the things that I think I took away from
what I've learned on that is, number one, we need to use the
tools we have much more energetically. Two, we need to be much
more analytical and not think in the world of theoretical
economic models but real evidence and look at how markets
actually work. So, of course, we can use more authority; we can
use more resources. But the number one thing we need to do is
energetically use the tools we have.
And for you to think about, and Dr. Valletti mentioned this
too. Should we be thinking about changing presumptions? Should
the largest firms on the planet, should the burden be on them
to show why their merger or their roll up of tons of companies
is in that interest? So there's ways you can change the way
courts are acting, and I urge you to do that, but I also urge
you to conduct oversight that makes sure agencies are using
every tool you have equipped us with.
Mr. Cicilline. Great. In February, Commissioner, you gave
remarks to a conference at the University of Colorado where you
said, and I quote: ``Competition enforcement actions like the
Bell Labs consent decree created the conditions for scores of
startups to innovate and flourish. While we often focus on the
cost of action and regulation, we should also be asking
ourselves about the cost of inaction,'' end quote.
Do you believe enforcers or lawmakers should be considering
remedies like the one imposed on Bell Labs, particularly since
a lot of the focus of this investigation has been the impact of
this market concentration on innovation startups, kind of the
opportunity to make the next--space for the next great
technology platform?
Mr. Chopra. Yeah. I appreciate that. One of your areas of
inquiry in the investigation is whether spinoffs or
divestitures of firms may be useful, you know. Some
colloquially call it breaking up. But there are many other
remedies we need to think hard about. Should we be opening up
intellectual property that has been abused by dominant firms,
and how much could that incubate a new activity? There are
many--there's all sorts of history about how we have pursued
this and the benefits from it. Can we look to separate lines of
business to end those conflicts of interest and create more
economic activity? So we should work with you on all of that,
but the discussion must be bigger than breakups. But, of
course, breakups must be in the tool kit as well.
Mr. Cicilline. I'm going to stay with you, Commissioner,
because we're going to do a second round because, obviously, I
couldn't question some of the other witnesses, but I want to
transition to some of the recent privacy settlements at the FTC
that I have criticized publicly. You recently dissented, along
with Commissioner Slaughter, in the FTC settlement with
Facebook. You stated that the settlement gives Facebook a lot
to celebrate which was similar to what I said. Can you explain
what your concerns are with the settlement? I know that you
said in part that the $5 billion settlement was insufficient
because it didn't address Facebook surveillance and
manipulation-based business model, which is what incentivized
Facebook to engage in order--to engage in the violations in the
first place. What do you think the effective remedies would
look like? What was your criticism of that, and what do you
think the effective remedies would look like?
Mr. Chopra. So I think of this in multiple buckets. First,
we should start with that this is the case of recidivism,
repeat offender, so it's not just a first time oops. And in my
view of the evidence, it was clear that there were multiple
early violations, and there was knowledge of those. I think of
it, number one, where is the individual accountability? The
officers and directors who called the shots to violate the law
so that they could put money in their own pockets, without
individual liability, you will not see the level of deterrence
you need, and the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure in our
courts bind officers and directors to Federal enforcement
orders.
Two, what is the actual conduct relief that goes at the
core economic incentives? And to me, there should have been
some real thought on actually banning some of the worst data
collection use and sharing practices. And we have to think--of
course, monetary relief is important, but U.S. consumers did
not get a penny of that, so I'm not sure that headline $5
billion is going to do much.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Commissioner. My time has
expired.
I now recognize the gentleman from--oh, I'm sorry. The
gentlelady from Pennsylvania, Ms. Scanlon.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you very much. I want to thank all our
witnesses for joining us today and for your testimony.
You know, consumer privacy is an important issue for all of
us, both as individuals and as Representatives for our
constituents, but the way that data is collected and used by
the large platforms obviously impacts the ability of consumers
to maintain their privacy and the options they have to make
informed decisions about their online activity.
Dr. Valletti, I wondered if you could expand a little bit
on the third point that you made regarding privacy degradation
leading to an objective detriment to consumers. And I think you
said that imposing terms of service with weak privacy
protection that is not well understood but is accepted by
consumers because of a lack of alternatives, it has to do with
market power. Can you just talk about that a little bit and any
perceived remedies that you might suggest?
Mr. Valletti. So, on objective consumer harm, as I write in
my written piece, it can be, you know, risk of data breach,
identity theft, but interesting, also, consumer profiling,
which is not done in the interest of a consumer, for instance,
discrimination scoring or being shown more expensive results.
So, if you are, in this moment, your dishwasher breaks
down, and you are going to type ``dishwasher repair in my
area,'' you're going to be shown one--most likely, one result
with a nice graphic interface because it is a real-time auction
that most likely Google will be doing, and who are they going
to select? The one that pays the most because they get--they
get a fee. We have lost--we have lost the original function of
the internet to offer us choices because as I said,
behaviorally speaking, consumers don't go to page 2, to page 3,
and they don't--you just are hooked up. These devices are meant
to keep us online as much as possible. So they learn about us,
and then we buy whatever is the thing which is offered to us,
and there is an underlying auction happening. There's only one
platform that we know for that.
Of course, if you're looking for a car, that's a choice
that would take a much longer kind of period, and so it's a bit
different.
And for remedies, the most important thing I would start
from is really try to think carefully about privacy, so having
privacy regulations, which is done in the interest of American
people, and it's American institutions that should come up with
a solution.
Mr. Chopra. Congresswoman, with your permission, just one
point. When Facebook started, there was another social media
platform called MySpace.
Ms. Scanlon. I remember.
Mr. Chopra. And one of the--one of the reasons Facebook was
able to unseat MySpace was partially on privacy and control of
data, that you will be able to control who sees your
information. We should want firms to compete on privacy. These
changes to terms of service hidden in the fine print where they
can collect more and more data and unilaterally impose these
terms, that is a price hike. We are paying with our data, that
valuable data, and more competition will also be critical to
how we think about protecting privacy.
Ms. Scanlon. I'm wondering in other contexts we've seen
that you can change the dynamic by having an opt-in rather than
an opt-out. Is there any possibility of doing something like
that in this sphere? So, for example, having to opt out of a
savings plan rather than opting in.
Mr. Chopra. Well, we do know behavioral defaults are highly
influential, and, typically, right now, companies get to take
everything from you, and you have to figure out a way to opt
out. It's, like, kind of like a full-time job with all the
websites you have. So shifting the burden to companies I think
would be a great way to really reduce the burden on all of us.
And, actually, if consumers want to share their data
proactively and really want to renew that, let them tell that
company and give them permission.
Ms. Scanlon. Okay. I've also had conversations with my kids
and other constituents about the power over consumer data,
putting that back in the hands of consumers, and the example
that they like to talk to me about is moving your music library
possibly from Apple to Spotify.
Mr. Furman, can you talk about the idea of implementing
data portability and whether that's something that we should be
exploring?
Mr. Furman. Yes. I think absolutely you should be exploring
that, and it's not just downloading your data; it's really
being able to port and move it over in a simple and transparent
manner. The companies are making some progress in doing this
through steps like the Digital Transfer Project. I think, in
part, they're making that progress because they think
regulation is coming, and they're responding to it. And to do
this is not just simply passing a law and say you have to do
it. You have to roll up your sleeves a little bit and go use
case through use case, figure out how to balance the different
concerns. But if you can do that, create a lot of value for
consumers and more competition.
Ms. Scanlon. Okay. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the gentlelady.
I now recognize the gentleman from North Dakota, Mr.
Armstrong.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I think Mr.--
the chairman actually does have a MySpace account.
Mr. Cicilline. I am that old; is that what you're saying?
Mr. Armstrong. So Ms.--Dr. Layton, you seemed like you
wanted to respond to that question, so I'll just give you a
little chance.
Ms. Layton. Well, thank you for that.
And I just wanted to say, Ms. Scanlon, on the point--to let
me piggyback on Dr. Valletti. He does have a paper looking at
the prices for options. I think it's very interesting. I'm a
person who--I managed 10 search engine marketers and have
experience in this, and I think there's a fallacy to think that
just because the ad appears at the top of the page in Google
search, that it's the highest bid. Frequently, the best--that
is the lowest paid bid because what is driving the price is
very much the quality of the ad. It's how well it's written,
whether the landing page where the ad goes to is relevant. So
what Google is actually rewarding is the quality of
advertising.
And, also, he brings an interesting case. A plumbing
service wants to create an ad. Well, that is also an issue of
who amongst the plumbing industry is organized to invest in
Google. You know, and it could be this also reflects that the
competition of the plumbing side. And the other part is, if
you're the consumer, you want to have the information. That ad
format actually gives you a lot of things to look at. So I only
say that it isn't--it's not a fact that the highest, top level
ads pay the most. In some fields, like asbestos, those key
words could be worth $5,000 a click. The plaintiffs' bar,
they're very clever around using that. But there's many other
areas that are not used at all, and the clicks could be assent,
so it's hard to generalize that. You actually have to look at
the data.
Mr. Armstrong. And then I'm going to move into something a
little different because, in your Senate testimony, you stated
that GDPR has a risk identifying with respect to convicted
felons successfully removing information from crimes in search
engines, and your footnote on that stated that the Finnish
court decision concluded the right to be forgotten provides
convicted murderers the right to have publicly available
information removed from Google listings. And I'm going--before
I let you answer this for a second, I want to say I support Ban
the Box. I think it's fantastic. I have some thoughts on that
when we're done, but we also have a First Amendment. So let's
take First Amendment issues aside. And just can you expound on
that a little bit?
Ms. Layton. Yeah. So, again, you know, we don't translate
the GDPR perfectly to the United States for those particular
reasons, but we can--and, also, right to be forgotten has been
pushed back by the European courts.
But this issue about people being able to expunge data that
they don't like, well, you know, maybe it's a nice idea in
theory, but it--we have--in the United States, we have a
respect for the public's right to know. So, for example, what
you've seen in the European Union are dirty politicians who
have bad articles about them. They get removed from the media.
They get removed from the Google searches. Murderers, child
predators, you know, all of these terrible characters are able
to weaponize the GDPR for those reasons.
Mr. Armstrong. And I think that's one of the things with
Ban the Box. We need to understand as Members of Congress is
that still only gets you past the first stage. And you can ban
anything from Google. You can ban it from a Facebook search,
but I can tell you, my private investigator would find it in 3
seconds. So, if you go into the second stage of an interview
and you're doing work for the Federal Government, you have to
have a certain insurance designation, any kind of--as simple as
a hazmat commercial driver's license. These are good concepts,
but I think sometimes we use the availability of information as
a scapegoat. What we really need--if we're serious about this,
and I think if you're 19 and have a nonviolent felony on your
record, the world we live in now compared to two generations
ago is so different. You can never outrun that conviction. You
just simply can't. If it happened in Dickinson, North Dakota,
in 1970, you could move to Madison, Wisconsin, and start your
life over because nobody from Madison, Wisconsin, was going to
drive to the Stark County Courthouse and look up records. But
we use this availability of information a little bit as a
scapegoat because, like I said, any job you're applying for
that has any kind of insurance issue, regulatory issue,
framework issue is going to find it anyway.
So we need to address the fact, like, with companies, with
insurance companies and say: Listen, we support this from a
congressional level. There's broad bipartisan support. We also
have to change insurance culture and hiring culture and
allowing those things to happen and the fact that it's not a
Google--it doesn't hit on a Google search doesn't mean it's not
going to exist.
Ms. Layton. I agree.
Mr. Valletti. I think we are mixing a few things here. One
thing is, you know, GDPR. One thing is right to be forgotten.
The first step is for you to understand what you interpret as
privacy. It is a boundary between your private self and the
outside world. What do you think you want to share only with
your family, with your community, with your friends, or not
even with them?
When it comes to digital space, this idea that there is
notice and choice, that we have borrowed from other industries
is not out there any longer, so these boundaries are so blurred
that you must look into that. You must have recognition of the
problem.
Mr. Armstrong. And I agree with that because, when we were
talking about opt in and opt out, shortly after there was some
congressional testimonies before I was here. You started seeing
these windows pop up on your social media platform and yes and
no. And whenever I talk to a high school or college age group
of kids after that happened, I would ask them, did any of you
check no? And not a single----
Mr. Chopra. Because you can't check no.
Mr. Armstrong. Not a single hand goes up. So how people
define privacy in the next generation is also something that is
changing dramatically.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank the gentleman. I recognize myself
for 5 minutes.
I just want to build upon that point that Commissioner
Chopra made about this notion of consent would be--you know,
trying to find out what you're consenting to would be a full-
time job. And I think, as it turns out, even if you devoted
your time to it as a full-time job, you still would run into
the situation in which you have these sort of take-it-or-leave-
it contracts where basically if you don't agree to a certain
amount of collection, you just don't get the service. So, you
know, the consumer or the user in this context doesn't really
have the power even if you devoted full-time to navigating and
trying to--and you wonder why we don't create the kind of
consent we require in most other contexts, if it's medical
consent, if it's consent to withdraw a not guilty plea and
enter a plea in court. It's the knowing consent. It's actually
the person knowing what they're consenting and affirmatively
consenting and why we have allowed a kind of complete turning
on its head where everyone is presumed to consent to the total
collection of everything about them unless they can find some
way to object to it. It's kind of curious, so I think this is a
really important area for us to look at.
Dr. Valletti, I want to just turn to you for a moment.
Google has 2 billion users on Android, and Facebook has over 2
and a half billion users. And what we hear very often is that,
you know, these services are very popular, and people really
have no problem with the kind of corporate surveillance and
these loose privacy controls. And isn't the fact that these
numbers are so great evidence that there's not really a
problem, that the popularity of these services proves that we
really don't need to worry about this. What do you say to that
argument?
Mr. Valletti. The services are very popular. It's evident
they are very good services but that nobody cares. One of the
points I make in my written piece is also that consumers are
not put in a position to understand what the cost might be
because they cannot make comparisons. They don't see where the
data is going. They don't know when something is coming back
against them because they just don't know, and they cannot make
comparisons because there is a lack of competition.
Going back to your original remark, you're probably aware
that, earlier this year, Germany had a case against Facebook,
and this is on appeal in the court now. But it exactly said
that the consent--that the customers who want to be on Facebook
had to give also to cross link data with WhatsApp and
Instagram, which belong to the same company. They said you
didn't tell them what you were going to do. You cannot do it
unless you inform them in some appropriate way, and if you do
not--if they don't consent, you cannot deny access to the
service to Facebook because you don't need that consent to
supply the primary service.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. In July, as part of this
investigation, Google testified before this subcommittee that
it faces, and I quote, ``formidable competition around the
world,'' end quote. Google stated that users can choose from a
menu of search providers, including Bing, DuckDuckGo, and
Yahoo.
Dr. Valletti, in light of your work with the European
Commission, do you agree that there is intense competition in
online search, whether it be in Europe or in the United States?
Mr. Valletti. It's a very general statement. So I will be
more precise when it comes to, say, general search, this
competition is not there in Europe; 93 percent of European
searches are done by one search engine. And this possibility
that consumers have to do something else, to change the
defaults, to change the pre-installment of these behavior
biases we already mentioned several times, they are clear in
the data; I do see people actually sticking all the time and
never changing the default.
Mr. Cicilline. Dr. Furman? I have a couple questions for
you. You can respond to that quickly, though.
Mr. Furman. Just one quick point to add. You wouldn't--
Google wouldn't pay so much money to be the default search
engine on things like iOS if it was really easy for consumers
to switch.
Mr. Cicilline. Right. And so, Dr. Furman, what role do you
think information asymmetries play in how we should understand
digital markets? Corporations routinely have more information
than regulators and the public, but digital platforms seem to
enjoy an astronomical advantage. How should this affect
antitrust enforcement and competition policy, if at all?
Mr. Furman. First of all, I think the enforcers need more
resources. The CMA and the U.K. have actually created a digital
unit with excellent staff in terms of data analytics and the
like. And we also need to design policies around data openness
that reduce some of that asymmetry between some of the big
platforms, their competitors, and the public and regulators.
Mr. Cicilline. I think many of you have made this point.
Competition and privacy can be complements such that more
competition can incentivize firms to provide users with more
privacy, but they can also be at odds, such as that encouraging
interoperability and data portability could expose user data to
a broader set of corporations. So how should enforcers and
policymakers in the Congress strike this balance?
Mr. Furman. I think the answer to that is going to be on a
case-by-case basis. First of all, as you said, a lot of cases,
they really are complements. A lot of cases, only one of them
is implicated; the other one barely is. But you need to have
both objectives. You can't just think about privacy and
completely ignore competition, and you can't just think about
competition and completely ignore privacy. That's part of why
you would want to establish a unit, a body of regulators,
something that would have both of those objectives.
Mr. Cicilline. Ms. Layton, I want to know if you wanted to
respond to any of what I've asked. No. Okay.
Mr. Chopra. Mr. Chairman, I would just add that when
there's so few dominant players, that opens up more abuses of
privacy. And I'm worried that our economy in this sphere is
just drifting toward the Chinese model where there's just a
massive amount of information on people collected without their
consent and can be used to manipulate. And I just reject this
argument that if we want to compete with China, we need to have
our companies look like them. The beauty of our country is when
new entrants come in and challenge the dominant ones. I just
don't want that system.
Mr. Cicilline. I agree.
At this time, I'd ask unanimous consent that the following
statements be introduced in the record: a written statement
from the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission Chair
Rod Sims discussing his investigation into the digital
platforms.
Without objection.
[The information follows:]
MR. CICILLINE FOR THE RECORD
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. A written statement from Dina Srinivasan
discussing the intersection of competition and privacy.
Without objection.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. A letter from the Consumer Reports detailing
their priorities in examining data and privacy in competition.
Without objection.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. A written statement from Maurice Stucke and
Ariel Ezrachi on the digital platform economy's effects on
antitrust and privacy policy.
Without objection.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. And a statement from the European Union
Commissioner for Competition, Margrethe Vestager, with her
expertise on the digital economy.
Without objection.
[The information follows:]
MR. CICILLINE FOR THE RECORD
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
Mr. Cicilline. And, with that, I will conclude the hearing
with gratitude for our extraordinary witnesses, and thank you
for being here today and for contributing significantly to our
ongoing investigation.
And, with that, the committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:05 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
APPENDIX
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
[all]