- REBUILDING INFRASTRUCTURE IN AMERICA: INVESTING IN NEXT GENERATION BROADBAND
[Senate Hearing 115-764]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-764
REBUILDING INFRASTRUCTURE IN AMERICA: INVESTING IN NEXT GENERATION
BROADBAND
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS, TECHNOLOGY, INNOVATION, AND THE
INTERNET
of the
COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE,
SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MARCH 13, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available online: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-879 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
SENATE COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
JOHN THUNE, South Dakota, Chairman
ROGER F. WICKER, Mississippi
BILL NELSON, Florida, Ranking
ROY BLUNT, Missouri
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
TED CRUZ, Texas
AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
EDWARD MARKEY, Massachusetts
DEAN HELLER, Nevada
TOM UDALL, New Mexico
JAMES INHOFE, Oklahoma
GARY PETERS, Michigan
MIKE LEE, Utah
TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
JON TESTER, Montana
Nick Rossi, Staff Director
Adrian Arnakis, Deputy Staff Director
Jason Van Beek, General Counsel
Kim Lipsky, Democratic Staff Director
Chris Day, Democratic Deputy Staff Director
Renae Black, Senior Counsel
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS, TECHNOLOGY, INNOVATION, AND THE
INTERNET
ROGER F. WICKER, Mississippi,
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii, Ranking
Chairman
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
ROY BLUNT, Missouri
AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota
TED CRUZ, Texas
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
EDWARD MARKEY, Massachusetts
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
TOM UDALL, New Mexico
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
GARY PETERS, Michigan
DEAN HELLER, Nevada
TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
JAMES INHOFE, Oklahoma
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
MIKE LEE, Utah
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
JON TESTER, Montana
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on March 13, 2018...................................
1
Statement of Senator Wicker......................................
1
Statement of Senator Nelson......................................
3
Statement of Senator Schatz......................................
42
Statement of Senator Blunt.......................................
44
Statement of Senator Udall.......................................
46
Prepared statement of Godfrey Enjady, General Manager,
Mescalero Apache Telecommunications, Inc...................
46
Statement of Senator Fischer.....................................
49
Statement of Senator Hassan......................................
51
Statement of Senator Moran.......................................
53
Statement of Senator Tester......................................
56
Statement of Senator Klobuchar...................................
58
Statement of Senator Capito......................................
60
Statement of Senator Peters......................................
62
Statement of Senator Blumenthal..................................
65
Statement of Senator Sullivan....................................
66
Statement of Senator Gardner.....................................
68
Statement of Senator Baldwin.....................................
70
Witnesses
Hon. Gary Resnick, Mayor, City of Wilton Manors, Florida.........
4
Prepared statement...........................................
5
Steven K. Berry, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Competitive Carriers Association...............................
11
Prepared statement...........................................
12
Robert DeBroux, Director, Federal Affairs and Public Policy, TDS
Telecommunications, LLC........................................
22
Prepared statement...........................................
23
Brad Gillen, Executive Vice President, CTIA......................
26
Prepared statement...........................................
27
Michael Romano, Senior Vice President, Industry Affairs and
Business Development, NTCA--The Rural Broadband Association....
30
Prepared statement...........................................
32
Appendix
Utilities Technology Council, prepared statement.................
73
Response to written questions submitted by Hon. Gary Peters to:
Hon. Gary Resnick............................................
74
Response to written questions submitted to Steven K. Berry by:
Hon. Gary Peters.............................................
75
Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto..................................
76
Response to written questions submitted to Robert DeBroux by:
Hon. Gary Peters.............................................
77
Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto..................................
78
Response to written questions submitted to Brad Gillen by:
Hon. Jerry Moran.............................................
79
Hon. Gary Peters.............................................
81
Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto..................................
82
Response to written questions submitted to Michael Romano by:
Hon. Gary Peters.............................................
84
Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto..................................
85
REBUILDING INFRASTRUCTURE IN AMERICA:
INVESTING IN NEXT GENERATION BROADBAND
----------
TUESDAY, MARCH 13, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee on Communications, Technology,
Innovation, and the Internet,
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation ,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m. in
room SR-253, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Roger Wicker,
Chairman of the Subcommittee, presiding.
Present: Senators Wicker [presiding], Nelson, Schatz,
Blunt, Udall, Fischer, Hassan, Moran, Tester, Klobuchar,
Capito, Peters, Blumenthal, Sullivan, Gardner, and Baldwin.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROGER F. WICKER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MISSISSIPPI.
Senator Wicker. Good morning. This hearing of Subcommittee
will come to order.
Today the Subcommittee will kick off a series of hearings
in the Commerce Committee on Rebuilding America's
Infrastructure. We start here in the communications
subcommittee with a focus on how to advance broadband
deployment in infrastructure legislation this Congress. I'm
glad to convene this hearing with my colleague, Ranking Member
Schatz.
Broadband connectivity is the digital engine driving
investment, innovation and productivity in virtually every
economic sector in the United States. Over the past decade
there have been unprecedented advancements in healthcare,
agriculture, transportation and many other industries because
of increasingly ubiquitous broadband connections. These
connections are helping industries reduce cost, increase
efficiencies and rapidly identify and act on opportunities for
growth.
Continuing the success of these developments and
maintaining the Nation's global leadership in technological
innovation are goals that depend on widespread access to a
reliable high speed broadband connection. Although we have made
significant progress on wireline, wireless and satellite
broadband deployments, more needs to be done. There is still a
disparity in broadband deployment across the country,
particularly in rural America.
In its 2018 broadband deployment report the FCC concluded
that ``far too many Americans remain unable to access high
speed broadband Internet access and we have much work to do.''
A direct quote from the Federal Communications Commission.
To that end, I'm greatly encouraged by the President's
support for programs directed toward increasing broadband
infrastructure deployment in rural areas. Today I hope to
discuss with our witnesses how Congress can most effectively
and efficiently deploy broadband infrastructure to unserved
communities. Using lessons learned earlier from broadband
projects, President Trump's infrastructure proposal is an
opportunity to get broadband to communities that truly need it.
This process should start with collecting standardized and
accurate data about where the reliable fixed and mobile
broadband already exists and where it does not, both in
Mississippi and around the country. This is critical to
delivering broadband to rural communities that lack service,
whether that be through infrastructure legislation or existing
Federal programs like Phase II of the mobility fund.
Inaccurate information of where broadband exists would only
exacerbate the digital divide and leave millions of rural
Americans further behind. We don't have accurate data yet, and
I hope we can discuss that today in the hearing. As we seek to
close the broadband gap in rural America, we should also plan
for the next generation of broadband such as 5G.
The availability of 5G communication networks promises to
transform the way we experience the Internet because of the
projected capacity speed and reliability to make next
generation broadband a reality and position the United States
so it can win the global race to 5G. We should modernize
outdated rules that delay and add unnecessary cost to broadband
infrastructure deployment.
A bipartisan piece of legislation that I introduced called
the Streamlining Permitting to Enable Efficient Deployment of
Broadband Infrastructure or SPEED Act does just that. Inaction
on our part would take the next generation of jobs, innovation
and investment out of the United States and put us at an
economic disadvantage with respect to our global competitors.
Clearly as the FCC concluded in its report that I have just
quoted, there is much work to be done. We are almost one-fifth
of the way through the 21st century. We ought to be able to
accelerate the deployment of next generation broadband, get all
Americans connected now and close the digital divide once and
for all.
I'm told that Senator Schatz has no opening statement, and
I think that's because he has concluded that I so completely
covered the subject in my opening statement. So we will get
right to our witnesses, and they include the Honorable Gary
Resnick, Mayor of the City of Wilton Manors, Florida.
Oh, I see, so the other part of that statement was that
Senator Nelson wishes to make an opening statement. After I
introduce our panel, we will certainly allow that. Although I'm
crushed now that the conclusion wasn't that I had said all that
could possibly be said.
Mayor Resnick will be joined by Mr. Steve Berry, Chief
Executive Officer, Competitive Carriers Association; Mr. Robert
DeBroux, Director of Federal Affairs and Public Policy, TDS
Telecom; Mr. Brad Gillen, Executive Vice President, CTIA, the
Wireless Association; and, Mr. Mike Romano, Senior Vice
President for Policy, NTCA, the Rural Broadband Association.
The Chair now recognizes Senator Nelson, the Ranking Member
of the Full Committee.
STATEMENT OF HON. BILL NELSON,
U.S. SENATOR FROM FLORIDA
Senator Nelson. Mr. Chairman, I do appreciate it. As you
know, Florida has many rural areas where we desperately need
advanced broadband networks. We do have advanced networks in
our state, but in rural areas such as Gilchrist, Dixie, Levy,
and even some cities where citizens have little to no access to
quality and affordable Internet service and in those areas
students often lack the ability to complete their homework,
small businesses cannot compete and social and political
engagement is hampered.
We have to close this digital divide and leave no area of
this country behind. That's why we have wanted to include
significant direct investments in broadband deployment in any
Federal infrastructure legislation.
Because the administration's proposal is simply inadequate
on broadband expansion, it is incumbent on this Committee to
work together in a bipartisan way to provide these critical
investments. Everyone, from those of us in the Senate, to our
mayors, local officials, we want Americans to benefit from the
availability of robust broadband.
Building these networks has always raised a number of very
sensitive issues from historic preservation and environmental
concerns to state and local land use policies to tribal
sovereignty and national security. And the highly anticipated
5G wireless technology brings with it networks that will
require installation of much denser wireless infrastructure
made up of many more small cell facilities. So we ought to have
reasoned discussion about these regulatory issues.
That reasoned discussion cannot begin and end with a wiping
away of key laws and regulations meant to protect our fellow
citizens and important Federal, state, local and tribal
interests. Steps that the FCC seems keen to take. And that
discussion must include fair and fulsome input from all
affected parties, including states and localities. And that's
why I'm pleased that Mayor Resnick is here. He is here for a
repeat performance. And he's going to provide the Committee
with the important local government perspective.
And I hope that all stakeholders, including those
represented before us today, can work together to help find
ways to effectively balance these competing concerns about
siting, construction of broadband facilities and consumers'
increasing demand for fast and reliable broadband services.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you.
Senator Wicker. And thank you, Senator Nelson.
Mayor Resnick, we will begin with you. I understand you
represent a City of about 11,000 just off I-95; is that
correct?
Mr. Resnick. That is correct. We are Broward County,
Florida; east Broward County.
Senator Nelson. Mr. Chairman, they are not far from the
very, very terrible, tragic shooting in Parkland.
Mr. Resnick. That is correct, Senator. Thank you. Two of my
colleagues that I work very closely with have children that
attend that school. And fortunately they were fine, but they
will probably be dealing with the trauma for the rest of their
lives. So we do appreciate your sentiments with respect to
that.
Senator Wicker. Well, and please do express our concern and
good wishes to all of the people who were involved.
Mr. Resnick. Thank you.
Senator Wicker. And to the citizens of your city.
Mr. Resnick. Thank you.
Senator Wicker. So proceed with your testimony. Thank you
for coming.
STATEMENT OF HON. GARY RESNICK, MAYOR,
CITY OF WILTON MANORS, FLORIDA
Mr. Resnick. Good morning. Thank you so much, Chairman.
First Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Schatz, Senator Nelson,
thank you so much for your service for Floridians. We really do
appreciate your wonderful service for our country.
I am Gary Resnick, Mayor of the great City of Wilton
Manors, Florida. I have the honor of serving on the Board of
the National League of Cities and chairing its Information,
Technology and Communications Committee.
I want to thank you for the opportunity to share some
perspective from city leaders across the country and for
calling attention to the importance of broadband infrastructure
deployment. I would also like to recognize my fellow city
officials who are here today. In fact, many of my friends from
Florida traveled here for NLC's Congressional Cities Conference
to emphasize the pressing need for infrastructure investment.
I can assure that you no one cares more about competitive
broadband access than local governments. We recognize that
everyone needs affordable, fast internet. Cities, however, are
not the reason that millions of Americans lack the necessary
infrastructure in their communities.
Today I would like to outline the challenges cities face in
ensuring that all Americans have access to affordable
broadband.
I would also like to offer policy solutions to tackle these
challenges. First, cities continue to face preemption by states
and the Federal Government. Many states do not allow cities to
build municipal networks or even to negotiate directly with
broadband providers to ensure that all neighborhoods are
served. Congress must preserve local authority and allows us to
do what we do best, solve problems for our residents.
Second, too many neighborhoods, particularly less dense and
lower income areas, have a lack of fiber investment and rural
communities are being left totally behind by new leaps in
technology. It is simply not sufficiently profitable for
private broadband providers to build in many cities and towns
leaving residents with inadequate options or none at all.
For too many households, a broadband subscription is simply
not affordable. The public libraries in my city are packed
after school with children looking for a place to get online to
do their homework. To address these gaps, Congress should
strengthen existing programs to expand broadband access and to
tackle Federal barriers to infrastructure deployment.
I would like to thank this committee for its work on the
MOBILE NOW Act and the Dig Once legislation which eliminates
some Federal barriers to deployment.
Finally, preemption of local authority over small cell
deployment is bad public policy. Our residents and businesses
are being asked to subsidize the private sector's deployment of
small cell infrastructure, supposedly for 5G. This technology
does not even exist. More importantly, it will not solve our
problems of rural access and digital inclusiveness.
Small cell technology is called small, not because it is
physically small, but because the signal covers a small area.
This makes small cells a good technology for improving signal
in profitable downtown areas, but terrible for covering
communities with few potential customers.
The Federal Government should work with both local
governments and the industry. An example that does not work is
the FCC's Broadband Deployment Advisory Committee. It continues
to be structurally dominated by industry. The BDAC recently
completed a draft model State code that lacked input from a
single local official.
Finally, the Federal Government must require responsible
industry practices. In the recent hurricane season experienced
by my community, and hundreds of others around the country, we
lost power and communications because so many of our utilities
are installed above ground. Restoring communications was a
challenge as cable, phone and wireless providers were slow to
assist with recovery efforts.
Companies enjoying access to the incredible valuable public
rights-of-way should be good citizens, particularly in times of
emergency.
On behalf of the City of Wilton Manors and National League
of Cities, I want to thank the Committee for inviting me to
participate in this hearing and cities are committed to
ensuring that Americans benefit from advances in next
generation broadband.
Thank you and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Resnick follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Gary Resnick, Mayor, Wilton Manors, Florida
Good morning, Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Schatz, and members
of the Subcommittee. I am Gary Resnick, Mayor of Wilton Manors,
Florida. I'm here to speak on behalf of the National League of Cities,
the Nation's oldest and largest organization representing local elected
officials in America's cities and towns of all sizes in your states and
across the country.
I currently serve as Chair of NLC's Information Technology and
Communications Committee and a member of NLC's Board of Directors. In
addition, I served on the Federal Communications Commission's (FCC)
Intergovernmental Advisory Committee for eight years, including as
Chair from 2014 through 2016. More locally, I have served on the Board
of Directors of the Florida League of Cities for 15 years and have
chaired various committees for the Florida League addressing
communications policies. My background as an attorney with the Florida
firm of GrayRobinson, representing businesses and local governments for
over 20 years in connection with communication issues, and my role as
Mayor, has afforded me a unique opportunity to work effectively with
public and private entities, and local citizens, focused on improving
communications services.
I want to thank Senators Thune and Nelson for inviting me here to
share some perspective from city leaders across the country. I'd also
like to thank the Subcommittee for calling attention to the importance
of broadband deployment. I particularly want to thank the members of
this subcommittee for their work to advance the dig once language
currently included in the FCC reauthorization bill. Common-sense
bipartisan policies like dig once will help us move toward responsible
broadband infrastructure deployment.
I also want to recognize my fellow local elected officials here
today. We are in Washington for NLC's Congressional City Conference,
and no doubt you will be hearing from my colleagues in the coming days
about how sorely broadband and other infrastructure investment is
needed in our communities. Affordable broadband for all Americans is
vital for 21st century education, health care, economy, recreation, and
public safety.
Cities Want and Need Broadband, But Obstacles Remain
City officials continue to work with our private, state, and
Federal partners to close the digital divide and provide the remaining
disconnected 10 percent of Americans, including 39 percent of Americans
living in rural areas, with access to the FCC's current benchmarked 25
Mbps/3 Mbps service, and more robust service, at affordable rates, that
will be demanded by our younger generation.
Cities, perhaps more than any other level of government, understand
the absolute necessity of reliable, affordable broadband for our
residents and businesses. Local officials are keenly aware of the
broadband gaps in their communities, driven by a lack of infrastructure
investment by the private sector and broadband options that are far too
costly for many residents and businesses. We are also aware of the
public need for broadband, as human resources, utilities, city clerks,
parks and recreation, and as we just saw only twenty miles from Wilton
Manors in Parkland, Florida, police and EMS first responders absolutely
need technology to do their jobs.
Despite the diligent efforts by communities across the country,
these gaps in service persist and are increasing. If our goal is to
ensure that all Americans have access to reliable, affordable broadband
services, states and the Federal Government are not adopting
appropriate actions consistent with that policy. I appreciate the
opportunity to share with you reasons why most Americans do not have
appropriate access to affordable broadband, from our local government
vantage point, and offer some solutions.
Preemption of Local Investment--In many states and in many
FCC orders, local governments are preempted from negotiating
with broadband providers or regulating broadband service. In
Florida, for example, my City is prohibited from entering into
an agreement with a broadband provider for use of our rights-
of-way. Cities and counties in Florida also have no authority
to regulate broadband service. The same holds true for state
agencies, including the Florida Public Service Commission, and
even the FCC. Without the ability to enter agreements or to
regulate broadband providers, the only reason for a broadband
provider to provide service is profit. Not all potential
consumers are going to provide sufficient incentive for private
investment in broadband infrastructure. It is up to government
to address this gap where the market fails.
Many local governments have heard their residents' complaints
and attempt to address the lack of affordable, reliable
broadband either on their own with public municipal broadband
networks, or by pursuing public-private partnerships. Mayors
are good at getting things done. However, once again, we are
preempted by industry-backed state laws that not only prohibit
local governments from offering broadband, but some that
require local governments that have already built taxpayer-
funded networks to shut them down. NLC's Center for City
Solutions and Applied Research found that in 2016, nearly half
of states preempted cities from creating--or even exploring--
municipal broadband networks.\1\ Yet, as we have seen with the
large number of successful ballot initiatives in cities in
Colorado, the demand remains enormous, and needs continue to go
unmet by the private sector. In Fort Collins, Colorado, the
city's residents recently passed a referendum granting the city
permission to build a municipal fiber network, despite industry
spending nearly a million dollars campaigning against it.\2\
Imagine how many broadband customers could have been served by
those dollars, if they had not been spent fighting a local
government attempt to fill a void where there was not even a
private competitor.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ National League of Cities. ``City Rights in an Era of
Preemption,'' February 22, 2017. Online at http://www.nlc.org/
preemption.
\2\ Nick Coltrain. ``$900K spent on failed fight against Fort
Collins broadband,'' December 8, 2017, The Coloradoan. Online at
https://www.coloradoan.com/story/news/2017/12/08/fort-collins-
broadband-vote-spending/934967001/.
Lack of Fiber Investment--Even in urban and suburban areas,
like my City, neighborhoods lack the necessary infrastructure
for true in-home or business broadband. As leaps in technology
move wealthy, highly profitable neighborhoods ahead, many areas
are being left further and further behind. Despite offering
fairly high density in eastern Broward County, Florida, and
having two of the largest wireline broadband providers
competing home by home, my City does not enjoy fiber to the
home, except in a few private developments that are served by
smaller, nimbler providers who negotiated contracts that they
feel can provide appropriate compensation for their investment.
If smaller companies can manage this, why not the large
incumbents? This is the same across Florida and the Nation.
When some potential competitors announce they will construct
fiber, we see the incumbents hold press conferences to announce
increased investment in fiber, but this is extremely rare,
particularly as competitors pause fiber builds and cities face
court challenges to prevent or delay access to utility poles.
As we recently saw in the legal challenge to the City of
Louisville's One Touch Make Ready ordinance, incumbents are
willing to invest significant resources to maintain barriers to
competition that could increase consumer choice.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ ``Judge throws out AT&T suit against city's `Google Fiber'
proposal.'' Louisville Courier-Journal, August 16, 2017. Available
https://www.courier-journal.com/story/news/politics/metro-government/
2017/08/16/judge-throws-out-at-t-suit-against-citys-google-fiber-
proposal/57386
3001/.
Our Forsaken Rural Communities--While residents and
businesses in more populated areas can generally obtain
broadband service, though often at a high price, our Nation's
policies and actions on broadband have not closed the digital
divide in rural areas. Small and rural communities are often
the last to receive improved technology, because of the high
cost of construction and relatively low return on investment.
There is no incentive or regulatory mandate for a private
company to build broadband to serve customers in areas that
will not generate sufficient profits. In some communities, it
may never be profitable for a private company to offer
broadband. That does not mean that we are absolved of our
responsibility to ensure that those residents have access to a
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
vital modern utility.
While my home in Wilton Manors is in a relatively urban area, I
also have experience with trying to obtain reliable broadband
in rural Georgia for a family home. There is one landline
communications provider serving the area, and it does not offer
broadband. The maximum data service is 5 mbps download for
about $60 per month. Many residents in the area rely solely on
wireless data. For vacationers, this may be fine. However, for
families with children or people running businesses, the lack
of broadband hurts educational and economic opportunities and
harms economic development in these areas.
Financial Issues--Even in neighborhoods with broadband
infrastructure, high rates can keep families from getting and
maintaining a subscription. Increased housing, medical, and
educational costs make it difficult for many households to
budget for broadband, despite its importance. The public
libraries in my area are packed after school with children
looking for a place to do their homework, since they do not
have broadband access at home. While teenagers live on their
smart phones, despite what the FCC may think, there are limits
to what you can do on such devices and wireless broadband is
similarly not affordable for many families.
While we are on the subject of money, the wireless broadband
industry has been successful in getting taxpayers to subsidize
the industry's access to public assets and rights-of-way. For
example, in Florida, cities and counties cannot charge service
providers for use of public rights-of-way. Taxpayers pay 100
percent of our costs to maintain the public rights-of-way.
Also, we cannot charge permit fees to process applications to
construct infrastructure in our rights-of-way. Taxpayers foot
the bill for our staff time to review these applications. This
is particularly a problem for smaller cities that do not have
in-house staff and pay out of pocket for outside contractors to
review permits. While Florida established a communications
services tax for communications providers using public rights-
of-way, a portion of which is distributed to cities and
counties, the providers do not pay that. Rather, the tax is
paid entirely by their subscribers as line items on bills.
Ironically, there is no tax on Internet service or prepaid
wireless service, so the fastest growing and most profitable
services that benefit the most from use of public rights-of-way
contribute nothing for rights-of-way maintenance.
Also, around the country, the industry has lobbied for State
legislation--and is pushing soon to be released FCC
regulations--giving them access to publicly owned light and
traffic poles at virtually no cost. In Florida and many other
states, the maximum rate Verizon or AT&T pays is $150/year/
pole. The typical cost to our taxpayers to purchase and to
install a new light pole is $15,000. The industry pays roughly
1 percent of the cost and once again, taxpayers subsidize this
industry's use of public resources. Market rates for access to
poles where local governments are not preempted from charging
market rates are closer to $2,000/pole/year. Given the
tremendous expenses cities and counties around the U.S. are
incurring, with aging infrastructure, soaring health care costs
for employees and first responders, and costly improvements for
public safety, this is not the time to be asking local
governments' residents to subsidize a for-profit communications
industry that is hardly in need of a handout.
Preemption of Local Authority Over Small Cells Is Not a
Silver Bullet--While wireless providers have touted the
potential of 5G, it is important to keep in mind the realities
of prospective 5G networks, and the limitations of the
technology. 5G deployment will not be a panacea for digital
inequity in the United States, particularly in rural areas. 5G,
which is still being standardized, necessitates the buildout of
hundreds of thousands of small cell sites because the portion
of the spectrum it uses cannot travel very far. Small cell
technology is called small not because it is physically small,
but because the signal covers a small area. This makes them
great tools for densifying downtown networks and event venues,
but terrible tools for covering sparsely populated, far-flung
communities. At a conference last week, the big 4 wireless
carriers announced their 5G market plans. No location in
Florida, Mississippi, or South Dakota is on anyone's plans for
2018 or 2019. They are looking at the most profitable markets,
like Dallas, Atlanta, Chicago and a few others. They will not
extend 5G to rural areas, nor to areas where there will not be
many customers because of the high rates. Even if we eliminate
all local permitting processes, and every environmental and
historic review, we cannot streamline our way out of the cost
to deploy broadband in rural areas.
Policy Recommendations for the Subcommittee
As the Subcommittee works to promote the advancement of next-
generation technology, I hope that you will also maintain focus on a
core goal of ensuring that all Americans have reliable access to
affordable, truly high-speed broadband. To further that goal, NLC has
proposed a number of actions the Federal Government can take to
increase broadband availability, affordability, and adoption.
Work in Partnership with Local Governments--Congress and the
FCC should more actively engage local governments in Federal
decision-making processes. Since I last testified, the FCC's
Broadband Deployment Advisory Committee (BDAC) has continued
its work to create policy recommendations on broadband
deployment without a sufficient balance of public and private
interests. Local government representatives are outnumbered on
that committee by industry by a ratio of ten to one, and the
BDAC's work on a model state code was completed behind closed
doors without input from a single local government committee
member.
One local official, Mayor Sam Liccardo of the City of San Jose,
was driven to resign from the committee by its overwhelmingly
biased process and predetermined outcomes.\4\ As Mayor Liccardo
had noted in the few public meetings of the BDAC, the
committee's recommendations have done nothing to address the
challenges of broadband access and affordability in low-income
and rural communities, despite the Commission's stated goal of
closing the digital divide. When the Mayor of America's 5th
largest city is not being allowed to provide meaningful input
on important national policy that will affect his and all
communities in the country, something is wrong with this
process. We do not believe the BDAC represents a good-faith
effort by the FCC to engage in meaningful dialog or create
consensus around the best ways to expand broadband access. If
state, tribal, and local officials are willing to volunteer
their time and travel to these meetings at the expense of their
communities, the FCC must take advantage of their
contributions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Mayor Sam Liccardo, Letter to Ajit Pai, January 25, 2018,
Available online at http://www.sanjoseca.gov/DocumentCenter/View/74464.
Preserve Local Authority--I urge this Committee to avoid
further preemption in legislation focused on broadband. While I
understand the drive to deploy 5G infrastructure efficiently
and cost-effectively, we must not subsidize one sector of the
broadband industry at taxpayers' expense. Imposing new
restrictions on cities such as unreasonable shot clocks,
restrictions on rent for public property to ``actual and direct
costs,'' and deemed granted remedies will only ultimately harm
cities' ability to manage responsibly the public rights-of-way
for all users. Cities continue to face mounting pressure to
provide an increasing number of critical services, yet states--
and now federal--governments are restricting our ability to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
raise additional revenue to carry out necessary activities.
The Federal Government should understand that even if it adopts
the industry's recommendations and preempts local governments
further, cities and counties will not sacrifice residents' and
businesses' health, safety and welfare by allowing
infrastructure where it does not belong. Years of litigation is
certainly not a good broadband policy. We best understand our
communities' needs and concerns. It is foolish to try to
develop national regulations for deploying broadband
infrastructure without local governments having a seat at the
table.
Strengthen Existing Federal Programs to Expand Broadband
Access--As this Committee and others work to invest in
broadband infrastructure, I encourage you to focus your efforts
on strengthening existing Federal programs that work. Programs
should be improved and updated, rather than eliminated or
replaced with new systems. Every Federal grant or loan comes
with a certain amount of application and compliance work for
eligible cities, and leveraging existing programs streamlines
the process by allowing communities to use the programs they
already know how to manage. For example, the Community
Development Block Grant and Choice Neighborhood Grant programs
are extremely flexible tools for communities that can be used
for broadband planning and deployment alongside affordable
housing and neighborhood improvement projects. These programs
should be protected and fully funded.
Congress should also support existing broadband grant and loan
programs that directly distribute Federal dollars to local
governments and community institutions that work on broadband
planning and deployment. The now-concluded Broadband Technology
Opportunities Program, the U.S. Department of Agriculture's
Rural Utilities Service, and the various components of the
Universal Service Fund programs are important tools for closing
the digital divide in unserved and underserved communities.
Congress should work to ensure that these programs are
sustainably funded and have the flexibility to reach as many
people as possible, while also ensuring that money is spent
responsibly and where it is most needed.
Tackle Federal Barriers to Infrastructure Deployment--I
thank the Subcommittee members for their efforts in directly
addressing Federal barriers to broadband infrastructure
deployment. In particular, passage of the bipartisan MOBILE NOW
Act and the dig once provision within the recently-passed FCC
reauthorization legislation will support deployment of
broadband infrastructure. By freeing up Federal spectrum,
streamlining access to Federal lands, building a database of
available infrastructure, and implementing common-sense dig
once policies for Federal construction, the Committee is
helping to eliminate obvious barriers to deployment in Federal
systems.
NLC also encourages Congress to strengthen the Federal
Government's role in data gathering and management to ensure
that private and public investments are made where they are
most needed. Congress must not only call for an update to the
National Broadband Map, but ensure that agencies are adequately
resourced to gather that data and that the data provided to the
public is accurate. Congress should also encourage the FCC to
take action on our 2016 recommendation from the
Intergovernmental Advisory Committee to create and maintain a
comprehensive database of facilities available for wireless
infrastructure collocation, particularly macro cell towers.
Collocation reduces the costs and physical imposition of
wireless infrastructure in our communities, and should be
encouraged as we deploy many more small cell structures. The
IAC recommended that it would be a good practice for local
governments and the FCC to maintain such information to
collocate wireless communications facilities more easily.
Allow Local Governments to Use Every Tool in the Toolbox--We
need every tool in the toolbox to ensure our residents can have
access to affordable, modern broadband and do not wind up
subsidizing the provider and infrastructure industries without
obtaining significant benefits in return. That means allowing
local governments to implement innovative policies like touch-
once, which minimizes the time and disruption necessary to add
new broadband providers to existing utility poles.
Cities also need the freedom to develop municipal broadband
networks, if appropriate, without outright or effective
preemption that limits competition. Smaller and rural
communities that have successfully developed partially or
wholly publicly owned networks have found this option to be a
critical lifeline in a market where private providers cannot
realize a high return on investment. As broadband has become a
necessary component for cities to retain talent and attract
business, denying them this option ensures that they will
continue to experience ``brain drain'' and fewer economic
opportunities. Furthermore, if the Administration and Congress
wish to encourage local investment in infrastructure, removing
state barriers to direct local investment in that
infrastructure is an important first step.
Require Responsible Industry Practices
Utility Responsibilities
Utilities such as electric and gas do not enjoy the kinds of
taxpayer subsidies demanded by the wireless industry. While
electric utilities enjoy access to public rights-of-way, that
access comes with costs and obligations. These include
permitting fees, payment for access to public property, and
obligations to provide certain levels of service to everyone--
even in unprofitable neighborhoods. Those utilities are also
obligated to partner closely with local governments during
emergencies, and to repair any damage in a timely fashion.
The City of Lincoln and other Nebraska local governments
supported reducing the city's fee per pole from its present
market rate fee of around $2,000 per pole per year to $95, if
wireless providers would agree to build out the State with 5G
infrastructure starting in rural areas. According to cities in
Nebraska, the industry refused, preferring to pay higher pole
access rates than providing service in areas that were not
profitable. The same response was received in Leon County,
Florida, where Tallahassee is located. When asked at a public
hearing if the industry would bring 5G to inner city areas
where families lack reliable broadband access, the industry, in
a surprisingly candid moment, said no, and the County
Commission was advised that Florida law preempted the County
from requiring such buildout.
Emergency Preparation and Recovery
We also learned a lot this year from the horrible storms that
struck Texas, Florida, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.
Regulated electric utilities worked with local governments to
better prepare for and to recover from the disasters. In
Florida, after Irma, we had daily contact with electric utility
representatives who were embedded in our emergency operations
centers. When cities were working to remove downed trees and
debris to re-install utility poles and lines, we worked 24/7
with electric utility contractors. However, since there are no
regulations, we did not hear from cable and phone companies,
and getting them to move their lines in streets or to restore
services in some communities was a challenge. Congress should
analyze what occurred in Houston and consider whether
undergrounding utilities should be a national priority. It
appeared that utilities and communications functioned in
Houston despite the tremendous flooding because they are
underground. In Florida, most communities have aerial
utilities, and lost power and communications during Hurricane
Irma.
Also, unlike electric utilities, such companies continue to
charge when they do not deliver service after a hurricane
unless the customer requests a credit, which residents found
absolutely appalling. Wireless providers were nowhere to be
found. With no power for towers, many communities reached out
for Cells on Wheels powered by generators, but the industry was
absent from recovery efforts. Perhaps FEMA should mandate such
items for recovery efforts.
Rights-of-way Repair
Virtually all local governments have also had their rights-of-
way and other utilities within the rights-of-way damaged by the
communications industry, from the smallest cable installers to
the largest incumbent providers. This is just the side effect
of performing construction in the rights-of-way. However,
without the proper authority to require repair and restoration,
our communities suffer from unchecked water, sewer and gas
leaks, and interference with access to transportation and
businesses. Local governments throughout the country require
security funds, insurance, and bonds to ensure that rights-of-
way and utilities are properly repaired after damage.
Nonetheless, it is difficult to get these companies to do the
right thing. When a contractor for Crown Castle, working on a
Saturday without a permit, damaged newly installed brick pavers
on Miracle Mile in Coral Gables, the city had to sue and refuse
to issue new permits to get the company to pay for repairs.
Conclusion
On behalf of NLC and the City of Wilton Manors, I want to thank the
Committee for inviting me to participate in this hearing today. I offer
the ongoing assistance of local governments as you examine ways to
increase broadband deployment responsibly across our Nation. I urge you
to view local governments as strong partners in ensuring that broadband
services are available to all Americans.
Thank you, and I look forward to any questions you might have.
Senator Wicker. Thank you, Mr. Mayor.
Mr. Berry.
STATEMENT OF STEVEN K. BERRY, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, COMPETITIVE CARRIERS ASSOCIATION
Mr. Berry. Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Schatz and
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify on ways to preserve and expand mobile broadband in
rural America. I'm here on behalf of CCA representing nearly a
hundred wireless carriers, as well as the companies that make
up the wireless ecosystem to say thank you, thank you to you
and your colleagues for making broadband services in rural
America a priority.
Like this Committee, every CCA member has an interest in
closing the digital divide for their communities, families and
businesses. On this day 34 years ago the very first handheld
cell phone was sold for just under $4,000. Yes, wireless has
come a long way since the brick, and we depend on mobile
broadband coverage for every aspect of life, from jobs to
public health and safety.
Tech companies recently announced plans to deploy 4G mobile
broadband on the Moon. Yet, too many in rural America are
unserved or underserved.
In 2016 Americans consumed 1.8 billion gigabytes of data
per month using wireless connections. This is more than 7,000
times the total of all information stored in the Library of
Congress each month.
Wireless usage will grow another fivefold over the next 5
years. To keep up with this demand and ensure that rural areas
are not left behind, Congress should act on three key issues.
One, provide sufficient and predictable funding for high cost
areas. Two, base decisions on reliable data. And, three,
streamline policies to site equipment and access new spectrum.
Rural America must have mobile broadband as a centerpiece.
The 2009 stimulus package failed to fund mobility. We must
include specific funding to support, preserve and expand
deployment where private capital alone is not enough to make
the business case for broadband service.
As Congress appropriates funds for infrastructure,
significant amounts should be made available for mobile
broadband deployment. Funding sources for broadband should
ensure this committee, with its vast experience, maintains
jurisdiction and oversight over how the funding will be
efficiently and effectively spent. Additional broadband funding
is a must, but it does not replace the long-term need for
ongoing universal service funds.
The FCC's implementation of the USF must meet Congressional
mandates for reasonably comparable services in urban and rural
areas and provide sufficient and predictable support. I thank
Senators Hassan and Capito for addressing this issue in their
legislation. The FCC should define what is reasonably
comparable service and design USF, as Wayne Gretzky once said,
to skate where the puck is going, not where the puck has been.
Second, we cannot afford to distribute funding based on a
ready, fire, aim approach. You cannot manage what you cannot
measure. Current data on mobile broadband coverage does not
reflect the reality on the ground. You, as you travel your
states, you know the job is not done.
I agree with concerns raised by members of this Committee
last week that a recent FCC eligibility map misrepresents the
existence of wireless service. It is so flawed that a challenge
process may not be sufficient to correct it. In this regard I
thank the Senate for passing the Rural Wireless Access Act,
acknowledging the critical need for accurate, reliable data.
Whether appropriated resources or ongoing support for the
Mobility Fund II, funding distributions must be made on
informed decisions.
Third, deployment and spectrum. Today's carriers face a
maze of regulatory red tape to build and upgrade both towers
and smaller cells with fees and delays at each step, and I
thank the Committee for its steadfast focus and strongly
support legislation introduced to streamline the siting process
including the Mobile Now, the SPEED Act, Dig Once and the Rural
Deployment Act. We also encourage the FCC to act swiftly to
vote to update procedures for modern deployments. Remember,
small cells are not just for big cities.
Just last week I was with FCC Commissioner Carr in the
Shenandoah Valley examining how smaller cells and deployments
are actually bringing new, latest services to rural America.
All carriers need access to high-, mid-, and low-band
spectrum, the invisible infrastructure, if you will. The FCC
should move quickly to auction spectrum currently available for
mobile services, including high band spectrum. For low band
access we must repack the 600 megahertz spectrum within the
approved 39 month timeline, and if additional funds are needed,
then they should be made available immediately.
And, finally, access to broadband is the opportunity
equalizer in the modern mobile economy. Policies established by
Congress and implemented by the FCC will determine whether
rural Americans are part of the new economy or will they be
left behind in the pursuant of a 5G IoT world.
Thank you and I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Berry follows:]
Prepared Statement of Steven K. Berry, President and Chief Executive
Officer, Competitive Carriers Association
Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Schatz, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify about closing
the digital divide and the policies necessary to provide ubiquitous
mobile broadband throughout the United States.
I am testifying on behalf of Competitive Carriers Association
(``CCA''), the Nation's leading association of competitive wireless
providers. CCA is made up of nearly 100 carrier members ranging from
small, rural providers serving fewer than 5,000 customers to regional
and national providers serving millions of customers, as well as
vendors and suppliers that provide products and services throughout the
mobile communications ecosystem.
I commend the Subcommittee for its continued focus on closing the
digital divide. Building infrastructure for the next generation of
services and technologies includes preserving, upgrading, and expanding
existing mobile broadband services. CCA is pleased that mobile
broadband deployment in rural America is a top priority for Congress,
the Federal Communications Commission (``FCC''), and the
Administration.
Consumer demand for mobile broadband services is undeniable. In
2016, American consumers used 1.8 exabytes of data on their
smartphones, tablets, and other devices connected to wireless networks
each month. That amounts to 1.8 billion gigabytes, or by way of
comparison, more than 7,000 times the total of all information stored
in the Library of Congress. This insatiable use demand for data will
grow exponentially, with projections of another five times growth over
the next five years.
Ever-growing mobile data use reflects the limitless potential for
innovations touching every industry and aspect of life in today's
mobile economy. For example, mobile networks and next generation
services are transforming healthcare through remote monitoring and new
health treatments, including in rural areas where patients must
otherwise drive hundreds of miles to receive care. Precision
agriculture technologies allow farmers to become agricultural
engineers, reducing economic resources and increasing productivity on
our Nation's farmlands and ranchlands. Mobile broadband supports
distance learning and creates educational opportunities for students
unimaginable only a few years ago. All of these applications are
powered by mobile broadband today. As we move towards 5G technologies,
applications once considered science fiction will become reality, with
networks supporting drones, autonomous vehicles, and artificial
intelligence continuing to change our lives.
However, reliance on mobile broadband networks only magnifies the
problems associated with being on the wrong side of the digital divide.
Indeed, the President's Interagency Task Force on Agriculture and Rural
Prosperity recently presented a report focused on e-connectivity for
rural America, finding that access to broadband ``is not simply an
amenity--it has become essential.'' The Administration has already
taken steps to support expanding broadband, including the Presidential
Executive Order on Streamlining and Expediting Requests to Locate
Broadband Facilities in Rural America, finding that ``Americans need
access to reliable, affordable broadband Internet service to succeed in
today's information-driven, global economy.'' But more needs to be
done.
CCA is proud of our members' work to provide mobile broadband
services in rural and remote areas. While they have invested millions
of dollars into their communities, Congress, the Administration, and
the FCC must work together to enact policies that connect the
unconnected. Technology companies recently announced plans to deploy 4G
LTE mobile broadband service on the moon--Americans living in rural
America deserve no less. To close the digital divide and advance
deployment in unserved and underserved communities, competitive
carriers need sufficient and predictable sources of funding,
streamlined deployment processes, and access to spectrum and equipment.
Legislative Proposals to Rebuild America's Infrastructure Must Include
Funding for Mobile Broadband
Bipartisan infrastructure discussions from the campaign trail
through the recent Administration proposal to Congress focus on the
need for broadband deployment in rural America. As proposals move from
ideas to concrete legislative language, it's clear broadband is the
centerpiece driving economic growth and jobs in rural America. CCA
agrees with this Committee and many other members of Congress that any
infrastructure package should include dedicated funding for rural
broadband.
The Bipartisan Budget Act, enacted last month, included $20 billion
over the next two fiscal years for rural infrastructure. As Congress
determines how to appropriate these funds, it should dedicate resources
specifically for mobile broadband deployment. The Administration also
has proposed allocating an additional $50 billion for rural
infrastructure in its recent proposal. While the proposal provides
funds as block grants to governors and even permits 100 percent of
funding to be used for broadband projects--it does not require that any
funds exclusively support broadband deployment. The goal of building
infrastructure for the next generation cannot be met without
specifically building broadband infrastructure.
Funding also should be available on a technologically-neutral
basis. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (``ARRA'')
included a scoring metric for certain applications for support through
the Rural Utilities Service's (``RUS'') Broadband Opportunities Program
that placed the heavy thumb of the government on the scale to
disadvantage wireless carriers. CCA encourages use of grants instead of
loans due to the costly, unnecessary bureaucratic red tape that
accompanies current RUS loans; however, if loans are provided, they
should not be comingled with Universal Service Fund (``USF'')
resources.
Further, to ensure that funding is well spent, it is important that
this Committee maintain jurisdiction over broadband funding programs.
With oversight by this Committee, Congress should make support
available through the Department of Commerce National
Telecommunications and Information Administration (``NTIA'') or through
the FCC. If funding does flow through the FCC, any one-time investments
should not jeopardize the critical and ongoing role of USF or place USF
under the appropriations process. Commerce Committee oversight of rural
broadband support is extremely important, leveraging Commerce Committee
expertise and providing a safeguard against waste.
All Programs to Disburse Funding for Broadband in High Cost Areas Must
Be Based on Reliable Data
You cannot manage what you cannot measure. Moving forward, it is
critical to accurately measure the extent of unserved and underserved
areas across the United States to implement practical, useful solutions
to expand mobile broadband service to all consumers. As an example, the
National Broadband Map was funded through ARRA. While important and
well-intentioned, NTIA delivered the map after decisions for deployment
funding awards had been made. We cannot afford to distribute funds in
the future on a ready, fire, aim basis. Accurate data is an absolute
for precisely targeting funds for future broadband buildout.
As another example, the FCC recently released mobile broadband data
depicting areas initially deemed eligible for the Mobility Fund Phase
II (``MF II'') mechanism of the USF High Cost Fund. While we understand
that the map released does not determine final eligible areas, the
technological parameters selected by the FCC were not sufficient to
produce a map that would reflect the experience you have as you travel
throughout your states. CCA has long supported an efficient challenge
process that is robust and targeted without overly burdening small
providers. Unfortunately, the initial map released by the FCC falls
short. CCA cautions against using this data as the basis for MF II or
any other funding program, including forthcoming support for broadband
infrastructure. We share concerns raised by Senators Wicker, Hassan,
Moran, King, Gardner, Klobuchar, Roberts, Blunt, Peters, and Tillis
last week that the map ``misrepresents the existence of 4G LTE service
in many areas'' and accordingly a challenge process may not be robust
enough to correct it.
At the same time, CCA appreciates actions by the FCC and other
Federal agencies to correct the digital divide. In testimony last week,
NTIA Administrator Redl noted the need to improve broadband mapping
data, including that data must be more accurate, granular, and
verified. The President's budget request included $50 million to update
the National Broadband Map, and as Administrator Redl highlighted the
NTIA can also leverage relationships with state and local governments
to ensure accuracy. If other agencies lack the resources to establish
parameters for data collection to accurately reflect your constituents'
experience, NTIA should revisit the issue prior final to funding
decisions.
CCA likewise commends the Senate for unanimously passing S. 1621,
the Rural Wireless Access Act, and thanks Senators Wicker and Manchin
for steadfastly championing this issue. We urge the House of
Representatives to swiftly act to send this important legislation to
the President for enactment so that the information used as a basis for
USF decisions, or decisions for other similar programs including new
infrastructure funding, are grounded in standardized, reliable data
that reflects constituents' expectations.
The Universal Service Fund Must Meet Congress's Mandate
Regardless of any new support for mobile broadband through
infrastructure efforts, ongoing support through USF remains critical.
Congress created the USF high-cost program to provide Americans in
rural areas with a ``reasonably comparable'' service as those in urban
areas through support that is sufficient and predictable. In
implementing this mandate, however, the FCC does not currently define
``reasonably comparable'' service. CCA supports S. 2418, the Rural
Reasonable and Comparable Wireless Access Act of 2018 to establish this
standard, and thanks Senators Hassan and Capito for introducing this
important bill. If enacted, the FCC must promulgate regulations to
establish this standard, which provides an important step to clarify
what services must be available to rural Americans.
Without a set standard, it is not clear that resources allocated by
the FCC are sufficient. It is widely understood that the $4.53 billion
budgeted for MF II will not ubiquitously expand mobile broadband
networks. Reasonable and comparable standards can inform what
parameters should be set for future data collections to revisit the
goal of reliable mapping data.
With the focus on securing immediate funds for broadband
infrastructure through appropriated resources, Congress also should
consider directing the FCC to maintain current USF support for mobile
broadband services and conduct the MF II auction after new
infrastructure funds are disbursed. This practical action would allow
the FCC to more accurately assess the ongoing needs to preserve and
expand service after one-time infusions of support, and direct limited
resources to areas in need.
Streamlined Infrastructure Siting Policies Increase Certainty and
Reduce Costs to Deploy Mobile Broadband
While consumers have come to rely on wireless connectivity, the
network itself depends on physical infrastructure, including towers,
small cells, wires, and fiber, to connect. Competitive carriers must
timely and efficiently deploy this infrastructure. Currently, however,
providers must navigate a regulatory maze to gain approval to serve
their communities, facing significant application review delays and
burdensome, unforeseen fees while working through the federal, state,
and local siting processes. To visualize the multitude of regulatory
steps it takes to site mobile wireless infrastructure at the local,
state, and Federal levels, with potential costs and delays at each
step, please see the chart attached to this testimony.
Adding another barrier to infrastructure deployment, fees and
administrative burdens attached to historic and environmental review
processes have escalated sharply in recent years, and these costs and
permitting delays will continue to rise as CCA members deploy to meet
consumers' increasing data demands. Without Congressional and FCC
intervention, deployment fees will become an increasingly exorbitant
cost barrier to ubiquitous broadband deployment. For example, one CCA
member operating in portions of Kansas, Colorado, and Nebraska paid
over $107,000 to 36 Tribes for the deployment of just seven towers, in
a seven-month period. This is an average of over $15,000 per tower,
solely for Tribal review fees. One CCA associate member was assessed
nearly $3 million in Tribal fees to deploy just under 3,000 nodes
across the United States in a one-year period, from 2017-2018. It is
not sustainable for carriers to continue expending these enormous
funds, especially considering future networks will require denser
deployment scenarios.
Fortunately, help is on the horizon. CCA applauds Congress's focus
on the issue, and recent steps taken by the Administration and FCC to
reduce regulatory burdens, increase certainty, and eliminate needless
costs. The bipartisan legislation stemming from this Subcommittee alone
demonstrates your commitment to closing the digital divide and
connecting all Americans. S. 19, The Making Opportunities for Broadband
Investment and Limiting Excessive and Needless Obstacles to Wireless
Act or MOBILE NOW, led by Committee Chairman Thune and Ranking Member
Nelson, makes common-sense reforms to Federal Government siting
process, while freeing up valuable spectrum resources for commercial
mobile use. S. 1988, the Streamlining Permitting to Enable Efficient
Deployment of Broadband Infrastructure Act of 2017 or SPEED Act,
spearheaded by Subcommittee Chairman Wicker and Senator Cortez Masto
will make it easier to deploy small cells by exempting them from
repetitive installation reviews. S. 2381, the Streamlining and
Investing in Broadband Infrastructure Act introduced by Senators
Klobuchar, Daines, Gardner, and Gillibrand would ensure broadband
conduits be included in highway projects, a critical step in the rural
buildout process. And S. 1363, The Rural Broadband Deployment
Streamlining Act offered by Senators Heller and Manchin would establish
best practices at the Department of Interior and Forestry Service by
enforcing accountability in the broadband application process with
uniform applications, streamlined processes, direct points of contact
with the agencies, and a deemed granted provision.
Further, later this month the FCC plans to vote on a Second Report
and Order (``Order'') that will streamline infrastructure siting
policies for mobile broadband. As proposed, this Order will exclude
small wireless facilities from the environmental and historic review
procedures that were designed for large macrocell deployments, update
the Section 106 Tribal consultation process, and adopt a shot clock for
the FCC's own processing of Environmental Assessments. Under current
siting policies, the same regulations apply to tall towers and macro
deployments as to small cells and distributed antenna systems. Building
the networks of the future cannot be completed with yesterday's rules
and regulations. Updating these policies for small wireless facilities
meets a key proposal from the Administration's ``Legislative Outline
for Rebuilding Infrastructure in America,'' which finds that small
cells are materially different than their predecessors, regarding both
size, and visual or actual impact on historic or environmental
property. CCA urges Congress to support these efforts and stands ready
to help ensure these policies are enacted.
To be clear, small cells are not only deployed in urban areas. In
recent conversations with CCA members serving the most rural portions
of our country, CCA has heard stories of using small cells to enhance
coverage in county seats, schools and meeting centers, and even a
popular boat ramp in a recreation area. Last week, I joined CCA member
Shentel and FCC Commissioner Brendan Carr in rural Shenandoah Valley,
Virginia, to discuss the importance of small cell deployment to
Shentel's network and to the communities it serves. Shentel's customers
use an average of 10 gigabytes of data per month and in some cases,
wireless devices are their only connection to broadband. Shentel plans
to build out 20 small cells on their network this year in an effort to
meet growing consumer data demands. Eliminating costly Federal reviews
could provide Shentel enough savings to deploy an additional 13 sites,
strengthening and expanding their network service area.
Shentel is not alone. Just two weeks ago, twenty-three other CEOs
and senior executives from non-nationwide CCA member companies joined
together to urge the FCC to streamline infrastructure policies by
providing regulatory certainty around siting processes, timelines, and
fees to deploy and upgrade mobile broadband services. These companies
serve rural populations represented by this Committee: from the upper
Midwest, across Appalachia, throughout the Gulf Coast, over the Great
Plains, into the desert Southwest and up to Alaska--each committed to
bridging the digital divide in their communities. A copy of that letter
is attached.
It is important to underscore that infrastructure reform need not
pit wireless carriers against the municipalities and states they serve.
Instead, streamlined processes will save resources for both carriers
and government agencies by eliminating redundant and unnecessary
reviews and spurring investment in local communities. Enhancing access
to rights-of-way, reducing and eliminating fees, and streamlining
siting processes will allow rural communities to connect exciting and
innovative new technologies, including precision agriculture,
telehealth, and the Internet of Things. Your constituents deserve
nothing less, and CCA commends this Committee's unwavering leadership
to address these issues.
Next Generation Services Depend on Increased Access to Spectrum
Beyond funding and streamlined deployment policies, the next
generation of mobile broadband services depends on a myriad of spectrum
resources. Spectrum is the invisible infrastructure connecting users to
towers and base stations. It also is a finite resource, and only
available for use through a license or lease by the FCC. As demand for
mobile service explodes, all carriers must have access to low-, mid-,
and high-band spectrum to deploy next-generation mobile broadband and,
eventually, 5G networks. Competitive carriers, in particular, must
deploy spectrum that is interoperable within bands to support an
equipment ecosystem driven by the scaled economies of the largest
carriers. It is equally important that spectrum is auctioned in
sufficiently small geographic license sizes that balance local access
to spectrum and the laws of physics with regard to power levels and
interference. CCA urges Congress to consider the following policies to
ensure that taxpayer-owned spectrum is properly managed.
Auction Deposits. Absent Congressional action to allow depositing
auction upfront payments in the U.S. Treasury, FCC Chairman Pai has
indicated that the FCC will be hamstrung from auctioning spectrum in
the near-term. Auctions are particularly important for competitive
carriers that may not have the size, resources, or access to purchase
spectrum licenses on the secondary market. While other nations are
moving forward with spectrum auctions, particularly to support 5G
services, it is critical that the United States does not fall behind.
Congress must authorize this change in the auction process and
encourage the FCC to auction all bands suitable for mobile broadband
use as soon as possible, and the FCC should move forward with a
proceeding to begin the auction process.
600 MHz. The first-of-its-kind 600 MHz spectrum auction closed on
March 30, 2017, with total bids nearing $20 billion and most of the
winning bids coming from CCA members. CCA commends this Committee for
the leadership in authorizing the auction and establishing a new model
for spectrum reallocation now proven in the market. Now that the
auction has closed, both the wireless and broadcast industries are in
the midst of a Congressionally-based 39-month ``repack'' process to
clear broadcasters out of the 600 MHz band as safely and efficiently as
possible to allow winning bidders to put this spectrum to use to serve
consumers and monetize their investment. The propagation
characteristics of the 600 MHz band make this spectrum particularly
important for serving rural America. For this reason, completing the
transition within the timeline or sooner is critical for economic
stimulation and job opportunities across rural areas, as well as
setting important precedent for future auctions. Any delay would be
detrimental to competition, the public interest, and the economy. CCA
commends recent action by the House of Representatives, which passed
legislation creating a reserve fund to keep the process on time in the
event the allocated resources to repack broadcasters proves inadequate,
and encourages the Senate to swiftly consider similar legislation. It
is important for Congress to make funds readily available to ensure
that delays do not prevent winning bidders from putting this spectrum
into operation as quickly as possible.
mmW. As carriers seek to densify their networks, and as standards
are developed for tomorrow's 5G technologies, unique spectrum bands
that are newly allocated for mobile broadband use are in high demand.
To ensure that competitive carriers are not left behind, policymakers
must rapidly auction several high frequency millimeter-wave (``mmW'')
bands, including the 24 GHz, 28 GHz, 37 GHz, 39 GHz, and 47 GHz bands.
CCA commends Senators Gardner and Hassan for introducing S. 1682, the
Advancing Innovation and Reinvigorating Widespread Access to Viable
Electromagnetic Spectrum Act or the AIRWAVES Act. This bipartisan
legislation sets a timeline for future auctions to keep the FCC focused
and provide certainty to carriers with regard to when spectrum will
come up for auction. We support this legislation and urge inclusion of
all bands ready for mobile broadband use to ensure sufficient spectrum
is available for all carriers to have a meaningful opportunity to bid
and win licenses. The nation's two largest carriers have a foothold in
several of these bands through secondary market transactions,
necessitating an auction as soon as practicable.
Demand for mobile broadband shows no signs of slowing down.
Policymakers must remain focused on promoting the efficient use of
spectrum and reallocating frequencies to ensure this finite resource is
available for carriers of all sizes to access for mobile broadband use.
All Carriers Require Access to Equipment
Finally, carriers cannot provide next generation mobile broadband
service without access to next generation equipment and devices. Even
as iconic devices may seem ubiquitous, many smaller carriers serving
rural America continue to struggle to get access to the latest devices
and are often 12 to 24 months delayed as compared to the largest
providers. This harms competition, and results in technology denial for
certain rural Americans. As the industry shifts to next generation
technologies and 5G, competitive carriers need access to equipment that
is available, affordable, and secure.
As equally frustrating for consumers as it is for competitive
carriers, lack of access to devices and other equipment also can make
it harder or nearly impossible to comply with regulatory mandates that
are premised on the latest technology, including Next Generation 9-1-1
services and Wireless Emergency Alerts, two priorities for this
Committee. Even where rural and regional carriers have access to
devices or network equipment, they may face increased costs based on
reduced economies and purchase order size. While competitive carriers
have taken steps to help themselves through business relationships,
including CCA's Device Hub, policymakers should ensure that rural areas
are not left behind in the mobile world because of inaccessible
equipment.
______
Today's hearing on investing in next generation broadband provides
a timely examination of important issues as Congress considers next
steps for infrastructure policies and the FCC seeks to solve the
persistent digital divide. CCA looks forward to continued collaboration
with Congress, the Administration, and the FCC to ensure that rural
America is not left behind without the critical mobile broadband
networks of today and the eventual tectonic shift to 5G services in the
future.
Thank you for your attention to these issues and for holding this
important hearing. I welcome any questions you may have.
Attachment
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
cc (via email): Rachael Bender
Jay Schwarz
Claude Aiken
Louis Peraertz
Erin McGrath
Amy Bender
Will Adams
Travis Litman
Umair Javed
Senator Wicker. Thank you very much, Mr. Berry.
Mr. DeBroux, have I pronounced your name correctly?
Mr. DeBroux. Yes, that is correct. Thank you.
Senator Wicker. Well, thank you for joining us and you are
recognized.
STATEMENT OF ROBERT DeBROUX, DIRECTOR,
FEDERAL AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC POLICY,
TDS TELECOMMUNICATIONS, LLC
Mr. DeBroux. Thank you.
Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Schatz, and members of the
Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
Subcommittee. I am Robert DeBroux, Director of Federal Affairs
and Public Policy for TDS Telecom.
Thank you for the opportunity to share with you some
insights into how Congress can help close the digital divide in
rural America. I am not only testifying today on behalf of TDS,
but also as a member of ITTA, a Washington, D.C. industry
association that includes TDS as a member.
TDS owns 108 separate telephone companies that provide
broadband, voice and video services. We serve a mix of rural
and urban areas, such as the bottom of the Grand Canyon and
islands off the coast of Maine and Michigan, as well as the
suburbs of larger cities such as Madison, Wisconsin and
Nashville, Tennessee. We also serve communities such as Big
Creek, Calhoun City and Sandhill in Mississippi.
TDS has a long history of building and maintaining robust
voice and data networks in its service areas. Recently, the
administration released the framework for its infrastructure
initiative, which includes a broadband component.
Unfortunately, the framework does not include dedicated funding
for broadband projects in unserved and underserved parts of the
country.
The administration's infrastructure plan appears to set
forth a process whereby rural broadband projects will compete
against other infrastructure projects, for example, roads,
sewers and airports, for 40 billion dollars in state-
administered block grants. TDS and ITTA do not think that this
will be the most efficient and effective way to provide the
dollars needed to close the digital divide and move the Nation
closer to rural and urban comparability.
Therefore, Congress should specifically designate funds for
broadband deployment and ensure the money it designates follows
the course that other successful programs to date have
followed. Those programs, which include, most importantly, the
FCC-administered Universal Service Fund High-Cost program, have
a proven track record of success in turning funds earmarked for
broadband into broadband networks.
The FCC through the USF can maximize the impact of any
infrastructure funding while minimizing waste. The FCC has
programs in place that make sure that there are specific
tangible obligations associated with funding and that funding
goes to the appropriate areas. For example, areas that are not
already served by another broadband provider. One such program
created by the FCC in December 2016 is the Alternative Connect
America Cost Model program. This program allows rate of return
carriers the option to receive USF support to serve high cost
rural areas based on a forward-looking cost model in return for
their agreement to deploy and maintain broadband to a specified
number of households with service standards as defined and
enforced by the FCC.
TDS, along with 206 other rural rate of return carriers in
43 states opted into the 10 years ACAM program. In this program
TDS will receive over 75 million dollars annually to provide
broadband to a 160,000 households in 25 states.
TDS has already begun the process of deploying fiber deep
into its network with this money thus improving consumer
broadband in various locations including, for example, in
Wisconsin and southeast Mississippi. Other ITTA members,
including Ritter Communications based in rural Arkansas, have
also been able to use ACAM funding to deploy fiber closer to
customers. In Nebraska, Great Plains Communications has used
ACAM dollars to increase the broadband capacity to schools and
libraries in Ponca, Nebraska.
There are hundreds of additional examples of ACAM funding
being used to bring broadband to consumers living in rural
America. Congress can leverage the ACAM program, as well as the
legacy funding mechanisms in the High-Cost program, to increase
broadband deployment to rural America by instructing the FCC to
increase the High-Cost Fund budget and providing the funding
necessary for that increase.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today and I look
toward to answering any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Robert DeBroux follows:]
Prepared Statement of Robert DeBroux, Director, Federal Affairs and
Public Policy, TDS Telecommunications, LLC
Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Schatz, and Members of the Senate
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation's Subcommittee, I am
Robert DeBroux, Director of Federal Affairs and Public Policy for TDS
Telecom (``TDS''). Thank you for the opportunity to share with you some
insights into how Congress can help close the digital divide in rural
America. I am not only testifying today on behalf of TDS but also as a
member of ITTA, a Washington, D.C. industry association that includes
TDS as a member. I recently also have had the pleasure of serving on
the Federal Communication Commission's (``FCC's'') Broadband Deployment
Advisory Committee (``BDAC'') as the chair of its ``Removing State and
Local Regulatory Barriers'' work group. This workgroup was tasked with
identifying barriers to broadband deployment at the state and local
level and providing policy recommendations to help eliminate those
barriers. Its report, as voted on and approved by the BDAC, is
available on the FCC's website.\1\ While I am not here today to speak
on behalf of the BDAC, you may find the report useful. Serving on the
BDAC provided me with valuable insight into the challenges and barriers
of providing broadband in many localities across the country.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.fcc.gov/sites/default/files/bdac-
regulatorybarriers-report-012018.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
TDS owns 108 separate telephone companies that provide broadband,
voice, and video services. We serve a mix of rural and urban areas such
as the bottom of the Grand Canyon and islands off the coast of Maine
and Michigan, as well the suburbs of larger cities such as Madison,
Wisconsin and Nashville, Tennessee. TDS has a long history of building
and maintaining robust voice and data networks in its service areas.
Closing the digital divide has widespread bipartisan support in
Washington. Gone are the days of the ``urban vs. rural'' debate in
telecommunications policy. Today, we can all agree consumers living in
rural America deserve exactly the same digital opportunities as those
citizens living in urban areas. How we close the digital divide and
what steps Congress can take in the short and long-term deserve
policymakers' full attention and commitment.
Infrastructure Proposal
Recently, the Administration released the framework for its
infrastructure initiative, which includes a broadband component.
Unfortunately, the framework does not include dedicated funding for
broadband projects in unserved and underserved parts of our country.
TDS and ITTA have been clear that if the Administration wants to make
closing the digital divide a top priority, dedicated funding for
broadband projects must be a key component of the overall plan.
The Administration's infrastructure plan appears to set forth a
process whereby rural broadband projects will compete against other
infrastructure projects (e.g., roads, sewers, airports) for $40 billion
in state-administered ``block grants.'' TDS and ITTA do not think that
this will be the most efficient and effective way to provide the
dollars needed to close the digital divide and move the Nation closer
to rural and urban comparability.
Therefore, Congress should specifically designate funds for
broadband deployment and ensure the money it designates follows the
course that other successful programs to date have followed. Those
programs, which include, most importantly, the FCC-administered
Universal Service Fund High-Cost program, have a proven track record of
success in turning funds earmarked for broadband into broadband
networks.
Ensuring the Correct Federal Agency is Tasked with Administering a
Broadband Infrastructure Program
TDS, along with our national association ITTA, supports directing
any funding for broadband infrastructure deployment to the FCC to be
administered through its Universal Service Fund (``USF''). As noted by
FCC Chairman Pai in March 2017,\2\ the FCC, through the USF, can
maximize the impact of any infrastructure funding while minimizing
waste. The FCC has programs in place that make sure that there are
specific, tangible obligations associated with funding and that funding
goes to the appropriate areas, for example, areas that are not already
served by another broadband provider.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DOC-343903A1.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leveraging Existing Programs--FCC High Cost Program
One such program, created by the FCC in December 2016, is the
Alternative Connect America Cost Model (``A-CAM'') program.\3\ This
program allowed rate-of-return carriers the option to receive USF
support to serve high-cost rural areas based on a forward-looking cost
model in return for their agreement to deploy and maintain broadband to
a specified number of locations with service standards as defined and
enforced by the FCC. TDS, along with 206 other rural rate-of-return
carriers in 43 states, opted into the ten-year A-CAM program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See Connect America Fund, Report and Order and Further Notice
of Proposed Rulemaking, 31 FCC Rcd 13775 (2016) (Order and/or FNPRM).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In this program, TDS will receive over $75M annually to provide
broadband to 160,000 households in 25 states. TDS has already begun the
process of deploying fiber deeper into its network with this money,
thus improving consumer broadband speeds in various locations,
including, for example, in Wisconsin and SE Mississippi. This work is
expected to stabilize the existing broadband delivery platform even in
times of peak demand. Other ITTA members, including Ritter
Communications based in rural Arkansas, have also already been able to
use A-CAM funds to deploy fiber closer to customers.\4\ In Nebraska,
Great Plains Communications has used A-CAM dollars to increase the
broadband capacity to schools and libraries in Ponca, Nebraska. There
are hundreds of additional examples of A-CAM funding being used to
bring broadband to consumers living in rural America.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ In the first year of the A-CAM program Ritter has deployed
fiber in the economically challenged Mississippi Delta.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress can leverage the A-CAM program as well as the legacy
funding mechanisms in the High-Cost program to increase broadband
deployment to rural America by instructing the FCC to increase the
High-Cost Fund budget and by providing the funding necessary for that
increase.
RUS
To be sure, TDS and many other rural broadband providers have
enjoyed a good working relationship with RUS.\5\ While our preference
is that any broadband infrastructure money be directed to the FCC for
distribution through the existing USF High-Cost program, we recognize
that the RUS has the expertise and experience to be able to distribute
funds wisely. If Congress decides that RUS should play a role in
distributing infrastructure funding, Congress should instruct that
entities applying for funding meet the eligibility requirements and
service standards applicable to the FCC's USF Program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Under the RUS Broadband Initiative Program (``BIP''), TDS was
awarded 44 grants totaling over $105M with specific buildout
obligations. TDS exceeded those obligations, ultimately deploying
broadband to 27,125 unserved households in 20 states at a cost of
almost $136M.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
State Grant Programs
The FCC's USF programs are successful because they are well defined
in terms of the dollars to be spent, the obligations which are required
to be met with those dollars, and the consequences for not meeting
those obligations. TDS and ITTA are skeptical of programs that simply
send money to the states and then rely exclusively on the states to
determine how the money should be spent. While many states may be
committed to improving their broadband networks, there are many
competing interests for dollars that arrive in a state without
specifics as to where the dollars must be spent. If such a grant
program is ultimately used for distributing infrastructure funding,
Congress should set forth specific parameters to ensure that the funds
go to areas that are most in need.
TDS has participated in 5 such state grant programs and has been
awarded over $28M to provide advanced broadband services to over 18,000
households. Based on its experience, TDS believes that Congress should,
in addition to specifically earmarking dollars for broadband
deployment, set parameters for such programs that include: (1) defining
unserved and underserved areas; (2) setting criteria for selecting
projects that include cost per location to deploy, economic impact,
matching funds, and network scalability; (3) awarding projects that are
technology neutral and not duplicative; and (4) setting the technical,
managerial and financial capabilities that private and public entities
must possess in order to be eligible to receive funding.
NTIA BTOP Program
Under the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (``ARRA''),
carriers could apply for grants through the National Telecommunications
and Information Administration (``NTIA'') to support broadband
deployment in unserved rural areas. As well documented through numerous
Department of Commerce Inspector General reports \6\ and a Government
Accountability Office (``GAO'') study, the BTOP program had a number of
shortcomings. For example, many awardees were public entities with
ambitious goals of building their own broadband networks. However, at
the time of approval of their applications, many of these entities did
not have the expertise or the infrastructure in place to build
broadband networks capable of being operational in relatively short
order. In order to prevent a similar situation from reoccurring,
Congress should mandate that any broadband funding made available
through the infrastructure initiative go to providers that have the
expertise and infrastructure in place to immediately deploy broadband.
In addition, any Federal dollars used to deploy broadband must be
subject to the highest degree of scrutiny to ensure that the money is
not being used to overbuild existing broadband networks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.oig.doc.gov/OIGPublications/OIG_Report_No_14-
0480_West_Virginia_
BTOP.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Streamlining of the Federal Permitting Process & Streamlining
Regulation at the FCC
It is beyond debate that the costs and time involved in securing
state and Federal permits to deploy broadband delay projects and
increase costs. Congress should work to create a ``deemed granted''
standard that places the burden on the applicable government agency to
approve, deny, or require more information from an applicant within a
defined period of time. While TDS recognizes that deemed granted
language presents jurisdictional issues among Congressional committees,
I encourage the various relevant committees to work together to find a
solution that protects the integrity of our Federal permitting process
and, at the same time, brings certainty and resolution to broadband
projects that are tied up in bureaucratic red tape.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I look forward to
answering any questions you may have.
Senator Wicker. Thank you very, very, much, Mr. DeBroux.
Mr. Gillen.
STATEMENT OF BRAD GILLEN, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, CTIA
Mr. Gillen. Thank you, Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member
Schatz. Thank you for including the wireless industry as part
of this important conversation. I want to particularly thank
this committee for making sure that broadband is not only a
national priority, it's an infrastructure priority.
And from our standpoint there are two core challenges we
face together. The first is the digital divide. Despite
billions invested and years of work, there are too many
Americans from northern county New Hampshire, foot hills of
West Virginia, I could go across the dais today. There are too
many Americans that don't have access to the wired and wireless
broadband we all rely on today. We commit as an industry to
work with you on your efforts to close the digital divide and
provide more opportunities for more Americans.
The second challenge, and Chairman Wicker alluded to it in
his opening, goes to our global competitiveness. We lead the
world today in 4G wireless. The LTE phone in your pocket today.
Right now we are on the cusp of 5G, the fifth generation of
wireless, and we are in a race, it is a global race. The head
of Nokia 2 weeks ago noted we are neck and neck with China to
lead the world in 5G. And this is a race that China wants to
win. They have seen what U.S. leadership has meant for us. They
are investing billions. They have over a hundred active trials
of 5G technology ongoing today.
We would like to win too and the United States is prepared
to invest in our next generation as well. We have trials
ongoing and all four national carriers have announced
accelerated deployments of 5G. Years have had to schedule
starting later this year.
In all, the wireless industry is estimated to spend 275
billion of its own private capital over the next 10 years to
build these 5G networks. So we are here today asking for help
to modernize the rules to reflect this new technology. Because
5G is going to be fundamentally different, as a number of the
witnesses have already alluded to. It's going to be built with
these. They are called small cells. They will attach to
streetlights and the sides of buildings throughout the country.
Accenture estimates we will have 800,000 of these in place by
2026. To put that in perspective, over the last 30 plus years,
we have installed a 150,000 total cell towers across the
country. So in about a third of the time we are going to need
five times the amount of infrastructure. It's a daunting task.
And right now, the good news is a device like this only
takes an hour or two to install. The challenge we face is it
can take a year or two to gain approval. And that's because at
every level of government; local, state and Federal, these get
treated as if they were a 275 foot tower along the side of the
highway.
And with your leadership, these new networks will have new
rules and there are a number of proposals before this Committee
that address the core impediments which give us--make us very
optimistic.
The first, Chairman Wicker, and--Chairman Wicker and
Senator Cortez Masto have the SPEED Act and the SPEED Act would
update Federal regulation for these type of devices. That
common sense proposal would slash the costs to deploy these by
a third and would shave months off deploying each of these.
Senator--next turn to Senator Schatz and Senator Thune are
working on local siting with respect to how do we update the
rules and the guidance to local communities to do siting. This
is something the Committee has done in 1992, 1996, and most
recently 2012. What are the guardrails around local action?
And Senator Schatz and Senator Thune's proposal addresses
what the proper rate structure, the timelines for devices like
this while preserving important local authority and retaining
that authority, as it should. Senator Heller and Senator
Mansion are working on Federal lands and making sure utilizing
Federal assets, particularly in rural America, to extend
broadband in rural America where Federal lands is the place
that makes most sense to site on.
And I can't have a conversation about infrastructure on
wireless without talking about spectrum. And Senator Hassan and
Senator Gardner's AIRWAVES Act is a central proposal for the
future of our country in terms of spectrum policy. We want to
win the race to 5G. That gives us a roadmap on the spectrum we
will need to do so.
And if we get these policies right, 5G will be
transformative. It's going to unlock telehealth and precision
agriculture, connected cars and the Internet of things. We are
excited about the possibility of jobs. We project 3,000 jobs in
downtown Honolulu, three million across the country. We are
looking at places like Jackson, Mississippi gaining 140 million
dollars to the local economy over next the 10 years thanks to
5G, 500 billion across the country.
So we are excited about what 5G can do and we are excited
about your leadership and we think working together this year
we can help close the digital divide and win the 5G race
together.
Thank you for the time. Look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Brad Gillen follows:]
Prepared Statement of Brad Gillen, Executive Vice President, CTIA
Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Schatz, and members of the
Subcommittee, on behalf of CTIA and the wireless industry, thank you
for the opportunity to testify today to discuss the critical role
Congress plays in ensuring that wireless broadband infrastructure can
be rapidly deployed across the country.
We commend the Subcommittee for its leadership with the MOBILE NOW
Act that provides a bipartisan roadmap for future infrastructure and
spectrum initiatives to help create new jobs and economic
opportunities. MOBILE NOW was focused on promoting the deployment of
wireless networks by making more spectrum available for wireless use
and facilitating deployment of infrastructure needed to support these
networks. We appreciate the opportunity today to address the next set
of infrastructure reforms needed to drive wireless investment.
This hearing is timely, as all four nationwide U.S. wireless
providers have recently announced plans to roll out the next-generation
of wireless networks, 5G, using a variety of spectrum bands. National
infrastructure reform can greatly expedite the millions of jobs and
billions of investment that 5G deployment will bring. Nations across
Asia to Europe are investing heavily in 5G, but none of those countries
can match the competitiveness of the U.S. wireless industry. Massive
private investment from the national providers and regional carriers
will be unleashed in the U.S. if the government modernizes its approach
to infrastructure siting this year.
We are confident that, with this Subcommittee's continued
leadership, we can win the global race to 5G--as we did for 4G. We are
equally confident that reforms can help the industry expand wireless
coverage throughout the country, particularly in rural areas.
The Wireless Industry Invests In Jobs and the Economy
Wireless networks and smartphones have become a central part of
Americans' daily lives. There are now more wireless connections in the
U.S. than there are Americans, and over the past two years, U.S. mobile
data usage has more than tripled. This rapid growth has been made
possible by the wireless industry's substantial investment in our
Nation's infrastructure. To meet consumer demand, wireless capital
expenditures totaled more than $200 billion in the past seven years
alone. Overall, the wireless industry supports more than 4.6 million
American jobs and contributes roughly $400 billion annually to the
economy.
Modernizing Regulation Promises 5G Investment and Jobs
The wireless industry is poised to play an even more significant
role in our economy with the arrival of 5G--networks that are expected
to be up to 100 times faster than 4G networks, connect 100 times the
number of devices, and respond five times as quickly. This increased
speed and lower latency will not only improve the way we communicate,
but it will unlock innovations in healthcare, transportation, and
manufacturing, help deliver the benefits of the Internet of Things, and
enable smart communities.
The overall impact on the economy from 5G will be remarkable.
Accenture reports that 5G will create three million new jobs and add
approximately $500 billion to the economy. To deploy tomorrow's next-
generation networks, wireless companies will need to complement today's
large towers with small cells that can be the size of a small pizza box
and that will often be located discreetly on the side of a building or
on a street light. It is estimated that wireless carriers will need to
deploy hundreds of thousands of these small antennas over the next few
years in order to meet America's consumer demand. This will require a
substantial infrastructure build by wireless operators across the
country at a projected cost of $275 billion.
Congress Plays an Important Role in Promoting National Wireless Policy
Congress has long played a critical role in setting nationwide
guidelines for how localities should treat requests for siting wireless
infrastructure. By affirming wireless infrastructure siting as a
national priority, just as it did in 1996, Congress can once again
ensure Americans benefit from global-leading wireless services.
The wireless industry works in collaboration with local and state
governments to facilitate the buildout of wireless infrastructure. Many
are good partners, but too often the wireless industry today is
encountering policies--long delays, onerous requirements, and excessive
fees--that frustrate efforts to deploy new broadband and expand
wireless coverage. In too many instances, an installation that takes
one to two hours to complete requires one to two years of processing
and application procedures. Some cities refuse to allow wireless
installations on streetlights, and still other communities effectively
foreclose deployment through excessive application and monthly fees
(e.g., charging $30,000 per pole per year, or a $15,000 application fee
per pole). The U.S. will not win the global 5G race if those timelines
and costs are not significantly reduced across the country.
More than 20 years ago, Congress made clear that localities play an
important role in the permitting process for wireless facilities, and
that localities may not frustrate wireless deployment that will
otherwise benefit our economy, and consumers. Specifically, Congress
established the rapid deployment of wireless infrastructure as a
national priority and set nationwide guidelines for how localities
should treat siting requests. Under that Federal regime, the wireless
industry constructed 150,000 cell towers and rolled out service
nationwide.
The transition to 5G necessitates updating Congress's guidance to
localities, as the rules that applied to the infrastructure of the past
are no longer appropriate to support next-generation 5G deployment. The
most meaningful step Congress can take is to once again provide clear
direction to--and guardrails around--state and local government. CTIA
is encouraged that Senators Thune and Schatz have circulated a
discussion draft that addresses three targeted reform areas that would
make a significant difference in promoting broadband investment while
preserving local authority. The discussion draft would:
1.
Ensure Cost-Based Fees. Congress would make clear that localities
retain the right to charge for access to government property,
provided that such fees are fair and reasonable, competitively
and technologically neutral, based on actual costs, and
publicly disclosed.
2.
Set Reasonable and Enforceable Timelines. Congress would
establish a reasonable ``shot clock'' on handling siting
applications and deeming applications granted if there is no
action within that shot clock period. This could accelerate
deployment while still preserving state and local authority
over zoning decisions.
3.
Clarify Permitted Conduct. Congress would clarify that local
roadblocks--like unreasonable, non-objective or discriminatory
application review guidelines--are forbidden by Congress's
long-standing directive to eliminate rules that ``prohibit or
have the effect of prohibiting'' the provision of
communications services.
These reforms, if enacted, would promote billions of dollars in the
deployment of new wireless infrastructure.
The SPEED Act Will Help Modernize Federal Requirements
Today, in order to install a new antenna or small cell, Federal
regulations require a cumbersome and costly Federal review process that
generally disregards the size or location of the new facility. For
instance, wireless reviews under the National Historic Preservation
Act, or ``NHPA,'' and the National Environmental Policy Act, or
``NEPA,'' can run into the tens of thousands of dollars per
installation, even for small wireless deployments that are dramatically
different in nature than the larger deployments for which these
obligations were originally created. FCC Commissioner Mignon Clyburn
has correctly noted, ``treating small cells differently than large
macrocells, that makes all the sense in the world. They're not created
equal.''
Yet today, NHPA mandates alone recently cost a carrier more than
$170,000 to install just 23 small cells in a parking lot. Another
provider estimates that reviews under NHPA and NEPA comprised, on
average, 26 percent of its total small cell deployment costs last year.
And these costs are increasing; one carrier reports that these costs
have risen by as much as 2500 percent in some parts of the country
since 2010. The direct costs only tell part of the story: these reviews
can take months, which add delays and uncertainty to projects, keeping
customers from enjoying the benefits of better service.
To be clear, the wireless industry supports appropriate
environmental and historic preservation review for sensitive sites and
major projects. The current regulatory structure, however, fails to
reflect the different impact of new small cells or installations in
previously approved locations.
That's why we're pleased with the common sense legislation--S.
1988--introduced by Senators Wicker and Cortez Masto, which would
modernize the NEPA and NHPA review process for wireless facilities.
While preserving key protections for environmentally or historically
significant areas, the SPEED Act recognizes the need to modernize the
process to allow antennas in public rights-of-way and where new
facilities simply replace existing ones or do not significantly expand
existing ones. It also recognizes that a small cell should not face the
same requirements as a 250-foot tower. The FCC is also scheduled to
consider reform to address modernizing NHPA/NEPA review at its March 22
meeting. CTIA strongly supports the FCC's proposed action as well.
Congress Can Facilitate Deployments on Federal Lands
The Federal Government owns nearly 30 percent of the land in the
U.S. and more than 50 percent of the land in the 10 most western
states. The Federal Government also owns and manages key buildings in
major cities and towns throughout the country.
Leases to place new sites on lands regulated by the Bureau of Land
Management or the National Park Service can take two or three years to
negotiate. Even simple lease renewals can take 12-18 months. In many
parts of the nation, enhanced siting on Federal lands will help
wireless carriers more quickly deploy in unserved or underserved
communities. Today, the process to deploy wireless networks on Federal
lands is too often opaque with different applications requirements and
timelines and without guidelines to support timely deployment of new
communications facilities.
We support Senators Heller and Manchin's leadership with S. 1363 to
streamline and standardize the process by which broadband companies of
all kinds obtain access to Federal properties for siting facilities and
also ensure that applications for this access are processed in a
reasonable period of time. These provisions, along with use of common
forms and master contracts, would bring much-needed predictability to
the process. S.1363 builds on key provisions included in MOBILE NOW.
The Wireless Industry Shares Congress's Goal of Expanding Broadband's
Reach
We are proud of the investment our Nation's wireless providers have
made to expand coverage across the country, including to rural areas,
and look forward to working with Congress to continue expanding the
number of Americans with access to wireless broadband. The wireless
industry--including both national and regional providers--has made
substantial strides in the past decade to expand wireless coverage to
reach more Americans. Today's 4G LTE mobile broadband services were
first introduced in the United States in 2010, and in less than eight
years, 4G wireless services are available to more than 99 percent of
Americans. This is a remarkable pace of deployment for a new technology
in a very short window. And our Nation's wireless footprint continues
to grow. In 2016 alone, wireless investment increased coverage by more
than 150,000 rural Americans and nearly 50,000 rural road miles.
We share the Subcommittee's desire to further expand broadband to
more Americans, and recognition of the important role infrastructure
reform can play to do so. Private capital has driven the vast majority
of the expanded wireless coverage, and there should be a renewed focus
on the steps policymakers can take--like those detailed above--to
facilitate wireless providers' investments in rural America by altering
the investment calculus of some rural deployments from uneconomic to
viable. As FCC Commissioner Brendan Carr has said, reducing the cost of
building new networks can ``flip the business case for [wireless]
deployments in thousands of communities in the U.S.''
The government also has the ability to expedite deployment in
unserved areas through direct funding. The upcoming FCC Mobility Fund
II auction of $4.5 billion over 10 years will be an important step to
reach rural Americans currently unserved by wireless broadband. And the
bipartisan budget that passed last month included $20 billion for
infrastructure programs, including funds for the expansion of rural
broadband. Any new Federal funding should consider the increasingly
critical role that mobile wireless services play in rural consumers'
lives. Greater participation by mobile wireless providers will lead to
more effective use of public resources and deployment of high-speed
broadband services to more rural areas. Any new funding should also
ensure that reaching areas unserved by wireless is reflected in the
program's objectives. In making funding decisions, data is key, and
rural broadband is no exception. CTIA appreciates that the Senate has
attempted to address this issue by passing the Rural Wireless Access
Act (S. 1621), and we will continue to work with both national and
regional wireless providers to ensure the FCC has information necessary
to direct limited Federal resources appropriately.
*
*
*
*
*
The wireless industry is eager to work with this Subcommittee in a
bipartisan manner to advance U.S. innovation and investment in mobile
broadband. CTIA strongly supports this Subcommittee's efforts to help
clear the way for 5G and expand wireless coverage. The time for
addressing these issues is now. America is in a global race to 5G as
China, Japan, South Korea, and the European Union are hard at work
accelerating 5G deployments. As Nokia's CEO noted, ``it's a neck-and-
neck race between the U.S. and China to see who will be the first to
deploy'' 5G networks. With the right infrastructure, spectrum, and
other regulatory policies in place, the U.S. can win this race, and
Americans can further benefit from the economic and consumer benefits
that flow from continuing to lead the world in wireless. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify today.
Senator Wicker. Thank you very much, Mr. Gillen.
Mr. Romano, you are recognized.
STATEMENT OF MICHAEL ROMANO, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,
INDUSTRY AFFAIRS AND BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT, NTCA--THE RURAL
BROADBAND ASSOCIATION
Mr. Romano. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Wicker,
Ranking Member Schatz and members of the Subcommittee for the
chance to testify today.
NTCA and our 850 small, rural telecom provider members have
been singularly focused on the mission of rural broadband,
making great strides to reach hard-to-serve areas in the most
rural parts of the United States. But as everyone here has
noted on the dais as well, there's much more to do to deploy
and sustain networks and we are eager to be part of a
conversation about developing comprehensive, coordinated
strategies to connect rural America with the world.
My testimony highlights several principles and lessons
learned to inform future infrastructure efforts. These are
based upon our members' efforts serving their rural hometowns
and their experience with prior Federal and state initiatives.
First, no rural broadband effort can succeed if the
business case for investment operation does not exist. While
rural broadband is difficult, it is not hard to identify the
primary barrier, the challenging economics of deploying and
sustaining networks in rural America.
Put simply, helping to make the business case for rural
broadband is job one. Other measures will help only on the
margins at best if there's no business case and dedicated
funding in the first instance.
Second, a proven track record of delivering real results in
rural areas is important. Finite Federal resources to promote
rural broadband are too important a gamble. Building and
operating a network in an NFL city is very different than doing
so in western Nebraska. We should leverage the experience and
existing assets of those that have actually deployed and
operated a rural network, to the extent possible, and must
verify the technical capabilities of proposals.
Third, we need to demand the best return in leveraging
public resources. Broadband networks are a long-term
investment. They must scale and be able to meet user demands
over the decades long lives of such assets. Investing in
networks that seem cheaper up front but cannot keep pace with
escalating user demand represent resources potentially wasted
and risks leaving rural America behind along the way. As an
analogy, we should not be paying for a two lane road when we
know a four lane road will be needed in just a few years time.
The same is true for broadband.
Fourth, any resources made available for rural broadband
should go to where they are needed most based upon an accurate
picture of current availability and construction underway. This
has been one of the most vexing challenges, but this can be
done better, as explained in my testimony, and it's extremely
important to do so.
Fifth, and on a related note, we must coordinate new
programs and resources with existing initiatives. There may be
no greater waste of money or opportunity than dueling programs
that over-build one another where the market can't sustain even
one network on its own.
To date most initiatives have complemented one another
quite well. But as new programs get created or older programs
are repurposed, the risk increases that Federal dollars may
compete with one another. Leveraging existing initiatives
provides the best means of avoiding such potential conflict and
waste.
Sixth, streamlining of permitting is important to help
remove barriers and accelerate broadband deployment. This must
be part of a comprehensive package, however, and not seen as
the singular solution to overcoming our digital divide.
Moreover, any permitting relief must take into account that
5G goals, which are very important, won't be achieved in rural
America without robust fiber necessary to connect those cells.
It's often said wireless needs wires and the new saying these
days is 5G needs fiber. Seventh, accountability is critical.
Providers must demonstrate that they have used resources to
deploy networks that do, in fact, deliver on the promises they
have made.
With these principles in mind and lessons learned NTCA
suggests three steps to take in pursuing a broadband
infrastructure plan.
First, any infrastructure package should direct resources
for rural broadband toward time-tested initiatives to the
greatest extent possible. For example, the FCC's universal
service program is a proven mechanism that with additional
support in the face of current shortfalls can deliver immediate
results in the form of better broadband to more places at more
affordable prices. USDA's RUS programs could certainly use
additional resources as well, and such funds, if directed
there, should be coordinated with FCC efforts to avoid
potential conflict and overbuilding.
Second, we must accurately identify where resources need to
go, as you said, Chairman Wicker. We suggest looking to how the
FCC's universal service programs have done this. While not
perfect they at least contain processes intended to overcome
mapping limitations, which prior programs have not.
Until more precise and granular mapping is available these
programs offer at least the best start in terms of targeting
resources. And we can do more to develop better maps going
forward and to develop better challenge processes.
Finally, streamlining of permitting is important. It's true
that the business case for investment must exist in the first
instance, but once that business case is made providers need
the opportunity to hit the ground running, as Mr. Gillen
described, to deploy networks and deliver services.
Discussions underway in the administration and Congress and
at the FCC all offer promise in this regard. The current
infrastructure debate represents an opportunity to make great
headway on rural broadband. A comprehensive, coordinated plan
that leverages existing initiatives and know-how and takes
stock of lessons learned can make a significant difference in
the immediate availability and sustainability of rural
broadband.
We look forward to working with you and we greatly
appreciate the long-standing and ongoing work of this
subcommittee on rural broadband concerns.
Thank you for inviting me to be with you today.
[The prepared statement of Mike Romano follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael Romano, Senior Vice President, Industry
Affairs and Business Development, NTCA--The Rural Broadband
Association
Introduction
Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Schatz, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to testify today to
discuss rural broadband infrastructure. My name is Michael Romano, and
I am the Senior Vice President for Industry Affairs and Business
Development at NTCA--The Rural Broadband Association.
NTCA applauds the increasing focus on rural broadband from Congress
and the Administration. Our association and the approximately 850
small, hometown-based rural telecom providers in our membership stand
ready to work with this Subcommittee and others in Congress on
comprehensive, coordinated strategies that can help connect rural
Americans with the world. NTCA welcomes the prospect of much-needed
additional resources for rural broadband deployment, but, at the same
time, it is critical policymakers closely examine not only what is
needed, but also what Federal initiatives are already working well and
what lessons can be learned from past and current broadband deployment
efforts. Any new initiatives must build upon--or at least take stock
of--efforts already underway, and also draw upon lessons to be learned
from earlier programs.
Background
NTCA's cooperative and small company members live and work in rural
America. They operate in the ``original unserved'' areas--those areas
left over when telephone service was first deployed starting over a
century ago. These are the most rural parts of the United States,
spread across more than 35 percent of the U.S. landmass but containing
less than five percent of the U.S. population. The average density is
about seven customers per square mile.
In the face of such distance and density challenges, these
committed hometown small businesses have nonetheless already made
substantial efforts to deploy, upgrade, and sustain advanced networks
that connect rural America to the rest of the world and to respond to
demands for cutting-edge services. The rural telecom industry has
always been resourceful and innovative--leading the way in converting
to digital switched systems, deploying creative technological solutions
to their hardest-to-reach customers, enabling distance learning and
tele-health applications, and ultimately deploying scalable broadband
networks.
For all this progress and commitment, however, the job is not done
in either the areas our members serve or in the areas not fortunate
enough to be served by a small hometown communications provider. In the
areas served by NTCA members--again, many of the most rural parts of
the country--13 percent of consumers still cannot get 10 Mbps
broadband, while 33 percent are unable to obtain 25 Mbps broadband that
is considered a threshold level today.\1\ And the story appears worse
in areas that are not fortunate enough to be served by cooperatives and
other small hometown-based telecom companies like those in NTCA's
membership; in these other rural communities, we know that many more
consumers, businesses, schools, and medical facilities lack access to
even basic levels of broadband.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ NTCA 2016 Broadband/Internet Availability Survey Report (2017),
NTCA-The Rural Broadband Association, Arlington, VA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
But to be clear, even where broadband is available in rural
America, the job is never done. Sustaining and upgrading broadband
networks is essential because consumers and businesses depend upon
reliable and affordable services that will remain high-quality and keep
pace with advances in technology and user needs. Indeed, what was
considered ``high-speed'' broadband just seven or eight years ago is
today considered antiquated, meaning that networks must be scalable and
upgraded over time to keep pace with consumer demand. Furthermore, in
terms of comparative operating costs between rural and urban areas,
when an urban operator has a ``truck roll'' to repair service, its
technician might need to drive two miles; a ``trouble call'' for a
rural operator by contrast might entail driving two hours--in each
direction. Thus, even as we have successes to celebrate and roadmaps to
look to for proven track records of success, we as a nation have much
more to do both to reach unserved areas and to sustain robust and
affordable rural broadband where it is available today.
Key Principles for Broadband-Focused Infrastructure Initiatives and
Lessons Learned from Prior Efforts
As policymakers consider effective and efficient ways to include
broadband deployment within broader infrastructure initiatives, it is
important to take stock of what has been tried to date--to build upon
(or at least take account of) existing initiatives and to draw upon
lessons learned from prior initiatives. Based in large part upon such
prior experiences, there are a number of principles to consider in
shaping policy and crafting infrastructure initiatives going forward.
1. Making the Business Case for Rural Broadband is Job One
While rural broadband is not an easy challenge to overcome, it is
not terribly complicated to identify the primary barrier to rural
broadband--the economics of deploying and sustaining broadband are
difficult, if not impossible, in many rural markets. The rates that
rural consumers pay are rarely sufficient to cover even the costs of
operating in rural areas, much less the upfront capital expenditures
required to deploy reliable, high-speed broadband in rural America.
While obtaining permits to build new infrastructure and navigating
complex bureaucratic application processes can often be difficult for
small businesses in particular, the single biggest challenge in rural
America is simply making the business case to build any broadband at
all. Put another way, permitting barriers and other impediments to
construction are no barriers at all if one cannot justify even building
a network in the first place.
Without a reasonable business plan, providers are hard-pressed to
justify borrowing funds or using one's own capital to build, and then
harder-pressed still to sustain networks in areas where densities are
low, distances are great, and terrain and topography complicate
operations. Ongoing support from the High-Cost Universal Service Fund
(USF) initiatives overseen by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) has therefore been critical to making the business case for
investing in and then sustaining rural broadband. The USF programs help
providers to keep rates more affordable and to justify either use of a
provider's own cash or financing from the few lenders that tend to
serve rural Internet service providers--the Department of Agriculture's
Rural Utilities Service (RUS), the Rural Telephone Finance Cooperative,
CoBank, and some community banks.
For these reasons, it is essential that infrastructure initiatives
include sufficient resources to meet the challenges of deploying and
sustaining broadband in rural America. Without such resources, any
effort is likely to be effective only on the margins or in very limited
respects, leaving behind many areas that still lack broadband access
and/or putting at risk investments already made to deploy advanced
broadband networks in deeply rural areas.
2. The Importance of Proven Track Records and Technical Know-How
The operational challenges of deploying networks over great
distances through sparsely populated rural areas are quite different
than any other network construction project. Just because an operator
has constructed a network in a downtown business district in an NFL
city--where there could be more people in a single building than in an
entire rural town and surrounding areas--this does not necessarily
translate into success in rural broadband.
It is therefore important to seek a proven track record of
delivering real results in rural areas. For example, while both
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) programs asked for
information on the capability of applicants to perform, only one
included an explicit preference for real-world experience in rural
broadband. Any finite resources put toward supporting rural broadband
are too important to gamble. Although new infrastructure initiatives
should consider the merits of all comers willing and able to make the
effort to deploy rural broadband, in the first instance we should also
look to leverage the experience and existing assets of those that have
in fact deployed and operated a rural network and then delivered
services atop that network.
This last point is particularly important. Our nation is not
building networks just for the sake of building shiny new networks.
Congress and the Administration are considering broadband
infrastructure initiatives because they care in the end about the
consumers and businesses in rural America that will use those
networks., and they recognize the benefits to the Nation as a whole To
this end, any initiative should look first to operators that are
currently in the business of rural broadband, delivering high-quality
broadband day after day to hundreds of customers spread over dozens or
even hundreds of miles in rural areas. If public resources are
leveraged to help make the business case to deploy networks, the
sustainability and usability of those networks are just as important as
the act of initially constructing them.
On a similar note, it is important to ensure that any entity
wishing to leverage Federal resources to deploy a rural broadband
network is technically capable of delivering on its promise. The FCC's
new Connect America Fund Phase II USF auction program, for example,
includes a ``screen'' that will aim to test technical assumptions of
applicants prior to providing any funding; the State of New York's
broadband grant program seems to have gone even further in ensuring
that those claiming to have solutions for rural broadband can in fact
deliver on their promise from a technical perspective. Similarly, the
ARRA programs required network proposals to include certification from
a professional engineer that the proposal would operate as designed and
claimed. Robust but reasonable ``technical screens'' are essential to
establish that a particular solution can in fact deliver upon the
promise asserted.
3. A Long-Term Investment Strategy is Far More Effective and Efficient
Any resources provided in connection with an infrastructure plan
will be finite, and thus should aim for the best return. In the case of
long-term capital investments such as networks that will last for
decades, this means that networks must be scalable and capable of
meeting user demands over the full life of such assets. Putting
resources toward inferior infrastructure that might seem cheaper
upfront but needs to be substantially rebuilt in only a few years' time
could turn out to be resources wasted--and risks leaving rural America
behind.
This concept can be referred to as ``total cost of ownership''--
estimating the total costs of owning and operating (and needing to
reinvest in) an asset over its economic life, rather than looking
merely at the upfront costs of procuring the same asset. Policymakers
should craft an infrastructure initiative with this in mind; it will do
neither the rural Americans that depend upon broadband nor the broader
American economy any good to spend billions of dollars now just to have
another conversation about the need to rebuild that broadband
infrastructure five years from now. Like bridges and roads, broadband
networks are long-term infrastructure assets, and our Nation should
adopt a similar planning horizon based upon scalable networks that can
meet user demands now and over the useful lives of these valuable
assets. Put another way, sustainability is key. It is not just about
getting broadband out there; from the perspective of consumers and
communities, it is about keeping broadband out there, and keeping it
affordable and up-to-date with user demand.
4. Targeting Resources for New Construction is Critical
It is important to target any resources made available to minimize
the prospect of overbuilding existing networks. Unfortunately, as
discussed further below in connection with broadband mapping,
identifying where service is or is not available has proven vexing. The
ARRA programs did not contain effective processes to validate existing
service coverage, and in some respects their rules all but invited at
least limited overbuilding. For example, the Broadband Technology
Opportunities Program (``BTOP'') overseen by the Department of Commerce
largely eliminated any firm bars to overbuilding by the time of its
second round of funding, instead merely weighing projects by the degree
of unserved areas reached. By contrast, the FCC employs a variety of
processes in its USF programs aimed at validating where service is or
is not already available in order to direct funding to where it is
needed most; these processes may not be perfect in scope or
granularity, but each is an improvement upon the baseline data
available in the FCC's Form 477 availability database or from any other
current source.
5. Coordinating Efforts Among Federal and State Broadband Initiatives
is Essential
Coordination among programs--both those that may be created as part
of any infrastructure plan and those already in place--is essential to
maximize the effectiveness of finite resources and achieve the goal of
robust and sustainable universal broadband. In fact, to minimize the
likelihood of ``making new mistakes'' (or even repeating old ones) in
the rush to stand up any new program, as discussed further below, NTCA
submits that it makes sense in the first instance to leverage existing
programs that have time-tested processes and procedures to direct funds
to the right places and already have experience in vetting proposals to
deploy and sustain rural broadband.
If, however, new programs are to be created, these programs should
not only take stock of the lessons learned and principles to be derived
from prior experience as outlined in this testimony, but such new
efforts must also ensure that they complement--and do not compete
with--the existing efforts already underway. For example, some
providers receiving Federal USF support have complained that BTOP funds
were used to connect anchor institutions that already had broadband
service leveraging that USF support. Similarly, RUS resources should
work in concert with USF as described further below, rather than having
multiple Federal programs stimulate the construction of duplicative
networks in rural areas where the costs of deploying and operating even
just one network are prohibitive. Any Federal resources made available
to promote broadband availability should therefore be directed through
existing programs to maximize their effectives, and sufficient
``guardrails'' should be put into place to ensure that any new efforts
complement, rather than undermine, the good work that existing
broadband-focused programs already enable.
6. Streamlining Construction Processes is Necessary
Once the business case can be made for deployment and ongoing
operation of a rural broadband network, this is where impediments that
can delay or deter a project come into play. Steps can and should be
taken to mitigate permitting delays, complicated application
procedures, and high costs of access. Such efforts are especially
important to enable any Federal resources made available as part of an
infrastructure plan can begin delivering on their promise as soon as
possible.
Smaller providers like those in NTCA's membership have neither the
staff nor the resources to navigate complex agency structures in search
of permits to build broadband; for companies and cooperatives with an
average of approximately 25 employees, time and money spent on such
efforts translates to time and money not spent building broadband. At
the same time, in serving many of the most remote parts of the United
States, our members have deep experience with the Bureau of Land
Management, U.S. Forest Service, National Park Service, and many other
land-owning and property-managing agencies across the Federal
Government. Especially when crossing Federal lands or railroad rights-
of-way, small rural providers must address permitting concerns or
contractual obligations that can delay projects and increase their
already high costs.
7. Accountability Must be Part of any Program
One final principle to consider in connection with any
infrastructure plan is how to hold recipients of any resources
accountable for use of the support they may receive. Concerns have been
raised in the past, for example, that it is difficult to discern the
precise locations reached leveraging ARRA resources. Similar concerns
were raised in the past with respect to use of USF funds, particularly
in areas where broadband remained lacking notwithstanding the sums
disbursed to certain carriers. In more recent years, however, the FCC
has established a robust accountability program that imposes specific
buildout obligations and requires recipients of USF support to capture
the latitude and longitude of every new location to which they deploy
broadband using such support. The FCC is also in the process of
developing measures by which USF recipients will verify the
availability of services at the levels required by the program. Similar
measures should be considered in any new program--or, yet again, this
provides good cause to leverage existing efforts in lieu of creating
new programs and compliance measures from scratch.
Proposed Steps Forward Based Upon These Key Principles and Lessons
Learned
The principles and lessons learned described above can provide
guidance in considering the most effective and efficient steps in
addressing our Nation's remaining rural broadband challenges. I will
next discuss a few steps that NTCA suggest should inform and shape any
infrastructure plan.
1. Leverage Existing Initiatives to the Maximum Extent Possible
a. Universal Service Fund
Standing up new programs from scratch is not easy, and if a new
broadband infrastructure initiative conflicts with existing efforts,
this would undermine, rather than further, our Nation's broadband
deployment goals. For these reasons, strong consideration should be
given to leveraging--and supplementing--the FCC's existing High-Cost
USF initiatives as a primary means of implementing a broadband
infrastructure initiative.
USF programs have been in place for years, and the FCC has recently
reoriented these efforts under the ``Connect America Fund'' banner to
promote broadband in high-cost rural areas. As discussed earlier in
this testimony, the high-cost USF/CAF initiatives are essential both in
justifying the business case for broadband infrastructure investment in
the first instance, and then sustaining such investments by keeping
rates for services more affordable once networks are built.
Unfortunately, although the FCC is considering steps to partially
address a current USF funding shortfall, these otherwise effective
broadband-promoting initiatives remain woefully underfunded to achieve
their goals. More than $100 million per year is still needed to fund a
USF model that the FCC created to promote broadband deployment. In
addition, under a budget control mechanism included within 2016 reforms
that applies only to some carriers, many small rural telecom operators
have had their support slashed by an unpredictably escalating budget
control that now equals 12.3 percent on average, translating into
denied recovery of more than $170 million in actual costs this year for
private broadband investments that they have already made.
Indeed, the impacts arising out of insufficient funding of the USF
programs are striking, and they underscore how more sufficient funding
could yield compelling results. Because of the USF model budget
shortfall, 71,000 rural locations will receive lower-speed broadband,
and nearly 50,000 may see no broadband investment at all. Meanwhile, a
NTCA survey found that 183 small business member companies were facing
annual USF support reductions of more than $500,000 on average, with a
corresponding average decline in planned network investment of nearly
$950,000 that translated to delays or denials of upgraded broadband to
more than 850 customers on average. (This last set of figures would add
up to an estimated $91.5 million in reduced USF support leading to
nearly $174 million in declined or deferred broadband investment, and
more than 150,000 customers estimated to remain without access to
upgraded services.) Moreover, NTCA members estimated that the USF
support reduction would contribute to standalone broadband prices $50
higher per month than they would otherwise have been for rural
consumers.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ NTCA 2017 USF Budget Control Impact Survey Results (2017),
NTCA--The Rural Broadband Association, Arlington, VA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The FCC's High-Cost USF efforts therefore represent a logical focal
point for future broadband infrastructure initiatives. The FCC is the
Nation's expert agency in telecom policy, and it is already tackling
broadband challenges with respect to availability and affordability.
Moreover, recent CAF reforms adopted by the FCC have sought to: (1)
reorient the USF programs toward broadband, (2) ensure funding is
targeted to where it is needed (i.e., to places where the market does
not enable service delivery on its own), and (3) define what the FCC
considers an efficient level of support in each area. The FCC will also
be conducting an auction later this year that will allow interested
bidders of all kinds to seek USF/CAF support for unserved areas.
Finally, the reformed program rules compel significant accountability,
to the point that support recipients must meet specified deployment
obligations and geocode every new location to which they deploy
broadband leveraging USF support.
The FCC's various High-Cost USF programs offer a ready-made
platform that, with additional resources but with very little
additional ``heavy lifting'' or process, could satisfy the principles
articulated above and yield immediate, measurable benefits for rural
consumers in the form of additional locations reached and higher-speed
broadband. By contrast, creating new programs would require more
administrative effort, and the rules for any such new programs must
still be informed by the objectives and ``lessons learned'' articulated
above--while also making sure not to undermine the important work that
existing programs are already undertaking.
b. Rural Utilities Service
Additional resources for rural broadband could also be directed to
the Department of Agriculture's RUS programs that have likewise been
important in stimulating rural infrastructure deployment. The RUS has
long played a crucial role in addressing rural broadband challenges
through its telecommunications programs that finance network upgrades
and deployment in rural areas, and these programs remain just as vital
today. If any infrastructure resources are directed to RUS rather than
to the FCC's USF/CAF efforts, it will then be essential, however, to
ensure that such programs are coordinated effectively with and
complement, rather than compete with, the ongoing efforts of the
Federal USF programs.
At times, some confuse the roles of RUS programs and the USF,
thinking them repetitive or redundant. But this reflects a fundamental
misunderstanding of the unique and distinct role each has played. USF
does not finance networks; banks and other lenders (including RUS
programs) provide upfront financing necessary to construct networks
(although not too many banks lend to construct broadband infrastructure
in rural America where return on investment is typically measured in
decades). On the other hand, RUS programs and other banks and financing
programs do not sustain networks or make services atop them affordable
for consumers; again, loans from private lenders or through the RUS
programs focus upon upfront financing. It is the Federal USF program
that is essential to ensure that consumers can obtain reasonably
comparable services at reasonably comparable rates atop the networks
once financed and built. In other words, USF is the linchpin of making
the business case in the first instance to obtain financing from any
lender--RUS or otherwise--to build networks in rural areas.
It is essential that this long-standing complementary relationship
between RUS and the USF initiatives continue, rather than revising the
programs or using any new infrastructure plan resources in a manner
that pits Federal efforts against each other. RUS already has policies
in place precluding its own programs from competing with one another;
it is important to take this a step further and ensure that all federal
programs work in concert rather than potentially undermining each
other's important pro-investment policies. To this end, NTCA suggests
ensuring that any Federal RUS program funds and new infrastructure
resources not be used to overbuild another provider's broadband network
if supported by Federal USF resources, provided that the USF recipient
is meeting its buildout obligations under the USF program. Such a
reasonable measure will ensure the ongoing complementary nature of
these efforts, maximize the effectiveness of any Federal resources put
toward broadband infrastructure, and ultimately enhance the likelihood
of success of new infrastructure initiatives in reaching as many rural
Americans as possible.
2. Conduct Better, Smarter Mapping of Service Availability
This Subcommittee's attention to mapping is much-needed and
appreciated by NTCA and its members. We need more accurate, granular
data on service availability to ensure that government efforts to
support broadband target resources as efficiently as possible. Such
data serve two important functions, in fact, in the context of
broadband infrastructure policy. First, better data will help ensure
that Federal support is not withdrawn when still needed because there
is no other network in a given area. Second, better data can help avoid
the prospect of federally-supported duplicative infrastructure
deployment in an area that might at first appear ``unserved.''
Unfortunately, there is no single, current, fully reliable source
of data with respect to broadband availability in the United States.
The National Broadband Map administered by the Department of Commerce
has not been updated since June 2014--ages ago in the evolution of
broadband network coverage and speeds. Moreover, depending on the state
process that went into gathering such data, that map appeared to
contain anything from carefully vetted information to self-selected
claims of coverage based more upon marketing interest than actual
network capabilities. In the interim, the FCC has started to publish
more tools showing the data gathered through provider Form 477
submissions, but the underlying Form 477 process itself suffers from
imprecision and an inherent lack of granularity. The Form 477 is
certified by the provider, but there is no means of validating the data
submitted. In addition, the Form 477 data is submitted by census
block--meaning that in a rural area, one consumer with service in a
block can result in unserved consumers miles away looking ``served''
nonetheless. It is for these reasons that the FCC has engaged in
substantial periodic data collections and additional ``challenge
processes'' in the context of its fixed and mobile USF proceedings, so
that it can develop a record of better evidence to validate where
service truly does and does not exist notwithstanding the face of Forms
477 received.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See Connect America Fund, et al., WC Docket No. 10-90, et al.,
Report and Order, Order and Order on Reconsideration, and Further
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, FCC 16-33 (rel. Mar. 30, 2016),
70-71
(directing a challenge process for recipients of model-based USF
support) and
116-145 (creating a challenge process for carriers
receiving cost-based USF support); Connect America Fund, et al., WC
Docket No. 10-90, et al., Order on Reconsideration and Second Report
and Order, FCC 17-102 (rel. Aug. 4, 2017),
27-64 (adopting a
challenge process intended to direct Mobility Fund support to rural
areas that lack unsubsidized 4G LTE service).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Better methods to ascertain broadband availability exist. The FCC's
High-Cost USF program requires recipients of support to geocode
individual locations where new broadband is installed (and, in some
cases, for prior deployments, too). Such measures--particularly the
geocoding of new installations and upgrades going forward--can bring us
closer to identifying where broadband exists with much greater
precision, which would then allow targeting of support and other
efforts to promote broadband deployment where needed most. On a going
forward basis, geocoding could perhaps offer promise in transitioning
from the current maps to better information. Whatever means might
ultimately be chosen to obtain more accurate and granular data,
however, it will be important to: (a) avoid unreasonable burdens in the
data-gathering process, including any duties to go back and geocode
prior installations; and (b) reconcile and coordinate data-gathering
and mapping efforts to avoid duplicative reporting requirements for
operators and the prospect of generating inconsistent data due to
differing standards among reports at different agencies.
3. Streamline Permitting
As discussed earlier in this testimony, the primary challenge to
rural broadband deployment is making the business case at all for rural
broadband deployment. Where such business case exists however, removing
barriers to deployment through streamlining of governmental permitting
procedures can in turn drive more rapid rural broadband deployment at
relatively lower cost. Several steps can and should be taken to address
such concerns, and NTCA is encouraged that Congress and the
Administration continue to examine these issues on so many fronts.
As an initial matter, NTCA and its members have urged that
differences in Federal agency policies and procedures with respect to
installation of communications facilities should be the exception
rather than the rule, applying only where needed to implement a unique
statutory directive to the agency in question. A lack of coordination
and standardization in environmental and historical application and
approval processes across Federal agencies increases the cost and
further complicates and delays the deployment of broadband
infrastructure--especially for small providers. Several NTCA members
joined NTCA's CEO, Shirley Bloomfield on the FCC's Broadband Deployment
Advisory Committee's Streamlining Federal Siting Working Group that put
forth recommendations, which will hopefully be implemented to further
accelerate the broadband deployment permitting process. Those
recommendations included:
Standardize and publish fee schedules, and utilize revenue
in a way that promotes expediting Federal siting processes.
Harmonize permitting processes across agencies to the extent
feasible and ensure the process is uniformly applied across
regional and state offices.
Recognize and accept existing completed studies in
previously disturbed areas.
Harmonize environmental assessments across Federal
landholding or managing agencies, further streamline National
Environmental Protection Act and National Historic Preservation
Act exclusions, and eliminate duplicative environmental
studies.
Make current environmental and historic review streamlining
mechanisms mandatory for all agencies.
There should be a single, easily accessible online-tracking
mechanism at each Federal agency for the permitting process.
All agencies should regularly report on permit status and the
number of permitting applications they have processed.
The common application form should accommodate changes to
existing installations and applicable leases and easements.
Agencies should accommodate and incorporate new broadband
infrastructure technologies into their review processes. \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Broadband Deployment Advisory Committee: Federal Siting Working
Group, Final Report, (2018).
As Congress considers any permitting reforms, however, it is
important to emphasize that any changes and coordination with respect
to permitting should be made on a ``technology neutral'' basis. Much of
the discussion with respect to streamlining of permitting processes
appears driven by a desire to promote the availability of 5G wireless
capabilities through the increased placement of small cells. This is
understandable given the promise of faster mobile broadband services
and the fact that massively expanded small cell placement is critical
to the availability of such services.
At the same time, it is important to take realistic stock of
whether, when, and to what degree 5G services will be available on a
widespread basis in rural America. A technical paper released last year
found that the full promise of 5G capability can only be realized in
rural America if small cells are placed every several hundred feet
apart,\5\ and it will take significant amounts of backhaul capacity--
``densification'' of fiber \6\--to manage the data loads that 5G is
hoping to handle.\7\ In short, the deployment of 5G-capable networks in
rural areas where there are only a few households per square mile would
effectively seem to translate to a fiber-to-the-premise construction.
Put another way, the old mantra of ``wireless needs wires'' is quickly
becoming ``5G needs fiber.'' In addition, it has been explained that
taking steps to rationale 5G permitting alone ``will not solve the
problem in unserved areas;'' it will clearly take both permitting
relief and additional resources if the promise of 5G will come to rural
America within the foreseeable future.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Evaluating 5G Wireless Technology as a Complement or Substitute
for Wireless Broadband, Vantage Point Solutions (2017).
\6\ See Remarks of Federal Communications Commission Chairman Ajit
Pai at the Mobile World Congress, Barcelona, Spain, February 28, 2017.
\7\ The Road to 5G is Paved with Fiber, Fiber Broadband
Association, December 2017; Sean Buckley, ``Verizon's McAdam: Our
multiuse fiber approach offers more cost efficiencies,'' Fierce
Telecom, May 22, 2017.
\8\ Holmes, Allan, ``5G Cell Service is Coming. Who Decides Where
It Goes?'' The New York Times, March 2, 2018; see also remarks of CTIA
during ``Closing the Digital Divide: Broadband Infrastructure
Solutions'' hearing, U.S. House of Representatives Energy & Commerce
Communications and Technology Subcommittee, January 30, 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the end, for rural consumers to have a broadband experience
reasonably comparable to that in urban America, they must have
meaningful access to both fixed and mobile broadband services. Placing
too much hope on mobility alone without recognizing ``wireless needs
wires''--or, these days, ``5G needs fiber''--is a recipe for
insufficient access in rural America.
Conclusion
The current national infrastructure debate represents a significant
opportunity to make progress on rural broadband deployment, and we hope
that the promise of broadband will be recognized among the many other
compelling infrastructure priorities also in need of attention and
resources. We look forward to working with you and greatly appreciate
the work of this subcommittee in helping to solve the challenges of
rural broadband.
Due in part to the leadership of this subcommittee, small, rural
broadband providers like those represented by NTCA-The Rural Broadband
Association continue to make great strides in overcoming the challenges
of providing broadband to rural America. Your commitment to identifying
and solving these challenges is greatly appreciated. Thank you for
inviting me to be with you today, and I look forward to your questions.
Senator Wicker. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Romano. And
thank you all, gentlemen, you all submitted excellent written
testimonies which will be included in the record and your 5
minute summaries were just outstanding. So my hat is off to
each of you.
Let's begin, Mr. Gillen, with something you brought up and
perhaps others would like to comment on this. This race to win
5G. You say we are in a race with China and Japan, for example,
as well as the European Union. What are the consequences of
letting someone else win this race? What if China wins the race
and we come in second? What does this really mean to Americans?
Mr. Gillen. It's a great question. Chairman, I think the
easiest way to think about it is looking backward. We lead the
world in 4G wireless and that lead to things like the app
economy developing here. You have global giants like Samsung
and Erickson have R&D facilities here in the United States
because we have the best networks to innovate off of.
So when we talk about 5G and the exciting things happening
in healthcare and transportation and education, we want that
innovation to happen here first. And if we aren't first we risk
that innovation going overseas.
Senator Wicker. Would someone else like to talk about that?
All right. OK. If not, we will move on and I'll get all my
questions in.
So do all of you agree with Mr. Gillen?
Mr. Berry.
Mr. Berry. Yes, Senator, I agree that we do want to be in
first because we get the first mover of benefit in an economy.
I'm also concerned about as we move to 5G that we are also
ready for 5G in all of rural America. We need to get the 4G
LTE, long-term evolution technology, as well as VoLT, voice
over LTE, and the faster we get there the faster we can have
the benefits in rural America and urban/suburban America of a
5G world. Because I don't think we want to leave half the
United States or half the Nation behind this economic
opportunity for the new mobile world. And so that's my concern.
Yes, we need to be on the forefront of innovation, but we also
need to do it in a way that allows the entire economy to
benefit from this great opportunity.
Senator Wicker. Thank you very much.
Well, Mr. Berry, let me ask you then to elaborate on the
concern that I expressed and that you expressed about data
collection and broadband mapping. I think you said it's just
totally inadequate. So if you would comment on that first and
then anyone else would like to follow-up, please do.
Why is the data so wrong?
Mr. Berry. You know the simple answer is garbage in,
garbage out. And we are not asking--it's clear that I had great
hopes that this next round of data request would actually
produce a better quality service maps. What we actually got
though was very clear that the FCC requested the wrong
perimeters in order to define a granular map that has actual
meaning on the ground.
Senator Wicker. When did that request go out?
Mr. Berry. Well, it was a whole series of discussions and
back and forth with the FCC. You know, our carriers, FCC and
our members said, listen, you should measure signal strength
and you should measure those types of things that consumers
expect for usage on the ground. And we didn't do that in this
map.
What you have is a map that the FCC produced that says here
is the areas that we think are eligible for USF and all those
other areas, including like 99 percent of Mississippi is
ineligible, and until someone challenges that, it's like having
to prove a negative and I--I am very concerned that the map is
so disfigured in terms of its reality on the ground that it's
almost impossible to have a successful challenge because you're
going to have to challenge literally 98 percent of the United
States in order to do so.
It's--we can do better. I would suggest that maybe we need
all the resources of the Federal Government to focus on
broadband data and information. NTIA just last--just a few days
ago, David Redl, the new Assistant Secretary of NTIA, suggested
NTIA has a great database and has access to local, state and
governments and that they can help build a better database that
is rational and more accurate about where is broadband and
where it is not.
Senator Wicker. Mr. DeBroux----
Mr. Berry. Not just wireline, but wireless.
Senator Wicker.--you seem eager to jump in.
Mr. DeBroux. Yes. I think, and I'm not an expert on the
wireless side of this, but on the wireline side I think some
good starts have been made. We are not there, but take, for
example, in the ACAM program, the FCC was extremely careful to
make sure that there was no over building. That money wasn't
given to households that already had other options available.
And we are in 25 different states and we looked very
closely at where the locations would be funded. We've actually
engaged in their challenge process in various areas and we
actually lost some of those challenges that we thought we
should have won, but what that meant was there was no
possibility that any money would be going for duplicative
networks. And in that particular context, I think the FCC had
done a really good job using 477 data in terms of precisely
targeting the money that was available for broadband.
So I think there's a start. I don't think it's all, you
know, total chaos out there. I think there are various agencies
that are collecting data.
In addition, USAC for each location that we build, each
household that we build to we have to provide the geocode
location to them. So they are building a map as time goes on.
So I think with coordination among various Federal agencies, I
think we are getting there, but we are clearly not there yet.
Senator Wicker. There are better maps you say.
Mr. DeBroux. Well, there are better--there's information
that hasn't really made its way into the maps. When I looked at
the FCC map, there were definitely flaws with it and I think
it's the way, partly the way the 477 data was interpreted.
For example, TDS Telecom, our parent company is telephone
and data systems. It's also the parent company of U.S. Cellular
and there was confusion in the maps in terms of what was
represented as an area that telephone and data systems served
that could have been either our wireless or our wireline areas.
So there's refinement that needs to be done, but I think the
underlying data is there.
So it's a matter of evolving these maps and working on them
and seeing what needs to be done and moving forward.
Senator Wicker. Senator Schatz.
STATEMENT OF HON. BRIAN SCHATZ,
U.S. SENATOR FROM HAWAII
Senator Schatz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to all
the testifiers for being here.
I want to talk a little bit about tech infrastructure in
the context of this broader infrastructure conversation. It
occurs to me that Democrats are unlikely to support a shifting
of responsibility for infrastructure from the Federal
Government to State and local. They are also unlikely to
support the undermining of labor or environmental protections.
And, likewise, Republicans are unlikely to support, at least at
this time, a big unpaid for straight up 1.5 trillion dollar
infrastructure plan and yet everybody likes the idea of funding
USF to a greater degree.
You have a technical problem I think of just making a
straight appropriation into a fund which is--which has always
operated under a statute with fee revenue. So that's context.
One more point of context is that the USF contribution
factor was five and a half percent in 2000. It's 19.5 percent
right now. We have gone from three million broadband
subscribers at the residential level to about 100 million now.
And that doesn't count anybody who gets high speed Internet in
some other way.
So you have this shrinking base of revenue from people who
still use traditional telephone service that is funding
broadband infrastructure across the country. We all support
that, but the math doesn't work out.
And the beauty of this is that the difficulty that a
legislative body would normally have in assessing a fee for
broadband, because everybody is freaked out about calling it
taxing the internet, is set aside because these are appointed
officials, not elected officials. The FCC already has statutory
authorization to do contribution reform.
And I can understand elected officials not wanting to stand
up and tax broadband, but it is actually unconscionable that we
are charging a smaller and smaller number of people who are
primarily rural in the first place, elderly, not as wealthy,
who just have traditional telephone service to subsidize the
rest of the world getting on broadband.
We need contribution reform and we need the FCC to step up
and act like appointed officials for a quasi-judicial
commission.
And, the FCC has already shown this year, without getting
into a separate conversation, an absolute determined
willingness to do unpopular things. This would be an unpopular
thing that would actually make sense in terms of connecting all
of our communities to the internet. And so I'll start with Mr.
DeBroux and Mr. Romano and see if you have any comments on
that.
Mr. DeBroux. Well, first of all, I'm not sure I've got much
to add to what you said because I could not agree with you
more. The base, the current base is shrinking. The need for
broadband is there. We have a law that says reasonable
comparability. I mean it's not just a good idea, it's the law.
And in order to obtain that, in order to get broadband out
into rural areas that is comparable it's going to take a lot of
money. I mean there are a lot of things that can be done around
the margins in terms of, in terms of helping getting through
rights-of-way, getting access, all that kind of stuff.
But without actual dollars being spent we are not going to
achieve comparability and so I agree a hundred percent with
your analysis.
Senator Schatz. Mr. Romano.
Mr. Romano. Thank you, Senator. Yes. So, first, you are
correct, the FCC does have the authority, regardless of--and I
know sometimes this gets into a question of what is broadband.
Regardless of what one considers broadband, the FCC has the
authority under current law to include some form of broadband
within the contributions mechanism, whether it's on a revenues
or connections or what have you basis. So that authority is
there.
But you raise a fundamental point. This is about equity. We
are talking about funding broadband networks. We are talking
about finding a way to help make sure broadband gets deeper
into rural areas, to lower-income consumers, into schools and
libraries. But yet the one service that isn't contributing to
that goal of getting more broadband out there, ironically, is
broadband.
There's an equity issue there. The consumers who are left
paying for this are the consumers who are not making use of
broadband. It's a fundamental disconnect in that.
Sustainability is critical to these programs, especially with
long-term investments like the ones we are talking about here.
If you don't have a sustainable universal service mechanism
itself in the form of sufficient funding, predictable funding,
we're going to have a problem. We are talking about potentially
providing more support for broadband. Yet right now the high-
cost program operates on levels that were decided in 2011 just
because that happened to be what 2010 distributions were.
So we do need to approach this fundamentally as an equity
issue and hopefully find a way to make these programs more
sustainable.
Senator Schatz. Thank you to all of you.
Mr. Mayor.
Mr. Resnick. Thank you, Senator. It's a great question. In
addition to being the Mayor and working with NLC on these
issues, I had the privilege of serving on the FCC's
Intergovernmental Advisory Committee for 8 years including as
its Chair through December 2016.
My committee supported the FCC reforming its programs to
recognize that people are getting new technology and the
programs don't work anymore based on the old technology,
including Life Line program which the FCC did reform to include
broadband support. So there's no reason that these programs
can't be expanded to cover broadband service.
Senator Schatz. I'm out of time so I'll take the rest of it
for the record.
Thank you.
Senator Wicker. Let's go ahead and let Mr. Gillen and Mr.
Berry comment briefly.
Mr. Berry. I'll give you one more factoid for your
illogical rationale on how we are spending more and more on
broadband and less and less contributions. Wireless is actually
spending--making a significant contribution to broadband.
That's the one area that's gone up.
Unfortunately, decisions in the last 4 years have reduced
the amount of funds that are available under the High-Cost Fund
for wireless. While we are paying 45 plus percent, we get about
8 percent now. Five years ago we were paying 45 or 50 percent
and we were getting 23 and a half percent. So how do you get
high speed mobile broadband when--and you're right, in a fund
that's declining, when the policies have actually decreased the
amount of funds that are going to mobile.
Senator Wicker. What decisions, what policies?
Mr. Berry. Within the FCC, when we restructured the USF,
you know, I represent wireless. So I think it's a little
broadband--I mean I think it's a little wireline biased, but
now we are in a broadband world and I think we do need to
address the contribution reform issue. It's been on the table
for a long time.
We have a lot of companies out there, especially over-the-
top companies are making a heck of a lot more on the networks
than the people that build and operate and maintain the
networks and we need to address that.
Senator Wicker. Mr. Gillen.
Mr. Gillen. Mr. Berry covered it well. It truly is, for us,
a matter of technology neutrality as well. We are paying in
roughly 50 percent of the fund, because we still have
telecommunication services that all of your cell phones pay
into this. But we are only getting 10 percent of the fund back.
So I think some of the equities we look at updated methodology
is who is paying in and the fairness of that program.
Thank you, sir.
Senator Wicker. Senator Blunt.
STATEMENT OF HON. ROY BLUNT,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MISSOURI
Senator Blunt. It's highly possible that I don't understand
how 5G is going to work. But what I think I understand about 5G
would mean that it would be likely to be even more slowly
implemented in rural America than what we are doing now. So
here's a premise.
The premise is if that's right and you have to have a 5G
tower every, you all can fill in the blank, but it all sounds
like to me it's pretty close, it might work in Wilton Manors,
Florida. It might not work in the rural parts surrounding
Wilton Manors, Florida as the example. So the premise would be
if--explain to me why 5G would be implemented in those last
people's served, and if it's not going to be implemented, would
we be better off to focus on wired broadband for those kinds of
locations knowing that there is likely not to be a tower built
for a long time every 500 yards. I think that's a big number
based on what I have heard.
Mr. Berry, do you want to start? And, Mr. Gillen, I can see
your eyes are twinkling there. So, and, Mr. DeBroux too, I
would be interested in what you have to say.
Mr. Berry. Thank you for the question. And it is real
interesting issue that I think technology is going to help us
respond and address some of those issues, but 5G IoT is a lot
of different things and a lot of different services.
There's some new technology the NB, narrowband technology,
on the IoT Internet of things can roll out through an LTE and
on top of LTE networks. So narrowband LTE. It can reach as much
as ten times further than existing LTE technology. So it's not
necessarily so that 5G IoT type of services and capabilities
are going to be rolled out in rural America last. I think what
we may have is an opportunity to actually enhance broadband
service, narrowband broadband service in some of the, you know,
more cost-effective deployments in rural America earlier. And
so if we had----
Senator Blunt. What do you mean by narrowband?
Mr. Berry. It's a type of technology that runs on a smaller
slice of spectrum and will--DISH technology, DISH is using
narrowband technology, as well as T-Mobile has just deployed a
narrowband technology running side-to-side essentially on the
guardbands of their own LTE network. So technology is giving us
great opportunities here.
Senator Blunt. All right.
Mr. Berry. So if we have some revenue and dedicated
resources for mobile broadband build out I think you are going
to see it sooner than you might otherwise expect.
Senator Blunt. Mr. Chairman, I'm going to have to take this
call.
Mr. Gillen. It's a 5G call.
Senator Blunt. While--it's a 5G call. It's probably a 4G
call. Go ahead and answer the question and I will read your
answer in the record.
Mr. Gillen. Absolutely, thank you, Senator. And I think 5G
will absolutely benefit rural America and it is going to start
in the denser parts, as any new technology does. So it's going
to first go to college campuses like Missoula, it's going to go
to the town square, places where you need to have the ability
to have a hundred times more devices and a hundred times the
speed.
But 5G will have applications, as Steve noted, that require
low band spectrum to go distances like connect a car and other
applications that is going to be different technology. So for
us we separate: there's rural America that absolutely will
benefit from 5G and then there are Americans unserved by any
broadband today, and those are really two different challenges
and we need two different sets of solutions for that, but in
terms of 5G benefiting rural America, absolutely.
Senator Wicker. OK. Mr. Udall is next.
STATEMENT OF HON. TOM UDALL,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NEW MEXICO
Senator Udall. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
This topic of this hearing is timely and important. In New
Mexico we have companies, including tribally owned
telecommunication companies, rural electric co-ops and
traditional rural, local exchange carriers that are working
hard every day to serve the highest cost areas, but basic
economics tells us they need more support from Federal
programs. And by support we mean dollars, not simply press
releases and rhetoric.
As I sit here and listen to some of the testimony it is
striking as major wireless companies tout winning the race for
5G, too many people in New Mexico and those living on tribal
lands are stuck without 1G. While carriers have been vocal
about what they see as delays, I hear from many rural areas and
tribal communities about these same carriers refusing to build
towers or serve those areas.
For example, the Village of Reserve, New Mexico was
approached by a wireless company in 2014 to build a tower
within village limits. Surveying was completed, but then the
company has failed to return a single phone call or e-mail from
local officials. That was 4 years ago.
So as we hear from companies asking for more latitude to
build in mostly urban areas, everyone on this Committee must
push them hard to expand to rural areas where so many
communities still do not have adequate internet.
And at this point, Mr. Chairman, I would just seek to put
in the testimony of Godfrey Enjady, the General Manager of the
Mescalero Apache Telecommunications, Inc. in New Mexico. And
he's also the head of the tribal entities----
Senator Wicker. Without objection it will be.
[The information referred to follows:]
Prepared Statement of Godfrey Enjady, General Manager,
Mescalero Apache Telecommunications, Inc.
Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Schatz and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to submit testimony. I am
Godfrey Enjady, General Manager of Mescalero Apache Telecom, Inc.
(MATI) located in Mescalero, New Mexico. I also serve as President of
the National Tribal Telecommunications Association (NTTA) which is
comprised of the nine Tribally-owned and operated telecommunications
companies that provide voice, broadband and other communications
services to their communities. Those companies are Cheyenne River Sioux
Telephone Authority, Fort Mojave Telecommunications, Inc., Gila River
Telecommunications, Inc., Hopi Telecommunications, Inc., Mescalero
Apache Telecom, Inc., Saddleback Communications, San Carlos Apache
Telecommunications Utility, Inc., Tohono O'odham Utility Authority, and
Warm Springs Telecom.
Mescalero Apache Telecom serves the entirety of the Mescalero
Apache Reservation located in the remote South Central Mountains of New
Mexico. Prior to MATI purchasing its service area and building its
network in 2001, 52 percent of the Mescalero Apache Tribe received no
service, and 48 percent received only basic voice service. Nearly 100
percent of the Tribe now has access to some level of broadband service.
MATI provides services in what is considered a rural, high-cost area
and serves an average population density of two customers per square
mile. This situation causes the average cost per loop to substantially
exceed the national average. In addition, 84 percent of the Tribe is
eligible for Lifeline Support, compared to the national average of 21.8
percent.
The recent 2018 Broadband Deployment Report acknowledges that only
31.6 percent of rural Tribal areas in the lower 48 states have access
to 25/3 fixed broadband service. MATI attests that, in its specific
case, extremely high costs are incurred to build out its Reservation
and maintain network operations to provide modernized
telecommunications and broadband services to its community and close
the digital divide.
The difficulties in serving remote, dispersed communities situated
in hard to serve, rough terrain has been thoroughly illuminated in
Congressional testimony and on the record at the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), and with USDA's Rural Utilities Service (RUS).
Access to capital is a major roadblock to network growth and
viability. Because most Tribally-owned carriers cannot collateralize
their assets, RUS is our only lender and I appreciate the work that
they do. In 2015, my company received the first RUS loan under the 2008
Farm Bill's Substantially Underserved Trust Area provision. RUS loans
and FCC Universal Service Fund (USF) support go hand-in-hand. Reliable
and predictable cash flow is required to get any sort of loan,
including RUS loans.
The National Broadband Plan, in numerous instances, outlined the
need for greater efforts to be made to make broadband available on
Tribal lands. There is a lack of FCC development of broadband
performance goals and measurements on Tribal lands. We recommend the
development of training, mapping, data collection, and performance
goals and measurements for broadband development in Native communities.
The arbitrary budget cap that has been established for the FCC's
USF high-cost program does not allow for adequate funds to build and
maintain the broadband networks that are demanded by regulators, policy
makers and consumers. There continues to be a debate about broadband
capacities and speeds, no matter what the platform of delivery. Fiber
optic networks, with the complement of wireless and satellite
technologies, delivers the most rewarding Internet experience to
consumers. And that network requires a viable and predictable funding
source, especially in areas that are remote, sparsely populated and
hard to serve. An examination and reform of the USF contribution regime
is long over-due, and may eliminate any need for the arbitrary budget
cap.
In June of 2015, NTTA went on record at the FCC with a proposal to
adopt a Tribal Broadband Factor (TBF) as part of the reform of the long
term USF for rate-of-return carriers. The TBF included a multiplier for
targeted support on Tribal lands, and had specific obligations for any
carrier, Tribally-owned or not, that uses the program. The proposal was
straightforward and easily understood, and was narrowly-tailored to
address the specific need to promote broadband while causing very
little impact on the overall USF mechanism. The FCC did not adopt this
proposal. In February of last year, the FCC began circulation of a
portion of the TBF proposal that would allow funding relief for
operational expenses for communications companies serving Tribal lands.
To date, this proposal has not been adopted. We call on this committee
to weigh-in with the FCC to immediately act on this opex relief order
and work to bring stability and predictability to USF support for
Tribal communities.
NTTA recommends that a pilot program be established to locate
existing infrastructure in Indian country. In many Tribal areas,
current infrastructure facilities (water, sewer, gas, electricity) are
not properly identified or mapped. The preference of burying new
broadband infrastructure leads to unintended cuts and/or damage to
existing utility facilities that can prove to be inconvenient and
possibly dangerous to the local community as well as adding significant
cost to a broadband build out. There are numerous instances of
Tribally-owned and operated telecommunications companies using a major
portion of their broadband project funding to repair damaged
infrastructure. For example, MATI recently incurred over $350,000 of
additional construction costs resulting from hitting unmarked water and
sewer lines during its current fiber-to-the-home build. In the case of
Tribally-owned companies, this funding would be provided primarily
through RUS loans. With aging infrastructure on Native lands, the scope
of this problem is significant and unknown. A pilot program, with
adequate funding, would allow all parties involved to develop best
practices and methods to identify unmarked infrastructure to avoid
damage and unneeded additional cost.
We also recommend additional funding for the development of more
robust middle mile infrastructure and capacity. Most Tribally-owned
telecommunications companies serve rugged and remote areas. Issues
related to distance and capacity make connecting to the ``outside
world'' very costly. As Tribal companies build out broadband to their
communities, they add more customers and therefore more traffic on
their network. Customer usage has also driven the need for more
capacity (Netflix, YouTube, etc.). An injection of funds to build more
middle mile capacity for Tribal use would greatly benefit those
communities.
Also, there needs to be a reallocation of spectrum for Tribal use.
The current process of spectrum allocation makes it very difficult for
smaller entities to access spectrum. This includes Tribal communities
which need both wired and wireless services to prosper. One way to
address the scale of size issue is to establish a Tribal Spectrum
Network to increase the capacity ``buying power'' of Tribal entities.
There are many other issues that can be addressed to enhance
broadband deployment in Tribal areas: expansion and increased funding
for USDA's Community Connect Grant program, the reduction of regulatory
compliance reporting for small companies, an enhanced Tribal Lifeline
credit, and a better Tribal engagement and consultation processes.
Mr. Chairman, much more work needs to be done on infrastructure
growth in Tribal areas, most importantly in the area of broadband
deployment.
Senator Udall. My question to Mr. Berry and Mr. Gillen,
there is much talk about the great future and capabilities of
5G, 5G wireless services and the need for more infrastructure
to build out that network. The FCC is currently examining
sweeping changes to Section 106 requirements that have been a
good example of government-to-government engagement between
tribal entities and the Federal Government.
How do your member companies view this Section 106 historic
preservation mandates and tribal consultation requirements in
light of the FCC's draft report and order?
Do you believe these mandates should be weakened and are
your members seeking to eliminate fees that cities and states
charge as well?
Mr. Berry and Mr. Gillen.
Mr. Berry. Thank you, Senator. Thank you for the concern
you expressed on the local tribal issues, as well as the
cultural heritage issues.
I would ask sort of a success story to be entered into the
record. One of our carriers, Commnet Cellular, actually worked
with the Pueblo tribes there in New Mexico to actually provide
a tower that is commensurate with their historical and cultural
acquisitions and worked very closely with them to bring them
their number one priority, which was service that was
culturally acceptable in its application.
So we very--most of our carriers are smaller carriers. They
live in the community. If they don't like something, you may
hear it at church and you may hear it at the PTA. So we are
very concerned about that in the local context.
But, we do believe that we need a modifications of Section
106 and National Historic Presentation Act, as well as NEPA. As
well as some of those tribal review requirements should be
focused more on actual addressing historical, cultural
antiquities and preservation.
It doesn't make any sense, Brad just mentioned, sometimes
you file an application and 2 years later you get approval. The
technology has moved so quickly that the antenna that you were
going to put up there is now no longer the antenna that works
in your network and so you have to refile.
So I think there are rationale, reasonable and logical
progression of how we can not only address those issues, but
also speed them up and bring that service to rural America and
we are totally in favor of that. And I'll share with you the
story that I think was a model of how we should address the
tribal issues.
Senator Udall. Thank you.
Mr. Gillen.
Mr. Gillen. Thank you, Senator. And we can and need to do
better in serving your residents in New Mexico. With respect to
the tribal question you raised, I think it's important from the
FCC's perspective what they are doing next week. It does not
actually govern actual tribal areas or reservation, it goes to
the consultation process of areas of significance.
And the challenge we face right now is there is an example,
a carrier wanted to site in Houston before the Super Bowl last
year 23 small cells in an existing parking lot. That process
cost $173,000 to site something on a parking lot.
And so I think what the FCC is trying to do is find the
right balance to retain the important tribal rights, but also
ensure we are deploying in a timely manner. We think the FCC
has struck the right balance, but happy to work with you on
that issue.
Senator Udall. Mr. Chairman, I think my time is up, but the
Mayor I think wanted to comment on this.
Mr. Resnick. Just briefly. I just wanted to bring to the
attention of the Senator and the Committee that the issues with
respect to deployment are not only in rural areas. I happened
to be at a public hearing in Leon County, Florida, which is
where Tallahassee is located. I know the representative is here
from Tallahassee.
And that when asked by a county commissioner whether a
company would install 5G technology in inner city Tallahassee
where residents do not have affordable broadband, do not have
reliable service, frankly, the industry in a candid moment
said, no, that there's not an economic case for that. We have
absolutely no intention of deploying 5G technology in inner
city Tallahassee and there's nothing in Florida law that allows
the city to require a buildout.
So it's not just the rural and tribal areas that are going
to suffer from a lack of this technology, it's the inner city
areas as well.
Senator Udall. Thank you.
Senator Wicker. Thank you, Mr. Mayor.
Senator Udall. And thank you for your courtesies.
Senator Wicker. Thank you, Senator Udall.
Senator Fischer.
STATEMENT OF HON. DEB FISCHER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NEBRASKA
Senator Fischer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In Nebraska one-in-four jobs is agriculture related. I
recently held an Internet of Things, an agriculture roundtable,
to explore the needs of rancher and farmers leveraging new
technologies that increase efficiencies and enhance crop
yields.
As we discussed precision agriculture technologies are
estimated to improve American farmer's crop yields by an
average of $40 per acre.
Mr. Gillen, in your view, how will 5G networks impact
precision agriculture to increase productivity and better
manage risk?
Mr. Gillen. Thank you, Senator. And thank you for your
leadership on this issue. Absolutely, we are very excited what
precision agriculture can do.
We tend to think about 4G made each of our lives easier,
made it simpler, made it more convenient. And 5G will do that
for industries and agriculture is certainly one of them. You
see the forty dollar example you gave. There's also examples of
reducing water usage by 50 percent thanks to sensors and better
utilization of data to keep farmers on farmland.
So we are very excited about what precision agriculture can
do and we have the challenge of deploying the networks to help
Nebraska be better farmers.
Senator Fischer. How do you think farmers can better manage
their risk through IoT?
Mr. Gillen. I think you know better than I, but I think
data is key here, just like it is when we talk about maps that
the more data we can give farmers about their crops, about
their land and their yield, they, they know-how to do their
job. So the more information we can give them the better they
will be.
Senator Fischer. Great.
Mr. Romano, do you feel different metrics or approaches
would be needed to properly address network coverage on our
Nation's ranch lands and the crop lands as well?
Mr. Romano. Thank you, Senator. I do. I think there's a--
there are two fundamental issues today with the mapping
structures that are in place. Now, the FCC's Form 477 data
right now is the best available source we've got. But there are
two primary I think issues with it. The first is that it is not
granular enough. If there is one location served within a
census block the entire location is deemed served. And as we
know in rural areas, those can be pretty big census blocks,
particularly when you have got agricultural communities at
issue.
The second issue is the fact that those are self-reported.
There's no verification process behind it. They are certified.
Providers have to certify that they are doing it, but there's
no verification of that. And as we seen in the mobility fund
context, as Mr. Berry described, as we have seen even in the
ACAM process or other processes, statements of overcoverage
lead to false positives of customers being served. And that
means, for example, that agricultural community does not have
the service throughout that is, in fact, claimed to be. It
might only be in the town and not to the surrounding areas.
Senator Fischer. How can we get better mapping? How can we
find those dead spots that are out there? Because in my area
they certainly exist.
Mr. Romano. So there are two things there. With respect
first to how do we get better data set beyond the 477? The FCC
has sought comment on that. One thing that we have suggested,
and Mr. DeBroux mentioned this a moment ago, is this notion of
geocoding.
So we initially had actual questions about the process of
geocoding, but what we found is that on a going-forward basis
with respect to figuring out where customers were actually
served it's not an unmanageable process as long as it's done
again going forward. And it could help to provide a transition
to actually figuring out at each and every location does this
customer have what the provider says they have there.
Senator Fischer. And, Mr. Romano, in your testimony you
referenced important distinctions in the FCC's USF and USDA--
sorry, RUS programs in terms of persistent rural broadband
challenges. You also stated that it is essential that these
longstanding complimentary relationship between RUS and the USF
initiatives continue.
How do you envision improved coordination going forward
between the two Federal agencies? So that we can avoid possible
believe overbuilding. So we can look for more enhanced
accountability and still maintain the integrity of these
programs.
Mr. Romano. Thank you, Senator. RUS and the FCC have worked
very well together in the past, I believe. There have been
times where communication might have been improved as some of
the reforms were going through and one agency was moving
quicker than another or in different directions, but by and
large I think the communication has been highly effective and
relatively consistent.
The question now as we talk about branching into new
programs, potential infrastructure initiatives, farm bill
coming up, what have you, this is an opportunity to make sure
we have got the right guardrails in place. What we don't want
to have happen is have two programs funding two different
providers to operate broadband networks to the same location.
We are going to be pitting programs against each other and
you are making use of resources that then could have gone to
other unserved areas or to help with the affordability of
networks. So having guardrails in place for affordability of
services. Having guardrails in place to make sure that a
program recognizes, for example, well, there's a FCC CAF II
build going on over here or an ACAM build going on over here is
going to be important and make sure those two programs work in
concert.
Senator Fischer. And how are we going to make sure that
this is extended to the State levels so that those dollars can
be maximized? Do you have any thoughts on that?
Mr. Romano. So, yes, Senator. We have been looking at the
prospect of potential State block grants. And this, to us, is
one of the most important questions to think about in the State
process is the states are going to be racing to get money out
the door as fast as they can and standing up a new program. We
are going to have to make sure that the same sorts of
guardrails are in place.
So, for example, New York had to do this in their program.
They made sure that they coordinated their program with the CAF
II initiatives to avoid that very prospect of overbuilding. And
I think the same care needs to be taken if we go to the State
route.
Senator Fischer. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Wicker. Senator Hassan.
STATEMENT OF HON. MAGGIE HASSAN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NEW HAMPSHIRE
Senator Hassan. Thank you very much and thank you to all of
our witnesses for being here this morning. Look, since joining
the Senate connecting Americans to robust broadband service has
remained a central focus of mine. I thank both Mr. Gillen and
Mr. Berry for mentioning a couple of the efforts I have been
involved in.
For starters, I work closely with Senator Gardner to
introduce the AIRWAVES Act which would free up more spectrum
resources to power our Nation into 5G. And the bill would also
set aside a portion of auction proceeds to invest in rural
broadband initiatives. Additionally, I worked with Senator
Capito to introduce, and here's a name that just rolls right
off the tongue, the Rural, Reasonable and Comparable Wireless
Act of 2018, which would help close the digital divide and
expand access to broadband in rural parts of the country.
So I would just like to give you both, Mr. Gillen and Mr.
Berry, an opportunity to talk to us about how these bills would
assist us in reaching our connectivity goals and spurn growth
in our economy.
Why don't we start first with Mr. Gillen and then Mr.
Berry.
Mr. Gillen. Thank you, Senator.
Absolutely, airwaves and spectrum policy are key to solving
this puzzle. When you look at the low band spectrum we sold
last year, that's enabling carriers now to reach rural America,
including some building out to Montana right now because that
spectrum goes a great deal of distance. So that spectrum is
definitely a key part of this puzzle.
And as you alluded to, one of the unique things in airwaves
is the idea of the rural dividend and that money raised through
the auction would go back into rural deployment. And that does
get to Senator Schatz point earlier where is this money coming
from and this is the wireless industry supporting the wireless
industry bill where you guys want us to build. So I think it's
a rather unique way of doing this and you are able to do both
spectrum and siting policy in the same item.
Senator Hassan. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Berry.
Mr. Berry. Thank you not only for your interest in those
two bills, but generally in support of broadband deployment.
We totally agree the AIRWAVES Act gives a road map on the
type of spectrum you can reasonably expect to be coming up and
it will give carriers an opportunity to say this is where I'm
going to go in my deployment scenarios. We would love to see,
you know, band 24 and I think 47 included in that, because I
think those two, you know, usable high speed mobile broadband
bands.
So I--we appreciate that and we also appreciate the ten
percent set aside that you included in the bill. I think it
will focus a lot of attention on how do we get that new service
out there sooner rather than later. So thank you for your help.
I think if the FCC had read your bill on comparable,
reasonably comparable wireless services, we might have had a
little more due thought to designing the perimeters around the
data requests that they made. Thank you.
Senator Hassan. Well, I appreciate that. And I was just
going to add my voice to the chorus to speak about how
inaccurate the data and the maps are. At the end of last year,
as I think you all know, I held a field hearing to examine the
state of broadband in the Granite State and mapping came up
frequently throughout the conversation. It continues to be a
serious challenge that throws off our efforts at ensuring
adequate coverage, particularly in rural areas.
Last week I joined a bipartisan group of Senators in a
letter to the FCC regarding their recently released map which
shows that most of New Hampshire is covered and, therefore,
ineligible for further support through the universal service
program mobility fund.
I will tell you, you can drive from Concord, New Hampshire,
our State capital, to our biggest city in the southwest corner
of the state, Keene, along Routes 202 and 9 and you cannot get
cell phone coverage for most of that trip. I, as Governor, I
had to try to respond to public safety emergencies while
traveling that route and if it hadn't been for a State Police
radio in the car it would have been extraordinarily difficult.
So your own members, Mr. Berry, testified at our field
hearing about their own lack of mobile service between
Manchester and Keene. So how can we work to address these
issues so that small carriers are not overburdened and states
like New Hampshire are not left to bear the brunt of the
digital divide?
Mr. Berry. Thank you for the question. You know, I think
we--years ago my grandfather owned an old two ton truck and
every time you wanted to take out a groundhog, meaning go a
little faster, you had to change the gears, but you had to
double-clutch it.
Senator Hassan. Yes.
Mr. Berry. And I think we need to double-clutch this data
access requirement. We need to get the right data to put this
thing in a higher gear because our carriers want to build out.
And so I think we double-clutch that by getting all sources of
Federal data and information included in it.
David Redl, as I mentioned to the Chairman Wicker,
suggested that NTI has a lot of data. They have good
relationships with states and counties, municipalities and they
already have some of that information that has not been tapped,
not been utilized. I think we can do a better job of that and
hopefully we can come up with a better map of where there is
and is not.
One thing that I would mention on the data that Mr. Romano
mentioned is it's a little easier to identify where you have a
fiber or a wire. Wireless is a lot different in their measuring
devices and their measuring scenarios are different.
I do want to thank the FCC for changing the wireless
measuring devices away from the centroid. So they finally
recognized that measuring the centroid, you know, whether it's
a part of the center. So, you know, we are working on it. We
are trying to do better, but we could, I think we could use
some help from some of the other agencies.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you. I know that I'm over time,
Mr. Chair. So thank you and I look forward to hearing the rest
of the hearing.
Senator Moran. Thank you, Senator Hassan. I now recognize
myself.
STATEMENT OF HON. JERRY MORAN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM KANSAS
Senator Moran. Let me direct this to Mr. Romano. The FCC is
in its finishing stages it seems of the high-cost program and
as you have testified, as we know there has been insufficient
funding that's resulted in cuts, uncertainty for small and
local broadband providers. We know it's clearly true in rural
Kansas.
So this lack of sustainability puts the investments that
have been made at risk, their future, and it creates an
unwillingness or could create an unwillingness for additional
investment in the arena.
This may be, you may have answered this question when in
response to Senator Schatz, but what is the long-term solution
for making certain that the investments made have a return and
that there is enough certainty that we will make future
investments?
Mr. Romano. Thank you, Senator. So there are two parts to
this. There is the answer I gave to Senator Schatz, which
relates to the sustainability of the funding mechanism itself.
I think your question goes to a certainly related issue,
which is the sustainability of the networks that the providers
are able to invest in, their reliance upon the program
ultimately to make their investments. We are making investments
here that they are talking about measuring in decades. These
are assets that are going to be long-term infrastructure assets
over which there is going to be cost recovery over the course
of decades.
The FCC had tried to reposition those for broadband in
2016, the mechanisms to support those. It rebuilt the engine,
but it didn't put enough gas in the engine and that has been
the fundamental problem. We have seen in Kansas that the
impacts have been worse than average and unfortunately in terms
of what it means both for recovery of existing investments and
in the ability to plan for future investments.
We are deeply gratified that the FCC seems inclined to take
steps perhaps to mitigate some of the budget shortfalls that
have hit carriers hardest in Kansas and a number of other rural
states. We are hopeful those actions will come through.
But we are still going to be in a case, to your point about
sustainability, come July 1 the budget control hits again. And
so we are going to be right back in the same thing with
providers looking at it saying, can I make investments for the
next year? Should I hold off because I don't know what the
budget controls are going to be? It's an ever escalating set of
cuts so far.
So we are hoping the FCC will act, stabilize the ground,
and give us an opportunity for a conversation as soon as
possible about what long-term sustainability really means in
these programs.
Senator Moran. Do you have any basis for that hope?
Mr. Berry. The FCC has been talking about an Order that
would address some of these issues in the near term and
immediately address, mitigate some of the budget shortfalls
that have occurred for this 12 month period. And we understand
that they are going to be asking questions about what should
the budget be going forward.
Our hope is that that will meet the standards of the Act
which look for reasonably comparable services or reasonably
comparable rates and the standards for predictability and
sufficiency.
Senator Moran. Thank you, Mr. Romano.
Mr. Berry, I want to talk about spectrum incentive auction.
Your testimony indicates that CCA supports completing the 39
month broadcaster repack in a timely fashion with adequate
resources provided to broadcasters to expedite the transition
and prevent delays to the winning bidders.
I'm an advocate for that repack and for adequate funding.
CCA members made up most of the winning bids for this
particular spectrum. Can you confirm and explain how funding
certainty for relocated broadcasters translates into
competitive wireless carriers expeditiously deploying
broadband?
Mr. Berry. Thank you, Senator. Thank you for the question.
Thank you for sponsoring the Viewer Protection Act also.
Six hundred megahertz was the largest--second largest
auction that actually ever occurred in the United States and it
is critical for our members to get 600 megahertz deployed in
their networks. Its great propagation characteristics, networks
in rural America. That's why 600 megahertz LTE is going to be,
you know, a great opportunity to get high speed mobile
broadband. We need to repack with a--we think the 39 month
timeframe that Congress set is the right timeframe. We were
very supportive of the broadcasters' efforts to not only
repack, but do it in a timely fashion and a safe fashion.
So I think additional funds that, my understanding, is they
have identified the cost of additional funding need and I think
it's reasonable to respond to that. We made, U.S. Treasury made
probably 13, 14 billion dollars net on that. Almost seven
billion dollars went into the first responder program, as you
will remember, out of that auction. So I think that's fair and
reasonable. Let's get that spectrum out there as soon as
possible. Let's build those networks.
Senator Moran. Thank you very much. I won't ask a question,
but I'll make a comment that there has been a theme about the
map or mapping or data accuracy. Senator Wicker led a letter,
which a number of us joined and if we can send a message
through this hearing to the FCC in regard to the accuracy of
the map we are particularly now talking about the Mobility Fund
Phase II map, and I heard what Mr. DeBroux said about there is
a standard there, a place to start we can work from, but let
me, in particular, complain about the appeals process or trying
to get the map changed. It puts a burden on people.
You start from, first of all, I think you start from a map
that is improperly determined, the accuracy or the value of the
map is nearly nil, in my view, but even if you start with the
baseline, the ability to modify the map, the actions that are
going to be necessary for a carrier or a community to get it
changed, I don't think it's going to be something that's going
to be easily done.
And so my hope is we start with a different map as compared
to trying to correct this one through an appeals process that I
don't think will work and will leave behind the folks that we
are desperately trying to provide service to.
Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Senator Wicker. We might as well say it, Senator Moran,
that the map is utterly worthless in terms of giving us good
information.
Senator Tester.
Senator Moran. You one-upped me, Mr. Chairman.
STATEMENT OF HON. JON TESTER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MONTANA
Senator Tester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And kudos to you, Mr. Berry, for the double-clutching
getting out of groundhog. We used to call it granny, but you
are probably more politically correct.
My first question is to Mr. Gillen, and that is it has been
referred to before that we need to win the race to 5G. What
constitutes a win? Is that people covered? Businesses covered?
Geographic area covered? What constitutes a win to 5G?
Mr. Gillen. For us it is that next generation of innovation
and opportunity happened here first. So it is a matter of
having enough scale that we have enough entrepreneurs and
innovators to build off of that platform. And so absolutely it
starts with a number of people covered in a timely manner.
Senator Tester. OK. So that and, by the way, that's the
definition of expect. The number of people covered in one block
of New York City is far more than the county I live in and my
county is bigger than most of the states. Not most of, but a
fair number of states at the table.
So the question is, is it--how do we get--how do we get 5G
into rural America? How do we get it there? The Senator from
Nebraska talked about, you know, precision farming, but it's
more than that. So how do we get it there?
Let me put it this way. I'll be more specific. Will you
commit to a pilot program for Montana on 5G?
Mr. Gillen. I'm happy to work with your office and put
something that looks like. I think for us 5G starts with the
densest area. So it is places like Missoula, it is town
squares, and then it goes go from there.
Just like 4G, and we continue to work on getting 4G more
and more in Montana. The job is not done by far.
Senator Tester. OK. So, and I'm not picking on Verizon, but
I happen to have one of your phones in my pocket. OK. Have you
seen the map on the advertisement that Verizon puts up? And, by
the way, I think all of them are this way. I'm picking on you
because I've got this.
Have you seen that advertisement?
Mr. Gillen. Yes, sir.
Senator Tester. Do you agree with that map?
Mr. Gillen. I've only had the chance to be in Missoula,
which had great coverage, but I have not been in the rest of
your state.
Senator Tester. Well, let me tell you something, Missoula
and Big Sandy is a hell of a lot different. I'll just say that.
It's 75 mile drive for me to Great Falls from my farm and I bet
I don't have coverage 25 miles of that and yet that map is all
red.
Do you want to talk about that?
Mr. Resnick. Just, yes, sir. And I do appreciate the
question and this is something that National League of Cities
and governments across the country are facing is that there's a
real misunderstanding as to 5G, especially when they ask states
to preempt local governments with respect to deployment.
So the industry comes in and says we will have 5G in your
communities and throughout the state and it's the next
generation broadband and we absolutely need it. Really, what
they are doing is densification of 4G networks in very dense
city areas for the most part.
Just to give you an example. The State of Nebraska is
currently debating a preemption small cell deployment bill, the
same as Florida passed last year, and the cities, lead by the
City of Lincoln, talked about lowering their rates for
attachment to city owned polls, to city and county owned polls.
They were willing to reduce the rate from the market rate of
about $2,000 per poll to $95 per poll if the industry would
agree to build out the entire state over reasonable period of
time with 5G service.
Senator Tester. Yes, but that isn't the problem. The
problem is you look at the bars on this phone, when I go home,
there are none.
Mr. Resnick. Right.
Senator Tester. There are no bars on this phone. So we are
not even close to talking about 4G or 3G or any G where I live.
We are not even close. I might be able to get a text message,
but unless I'm standing in the right corner of my house with my
mouth held in the right direction this phone does not work. OK.
And it's that way--I live in one of the more populated areas of
the state.
Go ahead.
Mr. Berry. Well, Senator, get back to the eligibility map
which, and you raise a really important point, it says it's
covered.
Senator Tester. Yes.
Mr. Berry. And it says a lot of places are covered.
Senator Tester. Yes.
Mr. Berry. What the FCC did was decide----
Senator Tester. So how do we fix that? The FCC is wrong,
they screwed up. We are getting screwed because they screwed
up. So how do we fix it?
Mr. Berry. Well, you've got to get better data. What they
decided was to collect data that was not what I would call----
Senator Tester. Who did they collect it from? Who did they
collect it from? Who did they collect it from?
Mr. Berry. They requested perimeters for the data and
information from all the carriers and the carriers gave the FCC
exactly what they requested. We suggested that that was the
wrong conclusion.
What they chose was the recommendation from the two largest
carriers on how to measure coverage, and I'll tell you that in
the last 8 years, the FCC is time and time again under very--
several administrations said we had 98 percent coverage
throughout the entire United States.
Senator Tester. You made the statement in your opening
statement, garbage in, garbage out. There has got to be a way
to get the FCC's attention on this, Mr. Chairman, on this
issue. It has come up in almost every one of these questions.
We are not going to solve the problem of wireless,
broadband, anything in rural America if we don't have good
information. And I would just say I've got 400 questions to ask
you guys. I'm not going to be able to do it. So put them in
writing and you'll have a lot of work to do, but the bottom
line is if we don't get this right----
Senator Wicker. Actually, you are limited to 300 questions.
Senator Tester. 300, OK. I'll par back to 299, with due
respect, but the truth is I know there is plenty of folks out
there that say things like, why do these guys even live in
rural America, they knew they didn't have the coverage when
they moved there.
I have got to tell you, I looked at my grandfather's diary
from 1915 and, you're right, he said, ``you know, damn it,
there is no cell coverage out here.''
We have to do better, folks. It's not working. Thank you.
Senator Wicker. Senator Klobuchar.
STATEMENT OF HON. AMY KLOBUCHAR,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MINNESOTA
Senator Klobuchar. Well, thank you very much. I think
Tester said it all down there.
But I want to start out, I noticed, Mayor, that you
mentioned the Dig Once bill that I've been leading for quite a
while and we are hoping we can finally get it done. It was
included in the MOBILE NOW Act and recently passed the House as
part of the FCC reauthorization bill.
As you know, this allows for better coordination between
state departments of transportation and broadband providers
during construction. You want to, I know you, I think, have a
comment on this, but maybe, Mr. Berry, do you want to add
anything? If you want to add anything, Mayor, that would be
great.
Mr. Resnick. No, I appreciate it, Senator. You know it's
nice when occasionally common sense makes its way into law.
Senator Klobuchar. Really?
Mr. Resnick. And it doesn't happen that often. So we do
appreciate it.
My city, for example, well this is around the country,
received Federal funds through our MPO to do about ten million
dollars in road improvements and I wanted to put in conduits.
It's very simple. It makes sense. We are digging up the roads.
It's no real extra expense. And we were frankly told, because
these were transportation and Federal dollars that we were not
allowed to put in conduits.
So we appreciate the Dig Once bill and the new legislation
and I think that's going to go a long way around the country to
speed up deployment of broadband.
Senator Klobuchar. Thank you.
Mr. Berry. Same here. Not only thank you for that, but also
signing the letter to the FCC on the eligibility map. We
greatly appreciate that.
All of our, and believe it or not, it does have a real
impact in rural America also. When you are building that road
if you can dig once it makes a huge difference. And what we are
talking about is how do you get that initial Cap X investment
down so that you can use that money to build out.
I was just in Shenandoah Valley last week with Commissioner
Carr and Shentel, which is a small carrier--larger carrier for
our purposes--saying if they can decrease their cost of
deployment to comply with Federal rules and regulations they
can put 13 more towers just on that one area. So that's
significant broadband buildout.
Thank you.
Senator Klobuchar. Different subject.
Mr. Romano, we just got the Rural Call Quality and
Reliability Act passed, something I worked on with Chairman
Thune as well as Senator Tester. This is all these dropped
calls that have been going on in rural areas and the President
just signed it into law and it's going to establish some basic
quality standards and a registry at the FCC.
Can you talk about how that will be helpful?
Mr. Romano. Yes. Thank you, Senator. Thanks to all of you
who supported that bill. Thank you for introducing it.
To echo the Mayor's comments, another case of common sense
making it into law. We should have reasonable expectation that
our calls are going to go through and that was an epidemic we
were seeing in rural America. Calls were not reaching rural
America and they still aren't today.
There have been efforts to try to improve the situation.
And it's a bit like wild fire, you put it out and then all of a
sudden it pops back up in a different space. So what this bill
will do and it's critical, it brings transparency to this
marketplace. It helps the FCC, it helps states, it helps the
industry to understand who is involved in taking these calls,
finds out--makes them register and finds out are they doing the
basic job of completing those calls.
We ask basic business registration for conducting business
in jurisdictions. This bill simply does a similar thing in
terms of calling those people out and making sure that we can
find them if we need to to ask the questions and get the calls
completed. So thank you.
Senator Klobuchar. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Gillen, in the run up to Super Bowl LII, I like to
mention that we had Super Bowl LII whenever I can, hundreds of
small cells were installed to accommodate the increase in
demand before, during and after the game. The deployment effort
will lay the groundwork for 5G communications capabilities in
the Twin Cities. How do small cells help address surges in data
usage?
Mr. Gillen. Thank you, Senator. We should all visit
Minneapolis because it has the best wireless network in the
country now as a result of the Super Bowl.
Senator Klobuchar. Thank you.
Mr. Gillen. And that really is the result of what Minnesota
state and Minneapolis as a city to create a rate structure and
the timelines to allow those small cells to be invested. So you
have 5,000 more bio tons capacity in Minneapolis today than you
did this time last year and you saw 71 times more traffic
during that Super Bowl than you did just last year's Super
Bowl.
And so in terms of where Minneapolis is with that small
cell infrastructure, they are ready for 5G in a way that other
cities aren't today.
Senator Klobuchar. And how could that be helpful at all in
rural areas? I can tell you we don't have that coverage in the
rural parts.
Mr. Gillen. Yes. Absolutely, Senator. I think it goes to
part of it is starting in the rural town centers, college
campuses and areas that are denser.
When we are talking about truly unserved areas, we need to
talk about how the mobility fund and other programs work. And
the challenge, as we all said, is getting the data right in
order to make sure we are funding the right places. But truly
unserved areas we are going to need your help.
In areas more dense where there's coverage today, 5G will
absolutely serve rural America as well.
Senator Klobuchar. All right. Thank you very much.
Senator Wicker. Now that item sitting on your witness table
there.
Mr. Gillen. Yes, sir.
Senator Wicker. That alone won't solve the question that
Senator Klobuchar asked about rural coverage?
Mr. Gillen. This will be rural coverage in a town square.
There is other more tradition technology that will be used for
truly coverage areas and more rural communities.
Senator Wicker. OK. Why is that going to work in a town
square and not five miles out of town?
Mr. Gillen. Well, this is only supposed to go about meters
in terms of how far the actual signal will go. And when we are
talking about in terms of serving rural Mississippi we need to
go miles.
Senator Wicker. OK. Well, darn.
Mr. Gillen. The technology is getting better every year.
Senator Wicker. Mr. Romano.
Mr. Romano. Thank you, Senator. That's one point that I
think is important to make is there are many tools in the tool
kit to solve rural broadband challenges. Small cells may offer
help in small towns. You know, our average density of our
membership's customer base is about seven people per square
mile. So we talking about 40 percent, 35 to 40 percent of the
U.S. land mass. It's going to be difficult to get those small
cells out there. We hope that they will, but it's going to
require ultimately as well a densified--the term densification
has been used a great deal today.
Densified fiber network to feed those small cells. So at
the end of the day in rural America, you are almost talking
about a fiber to the home network because those cells will need
to be several hundred feet apart in order to achieve the
promise of 5G in rural areas. It's going to take an integrated
solution of wired and wireless networks to achieve the
universal broadband that we are talking about.
Senator Wicker. Senator Capito.
STATEMENT OF HON. SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WEST VIRGINIA
Senator Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank all of you.
I think we worked with just about everybody on the panel,
again, for echoing what many of my colleagues have said, but I
have now figured out how to get rural broadband to West
Virginia, host the Super Bowl. It's that easy.
But I was recalling the conversations, I was listening to
your testimony several years ago that I had with our major
provider and I said, what is it going to take, what is it going
to take, insisting like Senator Tester was. Two things, time
and money. Well, you know, I get tired of hearing the same
thing, time and money. That's what you all are telling us, time
and money. So we try to focus the money.
We have a rural broadband caucus that Senator Klobuchar is
on. It's bipartisan. We have the desire, but you know I hear
about 5G development and I know 5G obviously the President's
decision this morning to disallow a merger because of security
reasons around 5G tells me how important that is on one, and,
Mr. Gillen, you have spoken to that.
But it also tells me when you keep talking about density in
town squares and college campuses, we are still not--they are
going to have 5G, but we are still not going to even have the
ability to do a lot of what we want to do. So I'm as
frustrated, as I'm sure you all are, and everybody else is to
try to get to that last, that last mile.
So let's talk a little bit about the census track. We
talked a lot about that. We have that same issue. We actually
have a broadband council in our state that has asked people to
do a self-test to see how fast. El flunko. I mean the results
are terrible.
So we know the data is not reflective of, and better yet,
what they are paying their bill, the service to receive is not
matching with what their data test is. But so what would it
take? Now it's like if one person is served in the census
track, the whole census track. So what would be a better
metric, 50 percent, 51 percent?
Mr. Romano.
Mr. Romano. I would submit actually that this geocoding
opportunity or geocoding method is a good opportunity. The FCC,
as Mr. DeBroux mentioned, is requiring those carriers that
receive universal service support to geocode. Get the latitude
and longitude of every location to which they are installing
fixed broadband.
And Mr. Berry mentioned about mobile. It's a slightly
different case. But fixed broadband you are then required to
show you actually have the service that you are saying you are
delivering to each of those locations. If we can get to that
level and it's going to take time because there's a transition.
Trying to go back and geocode every location where anybody ever
installs is a huge burden.
Senator Capito. So would you consider that a third-party
verification?
Mr. Romano. It's not. So this is--each carrier is going out
and geocoding when they do a new installation to a new rooftop,
to a premise, they are geocoding that they installed service
there and reflecting what they installed. So it is still
carrier reported.
The verification process I think ultimately when you are
talking about universal service dollars or other infrastructure
funds, for example, you are going to need to to set up a more
robust challenge process, which is the issue we are now seeing
with the mobility fund and we have had with other funds before.
Making sure that you are not having to prove a negative. There
isn't service there, but rather the provider who says there is
service there comes forward to validate, yes, there is service
there such that you should not then put Federal dollars toward
a program to invest there.
Senator Capito. So the other thing is money. We talked a
lot about the Universal Service Fund and the Connect America
Fund and where those dollars are going. We had the stimulus
package, the West Virginia stimulus package was a 126.3 million
dollars, and guess what, a lot of it was wasted. It was a
wasted opportunity for our state and sort of embarrassing too
in some ways when some of the stories came out.
So I put together an Act called the GO Act, a Gigabyte
Opportunity Act, which is trying to use the tax code to drive
investment to these last areas. So the Governor could
designate, much like he's going to be doing under these
opportunity zones that we created in the tax reform bill, but
the Governor designates these deserts of development.
So you could, the Governor could designate an unserved area
in the broadband area and you could create a fund that would
draw investment through the tax code into those gigabyte
opportunity zones. So I would ask you all to take a look at
that if you haven't looked at that to try to drive more private
investment into these areas before we give 5G to everybody else
and we are still sitting there with very little and no service.
My last question is, Mr. Gillen, you mentioned telehealth.
That's really important to an elderly state. Chronic conditions
can be monitored so well to people who lack transportation,
mobility, you know, physical mobility themselves or any family
members nearby to take them to their healthcare provider.
How do you see that rolling out into the really remote
areas?
Mr. Gillen. And, thank you, Senator. It goes exactly to the
challenge you just faced. Those that need the telehealth the
most are the ones we still need to reach often.
Senator Capito. Right.
Mr. Gillen. And so, absolutely, what you talk about on a
global scale it's a huge amount of savings and better outcomes
for patients and the challenge is connectivity in places like
West Virginia. But that we do see a great promise in the
ability to really revolutionize healthcare and drive down costs
by bringing healthcare closer to you and not having to have to
drive to Wheeling, or anywhere else, to get care. It will be
transformative when we get there.
Senator Capito. I know the VA is moving in this direction
too, which I would highly encourage and I think that would be
good sort of test drive how, I mean I know it's being done
everywhere because I've actually been to a couple
demonstrations, but really important.
And, last I'll say, Mr. Chairman, one of the biggest
phenomenon with our elderly is loneliness and connectivity can
help with that. You know, it's not waiting by the mailbox to
get a letter. Just think if you could Facetime with your
grandchildren or something like that to try to help with all of
the other issues that go with your mental health as you age. I
think it holds great promise.
So thank you all very much.
Senator Wicker. Thank you, Senator Capito.
Senator Peters.
STATEMENT OF HON. GARY PETERS,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MICHIGAN
Senator Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Senator Capito, thank you for bringing it up, the
statement about the elderly. I will tell you I think the person
that is most skilled at Facebook is my 93 year old mother. She
is amazing with it. And it is about being connected, it's
transformative to her life and countless other seniors. So
thank you for bringing that up.
Each of the folks for your testimony, thank you today for
that and certainly I think it is clear from the panel here we
all agree that broadband Internet and high speed internet in
rural areas is absolutely critical.
In fact, I really equate it to our country's effort in the
last century to make sure that everybody no matter who you are
or where you lived you had access to electricity, that it was
absolutely critical that we make sure that everybody had access
to it. In today's age high speed internet is in that same
category.
Certainly that's why I'm disappointed that it seems as if
President Trump doesn't necessarily share that in the fact that
the infrastructure package that was put before us doesn't
include any, none, zero, dedicated funding for rural broadband,
which I think is a big mistake.
My question for you though is that I've heard from many
local business leaders in Michigan that have reached out to me
about the rural utility service community connect to grant
program which prioritizes grants to communities that have zero
or very little access to broadband. Certainly an important
goal, but they have identified a problem with that grant and I
want to run that by you and get your thoughts on it.
As it currently stands, if any one household within the
applicant's defined geographic area has broadband service at or
above 4/1 megabytes per second speeds, the entire community
becomes ineligible to be considered for those funds. And while
it's important for these grants certainly to target communities
most in need, the 4/1 speed threshold has not been updated in
years. It's substantially below FCC's definition of broadband
coverage at 25/3.
So what I'm considering now is some legislation that will
modernize the grant program. The eligibility cutoff is intended
to be the base minimum for broadband coverage and preserve the
program's ability to prioritize the most underserved and
unserved rural communities. However, it's my understanding that
4/1 is simply no longer a bare minimum.
Do you think that the 4/1 speed threshold currently used by
the USDA should be updated? And that's to anyone. What do you
think about that?
Mr. DeBroux. Well, I'll start out. Thank you for your
question.
You know I do think we need to take the law seriously. And
the words, reasonably comparable, there's a little bit of
fuzziness on the edge, but there's no way 4/1 is reasonably
comparable to what you can get in major metropolitan areas.
The FCC tracks speeds and prices in major metropolitan
areas and I think that there needs to be something in place
that makes sure that the speeds in rural areas get ratcheted up
as those go up in metropolitan areas. So there needs to be a
connection in there.
Senator Peters. Any others agree?
Mr. Romano. Yes, Senator, thank you. We do agree. Our
members have actually made effective use of the community
connect grant program as it's constituted so far. But I think a
refresh, an update would be helpful to make sure that we are
continuing to raise the bar.
Your question also goes again to this point do you
disqualify an entire area, an entire community simply because
one location may be lucky enough to be served? In fact, there
are some cases, and this goes to the homework gap. You have a
school that happens to have gotten a State regional network
together, but the surrounding community doesn't have service.
That would disqualify it, if I understand the parameters of
community connect grant appropriately.
So it's a good point and one well taken and we look forward
to working with you on that.
Senator Peters. Mr. Berry.
Mr. Berry. Again, I go back to reasonably comparable
service, but also data. I mean how can you set a standard? How
do you know what it is unless you have qualified data?
We may be to the point that a third-party verifier,
collector and verifier of data may be. NTIA has put fifty
million dollars in their budget for data collection and
producing a new broadband map. Maybe the time has come so we
have a third-party verifier that would actually collect the
data and information, authenticate it and provide that
information to every agency in the Federal Government saying
this is where there is and is not broadband coverage.
And you can put the speeds with it. And, you know, 4/1 in
most urban/suburban areas would not be considered useable video
streaming capability. So you have some definitional problems
there. And I think the data is the key to whether or not you
can make that happen.
Senator Peters. So it's pretty clear that that is simply a
worthless standard to have 4/1 right now as part of it. That we
should be modernizing that. Any idea as to where we should set
that threshold or any advice?
Mr. Berry. Well, I would say--I wouldn't say it's a
worthless standard when you have no connectivity at all.
Senator Peters. Well, yes.
Mr. Berry. It's a pretty important standard. So we are
still going back to no connectivity versus, you know, 4/1. 4/1
sounds pretty good.
But it would be nice if you knew where those speeds were
and where that connectivity level was and have that in a map
that you could utilize for all different types of funding
programs. Not only the RUS program, but the FCC program and the
other two sources that you're going to make available, which is
under the budget act, 20 billion dollars there.
And then you've also identified additional funds that will
be in the infrastructure bill. We don't know what they are
right now, but wouldn't it be nice to have the ability to put
all these programs together on a map that says here's how we
can reach those most unserved areas in the United States.
Senator Peters. Right. Thank you so much.
Senator Wicker. Thank you, Senator Peters.
Senator Blumenthal.
STATEMENT OF HON. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL,
U.S. SENATOR FROM CONNECTICUT
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thanks for
having this hearing.
I want to talk a little bit about urban areas which, in my
view, are as important as rural areas in lack of adequate
service. Ellen Katz, who is the Consumer Council for the State
of Connecticut, recently testified at the House Energy and
Commerce hearing on closing the digital divide with regard to
the gap in Hartford. She called it ``the homework gap.'' I
think that's a common way of putting it.
Her report observed that many students lack adequate
broadband at home. They go to fast food restaurants or they sit
outside in all kinds of weather trying to pick up Wi-Fi from
another building in order to do their online school work. If
this problem exists in Connecticut where fiber services are
available in excess of 90 percent across the state they must be
even a bigger problem in other urban areas around the country.
So let me begin with Mr. Resnick. Would you agree that the
digital divide certainly exists in urban as well as rural
areas?
Mr. Resnick. Yes, Senator. Thank you for the question.
I actually included that in my testimony earlier today that
we are seeing within the urban areas lack of broadband access
by so many people simply because it's just not affordable. As I
indicated, the library in my city, the libraries in our areas
are packed after school with children just trying to get online
to do homework. We actually, through the National League of
Cities, had a conversation with FCC Commissioner Rosenworcel
about this very issue and she's from Connecticut and she made
very strong statements confirming that there are so many
children that just do not have access to needed broadband
simply to do their homework and they are being very creative.
They are, as you indicated, going wherever they can find a
good Wi-Fi hot spot, but that's certainly not the answer. And
this is happening not just in inner cities, but in suburban
areas, like my city, throughout the urban areas. So this is a
significant problem to address as well.
Senator Blumenthal. What's the best way of meeting that
urban need?
Mr. Resnick. Well, I think we need to focus on ways to
possibly reduce the cost of broadband. Currently to get ten
megz of broadband service costs many families over a hundred
dollars a month. That's just not affordable.
Communications costs for a family now easily are over four
hundred dollars. My neighbor who is a retired, 88 year old
gentleman, talk about connectivity for seniors, I mean of
course he wants to have Facebook to stay in touch with his
grandchildren across the country, to stay involved in the
community. He spends over four hundred dollars a month for
communication services and he's not getting anything special,
he's getting basic service. So I think we have to address the
affordability.
Senator Blumenthal. The Connecticut office of state
broadband, which is a division of the office of consumer
council headed by Ellen Katz assessed this homework gap in
Hartford and the report noted that a lot of Connecticut
families are frustrated that a smart phone is regarded by
policymakers and the public as a substitute for a home
connection for broadband Internet access.
Of course smart phones are typically expensive and
difficult to use to complete written school work or write
papers. I don't know how anyone could possibly use a smart
phone to do a paper.
Would you agree that a smart phone is no substitute for a
home connection for broadband access?
Mr. Resnick. Yes, sir. And we were actually disappointed
that some members of the FCC wanted to include wireless
broadband service as satisfying the requirements for meeting
broadband deployment.
As you indicated, children cannot do homework on a mobile
device, especially on a smart phone. It's just impossible to do
papers, to do significant research. It's really going to create
more of a digital divide if some students will be relegated
solely to that technology as opposed to have full broadband
access to do the work that they absolutely need to do. It's
just no substitute. So we do recognize that.
Senator Blumenthal. It's a form of sort of second class
citizen.
Mr. Resnick. Exactly.
Senator Blumenthal. In the broadband world.
Mr. Resnick. Exactly.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you.
Senator Wicker. Thank you, Senator Blumenthal.
Senator Sullivan.
STATEMENT OF HON. DAN SULLIVAN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
Senator Sullivan. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate the panel's insights on a lot of the tough issues
for us.
You know, I'm going to go back to the rural focus which has
been a lot of the discussion here in this hearing and, you
know, sometimes we talk about rural and then we can talk about
my state, which is I'm not sure how you would define it, but
extreme rural.
In terms of size we are about almost one-third the size of
the continental United States and have 730,000 people and
dozens and dozens of communities that are not connected by
roads. If you can put yourself in the shoes of Alaskans right
now, you know, hearing like this talks about 5G siting and
cells and, you know, a lot of my communities don't have 2G yet.
So excuse us if we are not kind of getting fired up about 5G
when we are not far down the line at all on some of the
previous technology.
So I'll start with you, Mr. Romano, but really open it up
to anybody. What would, what would be some of the most
important ways in which to address this, just, I mean we are a
big country obviously and Connecticut is a lot different than
Alaska. But what would be ways to really address, kind of, the
challenges that we have in the most extremely rural parts of
America, whether it's Alaska or some of the other communities
that you heard here?
I always look at this some ways as kind of a balance
between streamlining the permitting to actually get
technologies out and not delay, delay, delay, which is an
enormous problem with infrastructure in America whether it's
telecommunications or roads. And, of course, funding.
But, again, looking at some of the extreme rural
communities like we have in Alaska, what would you say are the
big issues and what are the problems? Is it NEPA? Is it the
National Historic Preservation Act?
I mean where do we need to focus to really get to, you
know, deal with communities that have been left behind?
Unfortunately, I have thousands if not tens of thousands of my
constituents who, they never talk about 5G because they are
still waiting for 2G.
Mr. Romano. Thank you, Senator. Yes, we have 13 members
that cover a significant footprint in your state.
So we are very familiar with the challenges they face that
your constituents face.
Alaska has some very unique challenges, but generally
speaking with respect to rural challenges we believe an
infrastructure package could contain at least two maybe three
key elements. First is funding, second is permitting and the
third is tax incentives.
There are going to be different tools in the tool kit
depending on what the particular challenge is that's faced. I
would suggest with respect to Alaska in particular funding is a
big issue. There's just no way around it.
The fact is that these remote villages are going to be very
tough to connect and build and your build season is short,
supplies are costly. All of those things drive higher cost in
Alaska for sure. Never mind distance and density alone.
So infrastructure funding and in that regard we believe
looking and leveraging existing initiatives is going to be
critical. Those places in Alaska where we have seen the best
success have been those places where there has been predictable
and sufficient universal service funding for those carriers
that can invest there.
The villages that are left behind are in many respects
those areas where universal service has not worked as well,
although the FCC has tried to recalibrate it to do so. The one
last piece I'll just mention quickly is middle mile. This is a
challenge that is often overlooked in universal service context
because everybody always thought about local telephone service,
that's where universal service started. But we need those
connections to connect rural Alaska, rural Montana, rural New
Hampshire, everywhere else to the rest of the world.
And those are connections that are today not supported at
all. Those are connections that are going to be critical,
increasingly critical as you are sending mission critical data
across those communications in terms of agricultural data,
connectivity, streaming video, whatever it is, that's a big
challenge in Alaska in particular of course.
Senator Sullivan. So just on that your kind of three areas,
would you kind of place one above the other or kind of all, all
of the above; taxes, streamlining, the permitting process and
funding? What would you say, is there a hierarchy there or just
got to attack all three?
Mr. Romano. There is a hierarchy. Financing, funding is
first. Because if you don't have the business case to invest it
doesn't matter that I can get permits more quickly, I can't
build the network to begin with.
So that's going to be first and foremost where it is
needed. If the business case is not there you need funding to
help make the business case. Then if the business case is
there, whether it's through funding or through the ability to
make it on its own in the marketplace you then move to
permitting. The ability to hit the ground quickly, remove
barriers, cost of deployment, and get those networks working
for consumers.
And then the third piece is tax incentives. To be candid,
tax incentives are an interesting tool in the tool kit but in
deeply rural areas you are not going to move the margins very
much because they are areas where it's hard to make any money
investing in the first place. If you are not going to make
money you don't need a tax break on the money you are not going
to make.
Senator Sullivan. OK. Thank you very much.
Senator Wicker. Thank you.
Senator Gardner.
STATEMENT OF HON. CORY GARDNER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM COLORADO
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Gillen, and
thanks to all of you for your time and testimony today.
Mr. Gillen, you talked a lot about infrastructure for the
future. Today's hearing spectrum is obviously a critical piece
of this and that infrastructure for wireless, the juice that is
going to keep innovation running; satellite, Wi-Fi and other
technologies.
This Committee has done a lot of great work under the
Chairman's leadership and I'm grateful for his leadership on
this issue including the MOBILE NOW Act that recently passed
the House as part of the Ray Bonds Act. And I just want to say
something about the name of that bill.
Ray is a, was a beloved figure in the House and a great
person. Just need this recognition to have happened.
I believe we have got to continue to keep up the pressure
to free even more spectrum and help close that digital divide.
That's why Senator Hassan and I introduced the AIRWAVES Act to
free up more license and unlicensed spectrum and to invest in
the buildout of rural broadband networks.
Do you agree that we should consider legislation like the
AIRWAVES Act as we continue to evaluate future spectrum policy?
Mr. Gillen. Thank you, Senator Gardner. I think we should--
it should be airwaves. Airwaves is the road map for the future
of our country when it comes to spectrum policy. In one place
we have low, mid, high band spectrum license and unlicensed and
the opportunity to make a difference in terms of a 5G race.
And the other thing that you guys have done, including that
bill, is the rural dividend to ensure that money coming in
through the Treasury will go back out to serve rural America,
to serve the plains, to serve the parts of Colorado that don't
have coverage today. You get to do both spectrum and
infrastructure policy and that's not we have seen before.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Gillen, for that. And
following up on kind of that rural comment. Mr. Berry, the FCC
recently released a new map for the dispersal of mobility fund
Phase II support. I appreciate the FCC's attempt to improve the
map and I continue to have--but I continue to have concerns
that it doesn't reflect actual coverage on the ground in my
home state of Colorado and I can tell you that because I can
tell you the mile markers south of town that, according to the
map, has excellent coverage, but somehow I don't have coverage
for mile upon mile upon mile when I'm driving it.
On the eastern plains, for example, nearly the entire
region is shown that it is served when I know firsthand large
service gaps exist. And so pleased about this decision, but are
many of your member companies planning to participate in the
challenge process? What would that look like and what do you
expect?
Mr. Berry. Thank you, Senator. And thank you for the
AIRWAVES Act.
Also, I could add two additional bands in there if you
would like to add 24 and 47 gigahertz in there.
Senator Gardner. Get the bands together, that sounds good
to me.
Mr. Berry. You got it. You're absolutely right. I was going
to congratulate you on getting a hundred percent coverage in
Yuma because that's what the map says you have, but obviously I
was premature in my congratulations, but----
Senator Gardner. My neighbors think I'm nuts because I have
to walk to the end of the block to get a cell phone signal.
Mr. Berry. Yes. Many of our carriers are going to
participate in our challenge process. The problem is the map is
so distorted in terms of reality of the coverage that it will
be exceedingly difficult for smaller carriers to challenge vast
territories of the map.
And this is one thing that we mentioned today, and I think
Senator Hassan also mentioned it, if you don't challenge it
then you're not going to be eligible for USF for 10 years.
Because that reverse auction is going to occur.
They are going to make a decision. Those areas that are not
deemed eligible, if they are not challenged, the auction will
occur 4.53 billion dollars will go out over the next 10 years.
Senator Gardner. How do we fix this? How do we make sure we
get this right?
Mr. Berry. I suggested earlier that you need to utilize all
the resources that we have available at the Federal Government.
I mean the NTIA indicated, David Redl, new Assistant Secretary,
said they have information, they have data, they have data
points that can contribute and inform the FCC on that and I
think we need to do that. The problem is, the 2009 Stimulus
Act, the money went out the door before the broadband map came
in. We should not, you know, commit the same error this time.
Let's try to get the data right as we are getting ready to
provide the funds available. And I think those are some of the
areas, innovative ways that we can inform the database.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Berry, for that.
Mr. Romano, when the BTOP program was created in 2009 many
people were hopeful about the money that it would bring into
rural infrastructure, underserved, unserved areas. A hundred
million dollars went to an outfit called Eagle Net in Colorado.
I strongly--and obviously they overbilled existing providers,
failed for years to meet their service obligations and now are
gone.
I strongly support including specific funding for broadband
in any infrastructure package, but I also want to make sure
that we never again have a situation like we did with Eagle
Net. Both from a competition standpoint and the fact that
somehow the Denver Cherry Creek School District was unserved
and underserved under its definition.
Will you commit to supporting strong oversight of any new
broadband dollars and robust buildout obligations for
providers?
Mr. Romano. Thank you, Senator. Absolutely, yes, sir. In
fact, that's one of the reasons we suggest leveraging existing
initiatives such as the Universal Service Fund. While it has
shortcomings in terms of the data that's available and the
challenge processes, it is by far the best way of ensuring that
we are targeting the money in the right places that exists
right now.
It also has great accountability on the back end in the
form of measuring where broadband is actually being deployed
and whether the provider's network can do what it actually
says.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Mr. DeBroux. I'm out of time.
Thanks for the work you are doing in Colorado.
Thank you.
Senator Wicker. Thank you, Senator Gardner.
Senator Baldwin.
STATEMENT OF HON. TAMMY BALDWIN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WISCONSIN
Senator Baldwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Schatz for holding this hearing, and to our panel of witnesses
for sharing your expertise. And I want to particularly welcome
Bob DeBroux, fellow Wisconsinite, from the Madison-based TDS
Telecom. I'm really pleased to have a Wisconsin voice at the
table today and thank you also for your membership on the FCC
Broadband Deployment Advisory Committee.
I also want to associate myself, Mr. Chairman, with remarks
of my colleagues earlier during this hearing who have
emphasized the need for dedicated funding for broadband as part
of any infrastructure measure that moves forward. Like a number
of my colleagues on the Subcommittee, from both sides of the
aisle, I wrote to President Trump urging him to include dollars
specifically for broadband and particularly in rural America.
And while I'm disappointed that he chose not to do so, the
Senate Democrats in putting forward our own infrastructure
proposal did include broadband. And I think as Congress
advances on an infrastructure package that we must address this
critical need for our communities.
Now, we are not starting from scratch regarding Federal
support for broadband deployment. In fact, we have current or
historic programs of the FCC, USDA and Commerce that have
supported expansion of broadband including in rural areas.
These can inform how we make future investments. So, Mr.
DeBroux, TDS telecom is a significant recipient of funds under
the Phase II of the FCC's Connect America Fund specifically
through the it's alternative connect America model program, and
I'm wondering if you can tell us how you believe your company's
experience with this program should inform how any new
resources are employed with the goal of ensuring the most
effective deployment of broadband to areas that are currently
unserved or underserved?
Mr. DeBroux. Well, thank you, Senator Baldwin, and thank
you for, apparently you have a lot of clout, because not only
was I put on the BDAC, but I was made Chair of a work group. So
it only tripled my work, but that was OK. Yes, I think there
are a lot of things that the FCC got right. I think their
programs have evolved and I think the accountability that's
built into their programs, and especially the certainty. I
mean, one, it's difficult, I think, for companies under the old
universal service programs where how much money you got
depended on a lot of things like how much your neighbors spent
on their programs and things went up and down to really make
predictable investments.
With the ACAM program and now with some of the improvements
that hopefully are coming with the legacy program it will be
easier to have more certainty in terms of how many dollars you
have. And with the ACAM program, the number of locations are
specified and with each extra dollar that goes into there the
number of locations that get higher speed broadband go up.
So it's a program that is scalable in that sense that you
can feed more money into it and you automatically get more
broadband and at the end of the day you have to report to USAC
how many locations you served including the exact location,
within feet, of where those locations are. So USAC is
collecting that data and they will then know going forward what
is served.
So the program, it did utilize the 477 data in order to
make sure that we weren't building duplicate networks and I
think that worked in the context of that program. People have
pointed out issues with the maps, but I think at least that was
a good starting point. So I think those are the types of
features, I think, that are critical that any programs, if
money goes to RUS or to NTIA in terms of having--and in
addition having specified dollars set out for infrastructure
specifically.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you.
Last year I had the opportunity to meet with a variety of
community stakeholders in different regions of the State of
Wisconsin: Washburn County, Green County and Eagle River, the
community, and Vilas County, Wisconsin, which is in the far
northern part of my home state. One thing I heard from
participants in this particular roundtable was their
frustration that the local and state planning efforts like the
one they undertook in Eagle River which helped identify the
unique needs of an area and how best to address them aren't
necessarily taken into account when distributing Federal
supports for broadband deployment.
So, Mayor Resnick, do you agree that there should be more
engagement with local and State planning processes and, if so,
what steps can Congress take to ensure local communities are a
part of the broadband deployment process?
Mr. Resnick. Well, thank you, Senator. And thank you for
your support of so many members of my community.
It's tremendously important that local governments,
counties, and cities have a seat at the table. I appreciate
being invited here to be part of this panel, but so often in
this discussion we are not. Look at, for example, and no
offense to my colleague at the table who is part of BDAC and we
appreciate his work on that, its ratio of industry members to
local government members is ten to one.
They drafted a model code for states without the input of
any single local official. So we do not feel right now that the
FCC is serious about engaging in dialogue with local
governments and we think that that's going to result in bad
broadband policy frankly.
So we do--any efforts that you can make to try and ensure
that local governments have more of a voice and a seat at the
table we would appreciate. Also, you cannot forget, you know,
we have heard throughout the hearing today about the
frustration of getting affordable broadband available in every
area.
Rural areas, inner city areas, et cetera, and the Federal
programs apparently are not providing enough incentive to make
the business case for the private investment that the industry
is looking for, but municipal broadband does have a way of
solving the needs of their communities.
Local governments are very good being creative coming up
with ways of solving of the needs of their communities. Mayors
like to get things done and if a problem exists in available
broadband for my community we are going to get it done. If we
have to build a municipal network to do it, we are going to try
and undertake efforts to do it.
So when you are talking about ways to engage local
governments and make sure that the needs of our communities are
met, we should not forget about the possibility of municipal
broadband systems. Too often we are preempted from doing so,
especially at the State level.
There's a situation, or an example, I think Wilson, North
Carolina, where they actually passed a referendum. The
taxpayers supported building a municipal network. It was built.
It was operating. It was providing great service and because of
State law they had to discontinue using it.
So there are plenty of examples like that where
municipalities and counties want to take the effort and spend
their residents' funds on these networks and State law simply
does not allow them. If there's something you can do with
respect to that, we would appreciate it.
Senator Wicker. Thank you very much, Senator Baldwin, and
thank you to the members of the panel and to the members of the
Subcommittee. I will tell you that almost one-fifth of the U.S.
Senate attended this hearing today. I think that tells us of
the interest we have in this subject.
Now, according to our procedures the hearing record will
remain open for two weeks. During this time Senators are asked
to submit any questions for the record. On receipt, the
witnesses are requested to submit their written answers to the
Committee as soon as possible. So we invite your cooperation
there.
Again, thank you for very excellent testimony and for
valuable information provided to the members.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:06 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
Prepared Statement of Utilities Technology Council
The Utilities Technology Council (UTC) thanks the Subcommittee on
Communications, Technology, Innovation and the Internet for the
opportunity to submit these comments for the record regarding the
above-referenced hearing. As the Subcommittee considers policies on
America's broadband infrastructure, UTC members are supporting
broadband deployment by both providing access to utility infrastructure
for third-party broadband providers and, where allowed, deploying
broadband services in unserved and underserved areas. UTC therefore
supports the development of policies which promote utility broadband
deployment and infrastructure access.
Established in 1948, UTC is the global association representing
energy and water providers on their needs related to the deployment of
reliable and resilient information and communications technology (ICT).
Energy and water providers use ICT networks as the backbone for the
infrastructure that delivers safe, reliable, and secure energy and
water services. These networks are essential for reliability, safety,
resiliency, and security.
UTC applauds the Subcommittee for holding this important hearing.
Our membership represents energy and water entities of all sizes and
ownership types, from investor-owned utilities to publicly and
consumer-owned utilities located in small towns and rural areas.
Although our membership is diverse, they all share the belief that
access to affordable and reliable broadband is a key economic driver
for our Nation.
Indeed, electric utilities, in particular, enable broadband access
in multiple ways. In many cases, where not prohibited by state or local
statute, a number of utilities are actually providing broadband in
locations where private firms have decided not to deploy such services.
Most of these locations are in rural, unserved or underserved areas.
For electric utilities, the decision to provide broadband services
to their customers and beyond is a natural progression because in most
cases these utilities have already built communications networks to
enhance electric reliability and resiliency; these networks include
wireline and wireless services that have narrowband and broadband
features. Therefore, electric utilities can use both their existing
knowledge and, in some cases, their infrastructure to deliver
broadband. As such, electric utilities can deploy future-proof, often
fiber-based, networks offering robust, affordable and reliable
broadband to potential customers inside and outside their service
territories. Importantly, the services these electric utilities provide
are reasonably comparable to the cost and quality of broadband
available in urban areas.
In addition, some electric utilities are willing and able to
provide wholesale services and infrastructure access to third-party
commercial communications service providers to enable broadband
deployment. As stated above, electric utilities have extensive
infrastructure that includes wireline and wireless communications
networks, as well as power poles and rights of way. Many utilities
offer wholesale capacity and dark fiber services over their
communications infrastructures at rates, terms and conditions that are
just and reasonable.
As this Subcommittee addresses broadband issues, we urge
acknowledgement of electric utilities as key partners in bringing
broadband to all Americans. Utility-owned infrastructure is an
important piece of the broadband-deployment puzzle, as power poles are
not only essential for delivering electricity, they are also used by
third parties to enable voice, data, and broadband services. Power
poles are designed first to deliver electricity to homes and
businesses, and in so doing they also power the carrier-provisioned
telecommunications services which cannot operate without electricity.
These poles are built to withstand tough weather conditions and hold
equipment that transforms high-voltage electricity into lower voltages
safe for homes and businesses.
With the advent of 5G wireless technologies, policymakers and
industry are looking at new ways to reduce pole-attachment costs and
expedite the regulatory process. This ``race to 5G'' is seen as the
next wave of broadband development that will enable greater
communications access to more people. Again, power poles play a key
role in the deployment of this technology, as small cellular wireless
devices that can be attached to electric infrastructure will be used to
bring 5G service to the Nation. These devices can weigh as much as, if
not more than, a pizza oven or a full-size refrigerator. In addition,
different companies will want to attach their own ``pizza ovens'' to
power poles or other devices, not necessarily recognizing that adding
so much weight to a pole could interfere with its first
responsibility--delivering the electricity that fuels everything from
our homes to the devices and systems 5G technology is intended to
serve.
UTC recommends this Subcommittee, as it looks to encourage
broadband deployment, consider the following:
Supporting broadband-funding programs that promote the
deployment of future-proof networks which provide robust,
reliable and affordable broadband services to all Americans;
Supporting pole attachment policies that promote safety,
reliability and security of electric utility infrastructure
while accelerating broadband deployment; and
Passing rights-of-way legislation that would clarify that
electric utilities may use their existing rights-of-way for
communications purposes. Doing so would promote broadband
deployment by preventing class-action lawsuits against electric
utilities that offer these services.
Ensuring that all Americans have access to affordable, reliable
broadband is just as important today as electricity was for the growth
of the Nation a century ago. Now as then, electric utilities are
critical partners in doing so and stand ready to assist.
UTC thanks the Subcommittee for holding this important hearing and
appreciates the opportunity to submit this statement. We look forward
to working with you and the full Commerce, Science, and Transportation
Committee in ensuring that all Americans have access to robust,
affordable and reliable broadband networks and services.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Gary Peters to
Hon. Gary Resnick
Question 1. The next generation of technological advances--like
self-driving vehicles--depend on increased connectivity and massive
amounts of data. I am deeply concerned that President Trump's
infrastructure and budget proposals do not appear to mention or
prioritize infrastructure needs of the future, particularly around
mobility, 5G, or connected infrastructure. What should Congress include
in an infrastructure package to support these initiatives? What Federal
investments are needed now to prepare for the future of mobility and
5G?
Answer. Cities agree that a national infrastructure framework must
be forward-looking, reimagining the infrastructure of the future while
repairing and rebuilding existing infrastructure networks. To that end,
broadband deployment and planning must be incorporated into other
infrastructure projects and programs, such as transportation projects
that could incorporate deployment of fiber or wireless equipment.
Congress should avoid focusing on the deployment of small cell or
5G-focused technologies to the exclusion of other broadband tools.
Closing the digital divide and enhancing mobile connectivity will
require a mix of wired, wireless, and satellite technologies. Even
wireless technologies will require an enormous amount of fiber backhaul
to support their transmissions, and support for smart cities and
connected infrastructure will require fiber investments to make the
wireless connectivity function. Congress must not be in the business of
picking winners and losers in the broadband industry.
Congress should also prioritize the inclusion of cybersecurity in
major infrastructure programs. As we have seen repeatedly over the past
several years, our increasingly connected workplaces and infrastructure
networks are much more vulnerable to cyberattacks, and these attacks
will have increasingly dangerous consequences. Finally, Congress should
prioritize digital inclusion efforts, not just the buildout of physical
broadband infrastructure. Too often, low-income residents are left out
of the benefits of our connected world, even if they live in
neighborhoods with broadband service. Without digital inclusion, low-
income residents of smart cities will be left further and further
behind.
Question 2. The omnibus spending bill provides $600 million to RUS
for a new pilot program of grants and loans for rural broadband
deployment. How should the RUS plan to use these additional funds?
Answer. Cities were pleased by the inclusion of $600 million for
rural broadband through the USDA's Rural Utilities Service. To have the
most impact, this pilot program should coordinate closely with local
and regional governing bodies, as well as the Federal Communications
Commission and the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration. This coordination must not only be focused on
preventing duplicative efforts across subsidy programs, but also
sharing best practices gleaned from existing or past subsidies,
encouraging economies of scale where possible, and coordinating network
build in adjacent communities or within regions. For example, Congress
should consider whether existing subsidized buildouts, such as
provision of E-Rate broadband service to a community institution such
as a school or library, can be expanded by a new infusion of funds to
serve the surrounding residential and business communities.
Congress should also ensure that rural service does not mean
second-class service. Federal support should be prioritized to
providers who can actually offer minimum upload/download speeds of
25Mbps/3Mbps or higher--the current Federal broadband standard--even in
low-density rural areas. Without some equity in the standard of service
available to all residents, rural communities will continue to fall
further behind in the digital economy.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Gary Peters to
Steven K. Berry
Question 1. The next generation of technological advances--like
self-driving vehicles--depend on increased connectivity and massive
amounts of data. I am deeply concerned that President Trump's
infrastructure and budget proposals do not appear to mention or
prioritize infrastructure needs of the future, particularly around
mobility, 5G, or connected infrastructure. What should Congress include
in an infrastructure package to support these initiatives? What Federal
investments are needed now to prepare for the future of mobility and
5G?
Answer. While it is important to lead the world in 5G technologies,
we must immediately focus on preserving and expanding mobile broadband
services to those who remain on the wrong side of the digital divide.
To ensure that all consumers have access to the latest mobile broadband
services, Congress should focus efforts on three critical elements:
sufficient and predictable funding for services in rural America based
on reliable data, certainty regarding policies for deployment, and
access to low-, mid-, and high-band spectrum.
Question 2. The omnibus spending bill provides $600 million to RUS
for a new pilot program of grants and loans for rural broadband
deployment. How should the RUS plan to use these additional funds?
Answer. As RUS works to distribute $600 million through a new pilot
program for rural broadband deployment, emphasis should be on grants
over loans. Additionally, RUS should work with the FCC to ensure that
future grants or loans do not impose obligations on future USF
decisions.
Question 3. The omnibus spending bill for FY 2018 allocated $7.5
million for NTIA to use for the National Broadband Map, and the
Administration has requested $50 million for FY 2019. Do you think the
FCC or NTIA should be in charge of the National Broadband Data Map? How
should the FCC and NTIA leverage and coordinate their resources to
provide more accurate and granular data?
Answer. NTIA and the FCC should coordinate their expertise and
resources to develop a National Broadband Data Map that reflects the
reality American consumers experience every day.
Administrator Redl has noted the need for better broadband mapping
data that is more accurate, granular, and verified. Unfortunately, the
parameters selected by the FCC for the one-time data collection to
determine initially eligible areas for Mobility Fund Phase II have
produced a map that fails to reliably reflect coverage. Data collected
to shape the National Broadband Data Map should balance real world
coverage without unduly burdening wireless carriers or state and local
governments.
Question 4. As noted during the hearing, I am considering
legislative options for modernizing the RUS Community Connect grant
program. The program currently sets an eligibility cut off that makes
communities ineligible if a single household has broadband service at
or above 4/1 megabits per second. This speed threshold has not been
updated in years, and it is substantially below the FCC's definition of
broadband coverage at 25/3 speeds. In addition to my questions we
discussed regarding the 4/1 speed threshold, do you have other
recommendations for modernizing these RUS grants?
Answer. RUS grant programs should provide support for an increasing
range of speeds based on technology and spectrum availability. However,
eligibility should be determined from geographic coverage based on
reliable data, not an outdated model where service available at one
location could eliminate entire areas from funding eligibility.
Question 5. Your testimony ``encourages the use of grants instead
of loans due to the costly, unnecessary bureaucratic red tape that
accompanies current RUS loans.'' Can you elaborate on what makes grants
preferential?
Answer. Mobile carriers today rely on various funding models,
especially to fund deployments in rural and high cost areas. While
carriers must already navigate bureaucratic processes in the
application and review process, additional steps to satisfy Federal
loan programs can add additional delays and costs compared to loans
available through commercial channels.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto
to Steven K. Berry
Question 1. In Nevada we have the most public lands of any state in
the Nation. In some of these remote areas, Internet access is extremely
slow or nonexistent. This presents a number of challenges for both the
residents who live in these areas to the government employees who
manage them, but there's also opportunities in these places.
Can you give an examples of any partnerships that have been done
with land management agencies that have increased access to high speed
broadband for these outposts?
Can you give examples of any of these partnerships being used to
increase access to high speed broadband to communities in these areas?
Answer. CCA is continuing outreach to members for examples of
successful partnerships with land management agencies and will provide
any additional updates to your office.
Question 2. 5G will rely on small cells with short signal ranges.
This raises questions about how they will be deployed and utilized in
remote areas like those we have in Nevada. Can you give examples of
these cells being deployed and befitting in rural areas?
Answer. Small cells are not only for big cities, and are being used
in addition to traditional macro-cell towers to provide coverage in
both urban and rural areas. Small cells can be particularly useful in
rural areas with areas where people congregate and need greater data
capacity, such as schools and universities, local sporting events,
designated areas of commerce or government, rural areas of recreation
and sport, and events such as state fairs and festivals. Additionally,
small cells may be deployed in rural areas where other considerations
may present challenges to deploying traditional towers.
Question 3. Can you describe the approval process by which telecom
carriers install components of their networks on Federal land?
Answer. Carriers must navigate a lengthy, complicated process to
gain regulatory approval to site mobile infrastructure, rife with
potential for delays or costs. The attached chart, produced by CCA,
describes the siting process for telecom equipment. CCA supports the
SPEED Act and appreciates your leadership on these issues, which will
benefit both urban and rural areas.
Question 4. What improvements are needed to the process to ensure
better connections for our residents and visitors to many of our
beautiful public land destinations, like Great Basin National Park?
Answer. Enacting the SPEED Act will help streamline deployment and
provide improved mobile broadband services. Enhancing mobile broadband
can also support residents and visitors to national parks and public
land destinations through allowing connectivity when desired for social
media and augmented reality experiences, as well as critical
connections to public safety and 9-1-1 if necessary. As policies are
updated, it is important that specific master plans are updated to
allow for telecommunications deployments, particularly if existing
master plans stretch over a decade or longer.
Question 5. The administration's proposal includes no direct
funding for rural broadband but $50 billion for rural infrastructure,
80 percent of which comes in the way of formula grants to the states
who will have the discretion to doll that money out as they see fit.
States often do not have institutions dedicated to allocating grant
money for rural broadband like they do for projects like water or
highways. What has been your experience in states prioritizing
broadband over other projects like highways or water?
Answer. While state focus on broadband deployment policies and
funding varies from state to state, traditional state infrastructure
policies have not focused on broadband deployment and have prioritized
other projects. CCA supports Congressional efforts to include direct
funding for rural broadband programs in any infrastructure legislative
package.
Question 6. One issue of concern in ensuring that Federal funds
that are included in any plan are well spent and not wasted. How do we
ensure we have the proper oversight or metrics in place to ensure that
Federal funds are well spent and reach the intended people without
adequate service?
Answer. You cannot manage what you cannot measure; reliable
coverage data is critical to structuring a program to provide funding
to reach the intended areas. Absent reliable data, areas that should be
eligible for funding will be left behind. Additionally, using lessons
learned from Mobility Fund Phase I, oversight of disbursed funds should
not freeze capital through withholding reimbursement until after
separate USAC certification, and build out time frames should be
flexible to accommodate for any delays outside a carrier's control,
including in the application process. Balancing oversight with
flexibility will encourage participation in programs, particularly in
remote areas, to ensure that Federal funds are being used as intended.
Question 7. Is increasing the amount of resources to RUS and the
FCC sufficient to meet our Nation's needs?
Answer. Congress directed the FCC to administer the Universal
Service Fund to provide eligible carriers with support that is both
predictable and sufficient. To close the digital divide in high cost
areas, additional resources are needed to support a business case where
private capital alone may not be sufficient.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Gary Peters to
Robert DeBroux
Question 1. The next generation of technological advances--like
self-driving vehicles--depend on increased connectivity and massive
amounts of data. I am deeply concerned that President Trump's
infrastructure and budget proposals do not appear to mention or
prioritize infrastructure needs of the future, particularly around
mobility, 5G, or connected infrastructure. What should Congress include
in an infrastructure package to support these initiatives? What Federal
investments are needed now to prepare for the future of mobility and
5G?
Answer. Successful deployment of 5G requires more than just
wireless ``towers.'' It requires, for the most part, fiber connections
to the network. In rural areas, especially, the business case for these
connections, i.e., covering the cost of these connections, may require
specific funding. Thus, any goal of deploying 5G broadly will need
dedicated funding.
Question 2. The omnibus spending bill provides $600 million to RUS
for a new pilot program of grants and loans for rural broadband
deployment. How should the RUS plan to use these additional funds?
Answer. The omnibus spending bill provided a solid framework for
the RUS to follow in establishing the new broadband pilot program. Most
important is Congress's acknowledgment that government funded projects
should be directed to unserved areas and to only one entity per service
area. I would recommend that Congress direct RUS to not only consult
with the FCC, but require that the RUS use the FCC's data to verify
that areas are unserved. In addition, RUS can allow current Universal
Service Fund (``USF'') recipients' to have the right of first refusal
prior to funding any incumbent provider's service area when applying
for funding. The FCC can also verify to the RUS which applicants are
USF recipients.
Question 3. The omnibus spending bill for FY 2018 allocated $7.5
million for NTIA to use for the National Broadband Map, and the
Administration has requested $50 million for FY 2019. Do you think the
FCC or NTIA should be in charge of the National Broadband Data Map? How
should the FCC and NTIA leverage and coordinate their resources to
provide more accurate and granular data?
Answer. The FCC should be the primary agency tasked with collecting
and interpreting broadband data. However, Congress has designated that
NTIA host and maintain the National Broadband Map and it's now up to
Congress to make sure that NTIA is not duplicating efforts taken by the
FCC or using different standards or benchmarks when collecting
broadband data. I would also add that the Census Bureau can also be
very helpful in providing broadband data to NTIA and the FCC. For
example, as the Census Bureau begins work on the 2020 Census, Congress
should direct the Census Bureau to geocode all parcel locations and
provide that information to the FCC and NTIA so that rural broadband
carriers can better identify where households are located.
Question 4. As noted during the hearing, I am considering
legislative options for modernizing the RUS Community Connect grant
program. The program currently sets an eligibility cut off that makes
communities ineligible if a single household has broadband service at
or above 4/1 megabits per second. This speed threshold has not been
updated in years, and it is substantially below the FCC's definition of
broadband coverage at 25/3 speeds. In addition to my questions we
discussed regarding the 4/1 speed threshold, do you have other
recommendations for modernizing these RUS grants?
Answer. The Farm Bill must be reauthorized by Congress by the end
of this year. Reauthorizing the Farm Bill, presents a real opportunity
for Congress to improve not only the RUS Community Connect Program but
also the RUS Rural Broadband Program. TDS suggests that the Community
Connect Program be rolled in the RUS Rural Broadband Program to gain
the greatest efficiency and to ensure better participation by
perspective applicants
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto
to Robert DeBroux
Question 1. I have heard from other people in your industry that
personnel is a major challenge. They feel that there is insufficient
personnel at state and national level agencies to review applications
quickly. This gets at the heart of the problem which is that this
administration wants to roll back the time it takes to do these reviews
and permitting but has also neglected staffing many of these agencies
responsible. How has, in your experience, staffing affected the speed
of the process?
Answer. It has been our experience that in some instances, lack of
staff has contributed to delays in applications However, when staff has
to comb through thousands of Federal and state laws just to approve an
application then it's easy to see why permit applications are delayed.
By appropriately streamlining the permit process and waiving some of
the more onerous requirements that in most cases, shouldn't apply to
broadband permit applications, the Federal government will be making
Federal agencies more efficient while at the same time promoting the
stated policy goal of expediting broadband deployment on Federal lands.
Question 2. How can we have ``shot clocks'' work if agencies are
not staffed to meet demand?
Answer. The alternative to not having ``shot clocks'' is what we
have today, thousands of permits pending before the Federal government.
Congress needs to find the right balance between providing adequate
time for agencies to review applications but not allowing the weight of
Federal bureaucracy to ensure broadband permits are never be approved.
Question 3. A recent Wireless Infrastructure Association report
notes that engineers and technicians need new training as we advance 5G
infrastructure.
What workforce development challenges is the industry facing?
What is being done to ensure that women and minorities have the
chance to fill these well-paying and technical positions?
Answer. As a primary wireline company I do not have any insight
into the challenges of 5G infrastructure.
Question 4. The administration's proposal includes no direct
funding for rural broadband but $50 billion for rural infrastructure,
80 percent of which comes in the way of formula grants to the states
who will have the discretion to doll that money out as they see fit.
States often do not have institutions dedicated to allocating grant
money for rural broadband like they do for projects like water or
highways. What has been your experience in states prioritizing
broadband over other projects like highways or water?
Answer. To my knowledge, the Trump Administration's proposal on
infrastructure would be the first time Federal broadband projects would
have to compete against more traditional infrastructure projects such
as highways and bridges. So while TDS doesn't have any experience in
competing against projects like bridges and roads I would caution
Congress and this Administration from establishing such a precedent.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Jerry Moran to
Brad Gillen
Question 1. I understand that the next generation of 5G wireless
networks will require hundreds of thousands of small cells that will be
placed on existing infrastructure. I'm encouraged that the FCC recently
released a draft decision that would exempt some of these small cells
from the burdensome and costly environmental and historic process
reviews that the FCC is required to conduct. Does CTIA favor the
proposed action?
Answer. Yes, consistent with the helpful direction in your
legislation, the RAPID Act, the Federal Communications Commission's
decision to update the environmental and historic preservation reviews
designed for large cell towers will accelerate 5G deployment, spur
significant new investment, innovation and job creation and help the
United States win the global race to 5G.
The wireless industry is preparing to install 800,000 small cells
in the next few years to make 5G a reality. These small cells are
roughly the size of a pizza box and can be installed in an hour or two
on a streetlight or utility pole, but it can take a year or more to get
the necessary siting permits due to rules designed for 200-foot cell
towers.
The Commission's March 22 decision to modernize some NEPA and NHPA
permitting reviews will mean tremendous time and cost savings that will
boost network investment and job creation, without impacting the
environment or historic properties, as reviews will still happen when
appropriate.
A recent Accenture report found that almost a third of the cost of
next-generation wireless deployments go to Federal reviews that the FCC
modernized with their decision. Accenture projects reforms like those
the FCC adopted could bring $1.6 billion in savings, helping jumpstart
5G deployment.
In addition to these reforms, the most important thing the Federal
government can now do is update its nationwide guidelines for how state
and local governments treat siting requests.
Question 2. To win the global race of 5G, the wireless industry
needs to rapidly deploy small cells, but many of today's rules were
designed for the large macro towers. I appreciate the work that the FCC
is doing this month to modernize the environmental and historic
preservation rules, but what should Congress do to ensure the United
States remains the world's leader in wireless?
Answer. Congress can help the United States remain the world's
leader in wireless by focusing on two main issues: (1) infrastructure
reforms and (2) building a spectrum pipeline.
(1) To unlock hundreds of billions of investment in new networks,
the U.S. needs a modernized siting framework. The most meaningful step
Congress can take is to provide clear direction and guardrails to state
and local governments for wireless infrastructure siting. CTIA is
encouraged that Senators Thune and Schatz have circulated a discussion
draft that updates congressional guidance to localities to reflect how
wireless infrastructure has evolved. The draft's ``shot clock''
provision provides reasonable timelines for states and localities to
act on siting applications and creates an important enforcement
mechanism--the ``deemed granted'' remedy. The FCC has already had a
``deemed granted'' tool in place since 2014 for certain facilities
requests, but this should be broadened to cover all siting reviews to
expedite deployment decisions. The draft also clarifies that localities
retain the right to charge for access to public property, provided that
rates are fair and reasonable, competitively and technologically
neutral, and based on actual costs. The impact of excessive fees is
real: disproportionate costs to site wireless infrastructure hinder
deployment, particularly in rural areas. These proposed reforms would
promote broadband investment, while preserving local authority in key
areas like zoning, safety, and aesthetics.
When it comes to the Federal review process and siting on Federal
lands, we applaud recent reforms. The FCC's action to streamline
environmental and historic preservation reviews designed for large cell
towers, consistent with your common-sense legislation, the RAPID Act
(S. 2576) as well as the SPEED Act (S. 1988) introduced by Senators
Wicker and Cortez Masto will accelerate 5G deployment. In addition, the
inclusion of a shot clock on Federal agencies and other provisions to
streamline wireless deployments on Federal lands in the Consolidated
Appropriations Act, 2018 was important progress. Congress can further
facilitate wireless deployments on Federal property by creating a
deemed granted remedy for siting applications that are not addressed in
a timely manner like that included in the Rural Broadband Deployment
Streamlining Act (S. 1363) introduced by Senators Heller and Manchin.
(2) We need a new schedule of spectrum auctions to support consumer
demand and 5G. Congress has already identified a number of bands
including low-, mid-, and high-bands for both study and auction,
including those proposed by Senators Gardner and Hassan in the AIRWAVES
Act (S. 1682). The FCC has recently announced at least one high-band
auction this year, and a clear schedule of additional spectrum auctions
would create certainty, encourage investment, and allow wireless
providers to plan and build their 5G networks to maximize efficiency
and robustness.
Question 3. Are Congress, the FCC, and the Administration doing
enough to help the U.S. win the race to 5G, or are we in serious danger
of ceding the mantle of wireless leadership to China, Japan, and South
Korea?
Answer. The U.S. is in a very tight race to lead in 5G. China,
South Korea, and other nations are threatening to overtake our wireless
leadership by investing billions, allocating huge blocks of spectrum,
and conducting hundreds of 5G trials.
The good news is that America's wireless industry is already
investing in the next generation of wireless with trials across the
country and some initial 5G deployments planned for this year.
According to Accenture research, the U.S. wireless industry contributes
$475 billion annually to America's economy and supports 4.7 million
jobs and the industry is poised to invest $275 billion of its own
private capital to build next-generation wireless networks. This will
create more than 3 million new jobs, and add $500 billion to our
economy, according to Accenture.
The wireless industry will continue to invest, deploy, and
innovate, but our continued global leadership depends on a committed
and comprehensive spectrum and infrastructure policy.
If Congress follows through on these key reforms in 2018, we will
be well positioned to be the world's leader in wireless:
Address wireless infrastructure needs. Federal policymakers
can help the U.S. win the race to 5G by updating its guidance
for state and local governments on wireless infrastructure
siting, and further build on recent reforms to streamline
siting on Federal lands. The U.S. will not win the global race
if timelines and costs are not significantly reduced across the
country.
Spectrum pipeline. We are encouraged that congressional
leaders and the FCC are focused on the key spectrum bands we
need for our future, and the challenge now is executing quickly
on these priorities. The U.S. has no mid-band spectrum (3-24
GHz) currently available for commercial use. The FCC is focused
on finalizing more investment-friendly rules for the 3.5 GHz
band, but a timetable for bringing that spectrum to market
remains unclear. While the FCC is exploring other mid-band
spectrum bands, including the 3.7-4.2 GHz band, which is a key
band for 5G globally, there is no clear timetable for a future
auction. We applaud the FCC's announcement that at least one
high-band auction will be held in 2018, and we encourage
policymakers to ready additional high-band spectrum for 5G
networks. Additionally, underused Federal spectrum should be
reallocated for commercial use where possible. We strongly
support Senators Gardner and Hassan's AIRWAVES Act, which
provides a clear plan for additional spectrum across a wide and
diverse range of frequencies.
Question 4. A growing number of states have adopted legislation to
accelerate the deployment of small cells. Are any of these new state
laws a particularly good model for us to follow if we undertake an
effort to create a Federal framework for the deployment of small cells?
Answer. A new Accenture study shows the powerful impact of wireless
investment and innovation across all 50 states. In Kansas alone, the
wireless industry contributes $7 billion to the State's economy and
supports 63,000 jobs. Fifteen states, including Kansas, have enacted
legislation to modernize rules impacting the deployment of small cells,
with other legislatures actively considering bills. The key provisions
of the state bills that make the biggest impact is the inclusion of
clear timetables for government action on siting requests and setting
cost-based rates for siting. States that are the first facilitate
wireless infrastructure deployment will likely see the greatest
benefit.
At the Federal level, Congress has repeatedly prioritized the rapid
deployment of wireless infrastructure as a national priority and
previously set nationwide guidelines for how localities should treat
siting requests. The race to 5G necessitates updating Congress's
guidance to localities, as the rules that applied to the infrastructure
of the past are no longer appropriate to support next-generation 5G
deployment. CTIA is encouraged that Chairman Thune and Sen. Schatz have
circulated a discussion draft that seeks to provide clear direction--
and guardrails around--state and local governments, while preserving
local authority over zoning, safety, and aesthetics.
We support state and Federal efforts to provide reasonable access
to rights of way, reasonable costs and fees, and streamlined processes
for the deployment of small cells.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Gary Peters to
Brad Gillen
Question 1. The next generation of technological advances--like
self-driving vehicles--depend on increased connectivity and massive
amounts of data. I am deeply concerned that President Trump's
infrastructure and budget proposals do not appear to mention or
prioritize infrastructure needs of the future, particularly around
mobility, 5G, or connected infrastructure. What should Congress include
in an infrastructure package to support these initiatives? What Federal
investments are needed now to prepare for the future of mobility and
5G?
Answer. The key infrastructure reform for wireless is modernizing
our siting rules and regulations. Our industry stands ready to invest
$275 billion in private capital in tomorrow's networks according to
Accenture.
The good news is Congress already enacted several important reforms
in the recently passed Appropriations Act that will assist in the
deployment of 5G networks on Federal lands. These include shot-clocks
for reviewing applications, the creation of contracts and applications
that would be consistent across Federal agencies, further streamlining
such applications, and adding information about facilities able to
support communications facilities to the existing Federal assets
database. There is more work to be done on Federal siting. First, the
newly created shot-clock for the review of applications for facilities
on Federal property should include a ``deemed granted'' remedy when the
shot clock rules are violated. The shot clock has limited utility if
there is no enforcement mechanism at the end. In basketball, when the
shot clock expires, you lose the ball.
The most significant reform Congress can take is to update the
guardrails on state and local governments to prevent unnecessary delays
or impediments to the development of broadband infrastructure. Congress
should also clarify that fees charged for siting wireless facilities
should be non-discriminatory and based on the state or local
government's actual, direct, and reasonable costs to manage the right
of way or issue permits. These changes will go a long way towards
reducing the costs and speeding the deployment of 5G infrastructure.
Additionally, Congress should reallocate spectrum, the invisible
infrastructure that is necessary to power mobile networks, to the
private sector. Not only is this important in that it will help bring
broadband to more Americans, but revenue from auctioning Federal
spectrum can help fund other congressional priorities. The AIRWAVES
Act, sponsored by Senators Gardner and Hassan, would allocate 10
percent of auction proceeds to fund mobile broadband in rural areas.
These funds would go a long way to ensuring rural consumers can benefit
from mobile broadband.
Question 2. The omnibus spending bill provides $600 million to RUS
for a new pilot program of grants and loans for rural broadband
deployment. How should the RUS plan to use these additional funds?
Answer. RUS should use technologically neutral criteria and focus
on the best way to get rural Americans online. All technologies, both
wireless and wired, should be viable funding options, especially next-
generation wireless networks that can meet the broadband needs of
consumers and businesses. RUS should also work cooperatively with other
agencies, including the FCC, to ensure funding is not duplicative and
is focused on those Americans that do not benefit from broadband access
today.
Question 3. The omnibus spending bill for FY 2018 allocated $7.5
million for NTIA to use for the National Broadband Map, and the
Administration has requested $50 million for FY 2019. Do you think the
FCC or NTIA should be in charge of the National Broadband Data Map? How
should the FCC and NTIA leverage and coordinate their resources to
provide more accurate and granular data?
Answer. Good data is key to effective program management and
congressional oversight and we applaud your focus on getting the right
data for mobile wireless coverage. NTIA and the FCC should work
together on the broadband map, incorporating data that both agencies
have as well as data commercially available from third parties. Any new
information collections should be carefully balanced in light of the
significant data our industry provides the government today. We are
hopeful that Congress gets the data needed without the need for any
additional burdensome collection mandates.
Question 4. As noted during the hearing, I am considering
legislative options for modernizing the RUS Community Connect grant
program. The program currently sets an eligibility cut off that makes
communities ineligible if a single household has broadband service at
or above 4/1 megabits per second. This speed threshold has not been
updated in years, and it is substantially below the FCC's definition of
broadband coverage at 25/3 speeds. In addition to my questions we
discussed regarding the 4/1 speed threshold, do you have other
recommendations for modernizing these RUS grants?
Answer. RUS should gear the program to what consumers' and
businesses' broadband needs are, then determine what technologies and
services can meet those demands. Today's wireless broadband services
should be an option for funding.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto
to Brad Gillen
Question 1. In Nevada we have the most public lands of any state in
the Nation. In some of these remote areas, Internet access is extremely
slow or nonexistent. This presents a number of challenges for both the
residents who live in these areas to the government employees who
manage them, but there's also opportunities in these places.
Can you give an examples of any partnerships that have been done
with land management agencies that have increased access to high speed
broadband for these outposts?
Can you give examples of any of these partnerships being used to
increase access to high speed broadband to communities in these areas?
Answer. Last year, NTIA produced a report on the use of public-
private partnerships to expand broadband access to rural areas. It
strongly endorsed those partnerships, and included several examples of
successful partnerships. These partnerships can be an important tool in
promoting broadband deployments to rural areas using all available
technologies, including developing 5G networks, which will offer speeds
and latency comparable to or better than wireline networks. In addition
to partnerships with land management agencies, Internet access can be
increased if wireless companies have better access to Federal lands.
That will allow those companies to provide service both on and adjacent
to Federal property. Recent changes to the process required by the 2018
Appropriations Act will help, but more work is necessary to reduce the
time it takes wireless companies to site facilities on Federal land.
Question 2. 5G will rely on small cells with short signal ranges.
This raises questions about how they will be deployed and utilized in
remote areas like those we have in Nevada. Can you give examples of
these cells being deployed and befitting in rural areas?
Answer. While much of the discussion surrounding 5G networks has
focused on high-band frequencies that will use small cells, 5G will
operate in a variety of different bands and will also take advantage of
the 150,000 cell towers across the country. For example, CTIA member T-
Mobile has announced that it is rolling out 5G service using the 600
MHz band spectrum it won in the FCC's landmark Broadcast Incentive
Auction. 5G networks using 600 MHz spectrum will not necessarily use
small cells because that spectrum can propagate further, making it
useful to deploy in rural areas. But there will be 5G small cell use in
rural areas as well. Small cells will be employed to provide additional
capacity and coverage in targeted areas like school campuses, town
squares, and areas such as tourist destinations and other high-traffic
outdoor recreation areas. So, in rural locations, 5G will be delivered
using a variety of facility types.
Question 3. Can you describe the approval process by which telecom
carriers install components of their networks on Federal land?
Answer. Unfortunately, there is no single approval process by which
carriers install components of their networks on Federal land. The
process for companies to site facilities on Federal land remains slow
and unpredictable. Different agencies have different siting approval
processes and even within agencies, procedures may be inconsistent
between different organizational units. CTIA is encouraged that in the
recently passed Appropriations bill, Congress took several important
actions to facilitate siting on Federal lands. First, agencies are now
required to act within a uniform 270-day period on siting applications.
Second, GSA is required to develop common forms and applications for
siting facilities on Federal property, which will standardize the
process of obtaining permission to deploy these facilities. Third, GSA
is required to update and make public the existing Federal property
database in order to make it easier to find available sites for these
facilities. Finally, GSA and NTIA will work with the relevant Federal
agencies to produce recommendations on how to streamline these
processes even further.
Question 4. What improvements are needed to the process to ensure
better connections for our residents and visitors to many of our
beautiful public land destinations, like Great Basin National Park?
Answer. CTIA is encouraged by the actions that Congress recently
took to ensure better connections on and near public lands. However,
more work must be done. CTIA looks forward to working with NTIA, GSA
and others to develop the new common forms and agreements required by
the Appropriations Act and to consider other actions, as Congress has
directed, to streamline siting on Federal lands. For example, Congress
could direct that relevant agencies implement new regulations to reform
the process of considering applications for siting on lands under their
jurisdiction. These reforms could focus on making the process more
uniform across different parts of an agency, tracking application
reviews, setting cost-based fees, and speeding the review of
applications with minimal impacts on protected lands, such as when the
facilities will be located in existing rights-of-way.
I would also like to note that the SPEED Act, which you sponsored
with Sen. Wicker, is the type of smart, targeted streamlining measure
that the Federal government should continue to explore. The legislation
wisely balances the need to expand the deployment of broadband while
ensuring the environmental impact is minimized. This is especially
relevant in places like the Great Basin National Park, where both
visitors and public safety officials rely on broadband for
communications.
Question 5. I have heard from other people in industry that
personnel is major challenge. They feel that there is insufficient
personnel at state and national level agencies to review applications
quickly. This gets at the heart of the problem which is that this
administration wants to roll back the time it takes to do these reviews
and permitting but has also neglected staffing many of these agencies
responsible.
How has, in your experience, staffing affected the speed of the
process?
How can we have ``shot clocks'' work if agencies are not staffed to
meet demand?
Answer. The wireless industry recognizes that budget constraints
exist for all government agencies and that delays in review of
applications may stem from lack of resources. This is why CTIA has
supported actions that would permit government agencies to charge cost-
based fees for processing siting applications and for siting on
government land. While fees should not be revenue-generating tools for
governments, they can and should account for the cost of reviewing and
processing applications to ensure that reviews are completed within any
periods required by shot-clocks. The industry is committed to working
with state and local governments to ensure deployment is efficient and
timely.
Question 6. A recent article in the Las Vegas Review Journal
reports that large areas of Las Vegas still have spotty access to
cellular coverage.\1\ This is not acceptable in a major metropolitan
area.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Dead spots remain for many cell customers in Las Vegas Valley.
Las Vegas Review Journal. Available at: https://www.reviewjournal.com/
business/dead-spots-remain-for-many-cell-customers-in-las-vegas-valley/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Some have accused providers of ``redlining'' certain neighborhoods,
can you provide a comment on this, including how you ensure it doesn't
exist?
Can you speak to any other challenges to LTE access facing larger
cities, particularly in low income and minority communities which are
disproportionately affected?
Answer. Wireless coverage gets better every year and we all work
hard to improve that coverage. One of the amazing things about the
wireless industry is the vast competition: competition to find new
customers and meet their demands. As a result of these market dynamics,
wireless providers compete every day to serve new markets and
consumers, and according to the FCC's best available data, more than 99
percent of Americans have access to 4G LTE networks and nearly 97
percent having access to three or more LTE providers. Not only are
nation-wide carriers, rural and regional providers, and resellers of
wireless services competing to reach these consumers, but they also
offer competitive service plans that fit within consumers', including
low-income consumers', budgets. To further facilitate wireless
affordability, CTIA is a strong supporter of the Lifeline Program,
which provides support to those consumers who may not be able to afford
voice and broadband service.
In order to further reduce disparities in coverage and ensure that
more consumers have access to and can afford wireless services,
Congress should continue to support policies that lower the cost of
deployments and support targeted funding mechanisms like the Mobility
Fund. As FCC Commissioner Carr has said, shifting the business case can
spur carriers to invest in areas that were previously uneconomic. Smart
reforms such as reducing barriers to accessing public rights of way,
establishing shot clocks and enforceable remedies for the entire
permitting process, and promoting cost-based fee methodologies can help
bring the benefits of these networks to more Americans, including those
in low-income communities, whether in rural or urban areas.
Question 7. A recent Wireless Infrastructure Association report
notes that engineers and technicians need new training as we advance 5G
infrastructure.
What workforce development challenges is the industry facing?
What is being done to ensure that women and minorities have the
chance to fill these well-paying and technical positions?
Answer. The wireless industry prides itself on the opportunities it
provides to all Americans to have well-paying jobs that will continue
to be vital for decades to come. As a recent report from Recon
Analytics showed, America's leadership in 4G LTE connectivity brought
$100 billion to the U.S. GDP and spurred an 84 percent increase in
wireless-related jobs. Today, wireless underpins much of our economy,
supporting 4.6 million core wireless-related jobs and creating 6.5 more
jobs for each direct wireless job. And next-generation 5G is expected
to produce three million new long-term jobs for Americans of a variety
of skills and backgrounds.
Further, a snapshot of publically available data shows that the
wireless industry values diversity in its workforce. AT&T was ranked
number 3 on Diversity Inc.'s 2017 Top 50 companies for diversity; as of
September 2017, 62 percent of T-Mobile's workforce is comprised of
minorities; and 6 of 12 of Verizon's board members are women and/or
minorities.
Question 8. In your testimony you said, ``NHPA mandates alone
recently cost a carrier more than $170,000 to install just 23 small
cells in a parking lot. Another provider estimates that reviews under
NHPA and NEPA comprised, on average, 26 percent of its total small cell
deployment costs last year. And these costs are increasing; one carrier
reports that these costs have risen by as much as 2500 percent in some
parts of the country since 2010.'' Can you provide more detailed
information and background on these statements?
Answer. These examples come from public filings made by wireless
carriers with the FCC, summarized in a February 2018 CTIA ex parte
presentation.\2\ The first example is from Sprint, which described the
situation it faced in deployments leading up to the 2017 Super Bowl in
Houston, Texas in a filing with the FCC in May, 2017. The second
example is from Verizon Wireless, which noted this figure in an ex
parte presentation filed with the FCC in February, 2018. The third
example is from a submission by AT&T to the FCC in February 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ CTIA Ex Parte Presentation to FCC, WT Docket nos. 17-79, 16-421
(filed Feb. 26, 2018), https://ecfsapi.fcc.gov/file/10226219719241/
180226%20CTIA%20Ex%20Parte%20on%20Costs%
20Associated%20with%20NEPA%20and%20NHPA%20Reviews.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Gary Peters to
Michael Romano
Question 1. The next generation of technological advances--like
self-driving vehicles--depend on increased connectivity and massive
amounts of data. I am deeply concerned that President Trump's
infrastructure and budget proposals do not appear to mention or
prioritize infrastructure needs of the future, particularly around
mobility, 5G, or connected infrastructure. What should Congress include
in an infrastructure package to support these initiatives? What Federal
investments are needed now to prepare for the future of mobility and
5G?
Answer. Preparing for 5G infrastructure means preparing for
broadband infrastructure generally. We will need densification of fiber
for small cells; the data demands and throughput necessary to realize
the promise of 5G services will require placement of small cells every
several hundred feet, and substantial new fiber connectivity to connect
those small cells to one another and the rest of the world. It will
therefore take a mix of dedicated funding resources and common-sense
permitting reforms to ensure that rural Americans share in the
communications revolution for both mobile and fixed services, all of
which are enabled by and dependent upon a robust underlying fixed
network.
Question 2. The omnibus spending bill provides $600 million to RUS
for a new pilot program of grants and loans for rural broadband
deployment. How should the RUS plan to use these additional funds?
Answer. RUS should target the funding to areas where no provider is
currently operating, or for use in areas where only one provider is
currently providing service below speeds of 10/1. Additionally, RUS and
the FCC should coordinate on how new pilot program funds can best work
in concert with the Universal Service Fund (USF). It would be a waste
of taxpayer resources if multiple government programs fund competing
networks in high-cost rural areas that can barely sustain even a single
network, while leaving other areas entirely unserved.
Question 3. The omnibus spending bill for FY 2018 allocated $7.5
million for NTIA to use for the National Broadband Map, and the
Administration has requested $50 million for FY 2019. Do you think the
FCC or NTIA should be in charge of the National Broadband Data Map? How
should the FCC and NTIA leverage and coordinate their resources to
provide more accurate and granular data?
Answer. NTCA is agnostic to what Federal agency is charged with
creating the map, so long as providers only must report once. We would
also strongly encourage the mapping entity to consider geocoding new
installs. The best way to get data that can drive informed decision-
making and funding decisions in particular is to get as granular as
geocoding new installs. Even then, a robust challenge processes will
also be needed thereafter to ensure self-reported data are correct and
legitimate, so that we do not leave unserved locations behind based
upon self-proclaimed ``false positives'' of service availability.
Question 4. As noted during the hearing, I am considering
legislative options for modernizing the RUS Community Connect grant
program. The program currently sets an eligibility cut off that makes
communities ineligible if a single household has broadband service at
or above 4/1 megabits per second. This speed threshold has not been
updated in years, and it is substantially below the FCC's definition of
broadband coverage at 25/3 speeds. In addition to my questions we
discussed regarding the 4/1 speed threshold, do you have other
recommendations for modernizing these RUS grants?
Answer. We urge RUS to use more granular data and robust challenge
processes to avoid ``false positives'' that deny support/loans where
needed despite the fact that much of a community may in fact be
unserved. Speeds of 4/1 should be updated to 10/1, but once areas
lacking 10/1 are identified, providers should be required to aim for
even higher speeds, with the goal of making the new networks that are
built leveraging this program ``future-proof''--that is, built for
effective, scalable use by consumers over the entire life of the
network asset. Finally, as noted in other answers, it is important
however to coordinate RUS and FCC efforts, so that program efforts are
working in concert rather than potentially overbuilding one another in
the form of duplicative, competing networks operated by two different
providers.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto
to Michael Romano
Question 1. All of our infrastructure pushes in the past outlined a
bold vision, such as connecting our communities with railroads and
highways. I believe that smart, interconnected communities should be
that vision in the 21st century, obviously broadband is a critical
component of that. I recently saw that NTCA announced four Smart Rural
Community Collaboration Challenge grants as part of the annual Smart
Rural Community initiative. What are the major issues that rural
communities are trying to overcome with smart technology?
Answer. Many rural areas face the same exciting opportunities and
challenges as urban areas as the incorporation of technology into all
facets of life expands. In rural areas, however, these advancements are
even more critical, as broadband-enabled telehealth, tele-education,
and Internet-enabled commerce enable rural regions to reach resources
that would be otherwise unavailable. Small rural high schools might
lack a critical mass of students to justify the offering of certain
niche or advanced courses. Residents of rural areas may be so far from
comprehensive health care facilities that they either must take a full
day for a medical appointment or may defer care altogether. This not
only risks losing the benefits of preventative medicine, but also
increases the likelihood of greater expense if untreated chronic or
acute illnesses advance.
The goal of the Smart Rural Community initiative and, in parallel,
our members who engage these efforts, is for rural broadband providers
to work with other community leaders to ensure that broadband is
leveraged to improve educational opportunities, health care, public
services and other vital aspects of life. The innovative efforts of our
Smart Rural Community and other NTCA members strengthen their rural
areas and, as studies exploring the interdependencies of rural and
urban America have demonstrated, the Nation as a whole.
Question 2. Can you provide examples of interesting things that
have been done with this funding?
Answer. In Princeton, Missouri, a Smart Rural Community grant
supports a business incubator designed to train area high school
students in business development; the facility will be staffed by
senior citizen volunteers.
In Havre, Montana, a Smart Rural Community grant supports a Tribal-
owned economic development agency's establishment of a virtual
workplace suite and training center to provide educational resources
and training for call center and other telework industries.
In Brandon, Minnesota, an NTCA member relied upon a Smart Rural
Community grant when partnering with a faith-based hospice to deploy
Mi-Wi technology that enables social and medical connectivity for
patients.
Question 3. What are some challenges, besides the obvious lack of
high speed broadband, that face rural areas when implementing smart
technology?
Answer. According to our most recent survey, 41 percent of NTCA
members' customers enjoy fiber to the home, and about 80 percent enjoy
speeds 10 mbps and above (67 percent enjoy speeds of 25 mbps). More
than 100 NTCA members have been certified as Gig capable. But, we have
many members whose deployment plans are not yet complete; and all
members face the on-going challenges of maintaining and upgrading
networks. Beyond those issues, NTCA members are meeting the challenges
of introducing their customers to new technologies and demonstrating
how the integration of those devices and applications can help assure
rural vitality and viability. These are critical as rural demographics
change, and as traditional employment opportunities advance to middle-
skills jobs and other careers that require greater technical education.
NTCA, working with its members, champions collaboration among our rural
providers and local K-12 and secondary education providers.
Question 4. In Nevada we have the most public lands of any state in
the Nation. In some of these remote areas, Internet access is extremely
slow or nonexistent. This presents a number of challenges for both the
residents who live in these areas to the government employees who
manage them, but there's also opportunities in these places. Can you
give an examples of any partnerships that have been done with land
management agencies that have increased access to high speed broadband
for these outposts?
Can you give examples of any of these partnerships being used to
increase access to high speed broadband to communities in these areas?
Answer. Navigating byzantine application and review processes
within individual Federal land-managing and property-managing agencies
can be burdensome for any network operator, but particularly for the
smaller network operators that serve the most rural 35 percent of the
U.S. landmass. The review procedures can take substantial amounts of
time, undermining the ability to plan for and deploy broadband
infrastructure. For ways to improve the process and promote
partnerships, we suggest reviewing the Broadband Deployment Advisory
Committee's Streamlining Federal Siting Working Group report for
recommendations on improving the process of building broadband on
Federal lands; an overview of some of those recommendations was
included with my submitted testimony.
Question 5. The administration's proposal includes no direct
funding for rural broadband but $50 billion for rural infrastructure,
80 percent of which comes in the way of formula grants to the states
who will have the discretion to doll that money out as they see fit.
States often do not have institutions dedicated to allocating grant
money for rural broadband like they do for projects like water or
highways. What has been your experience in states prioritizing
broadband over other projects like highways or water?
Answer. Several states, including New York, Minnesota, and
Wisconsin, have established successful broadband programs that direct
limited resources to areas in most need in an effective and efficient
manner. These programs focus, however, primarily upon defraying some of
the upfront costs of network construction, and do not specifically
address the ongoing need for support to sustain service on networks
once built or to ensure the affordability of services provided over
those networks. Separately, 22 states have established state universal
service programs to help provide additional cost recovery for
telecommunications networks and services in high-cost areas. However,
at the end of the day, the only program that helps enable reasonably
affordable and comparable rural broadband services in most states--and
provides much-needed additional support even in those states that
themselves provide some level of funding--is the Federal Universal
Service Fund.
Question 6. One issue of concern in ensuring that Federal funds
that are included in any plan are well spent and not wasted. How do we
ensure we have the proper oversight or metrics in place to ensure that
Federal funds are well spent and reach the intended people without
adequate service?
Answer. To ensure proper oversight and metrics, strong
consideration should be given to leveraging--and supplementing--the
FCC's existing High-Cost USF initiatives as a primary means of
implementing broadband infrastructure initiatives. The FCC is the
Nation's expert agency in telecom policy, and it is already tackling
broadband challenges with respect to availability and affordability.
Moreover, recent reforms adopted by the FCC have sought to: (1)
reorient the USF programs toward broadband, (2) ensure funding is
targeted to where it is needed (i.e., to places where the market does
not enable service delivery on its own), and (3) define what the FCC
considers an efficient level of support in each area. At the very
least, such principles and practices should guide any program that
distributes Federal funds, regardless of which agency administers the
program.
Question 7. Is increasing the amount of resources to RUS and the
FCC sufficient to meet our Nation's needs?
Answer. Additional resources are needed to meet our Nation's
broadband goals. For example, broadband-promoting initiatives remain
woefully underfunded to achieve the goals for small, rural broadband
providers. More than $66 million per year is still needed to fund a USF
model that the FCC created to promote broadband deployment. In
addition, under a budget control mechanism included within 2016 reforms
that applies only to some carriers, many small rural telecom operators
have had their support slashed by an unpredictably escalating budget
control that now equals 12.3 percent on average, translating into
denied recovery of more than $180 million in actual costs per year for
private broadband investments. Although the FCC took steps to mitigate
this budget control for the most recent twelve months, the budget
shortfall will begin anew as of July 1, resulting in tens of millions
of dollars per month in denied recovery for broadband infrastructure
investment.
Beyond these concerns, there are many areas--especially in rural
America--where broadband remains lacking, and there is no prospect of
the private sector stepping in to fill that gap given the challenges of
distance and density that make a business case for investment
impossible to justify. Additional resources to help defray the upfront
costs of construction and/or provide ongoing support that helps to make
the business case for investment and operation are needed if we will
realize the goal of universal broadband access.
[all]