- NOMINATIONS OF JOHN J. BARTRUM AND LYNN A. JOHNSON
[Senate Hearing 115-587]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-587
NOMINATIONS OF JOHN J. BARTRUM
AND LYNN A. JOHNSON
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
on the
NOMINATIONS OF
JOHN J. BARTRUM, TO BE ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR FINANCIAL
RESOURCES, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES; AND LYNN A.
JOHNSON, TO BE ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR FAMILY SUPPORT, DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
__________
MARCH 20, 2018
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the Committee on Finance
_________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-115 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
ORRIN G. HATCH, Utah, Chairman
CHUCK GRASSLEY, Iowa
RON WYDEN, Oregon
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
BILL NELSON, Florida
JOHN CORNYN, Texas
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
JOHN THUNE, South Dakota
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
RICHARD BURR, North Carolina
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
JOHNNY ISAKSON, Georgia
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
MICHAEL F. BENNET, Colorado
PATRICK J. TOOMEY, Pennsylvania
ROBERT P. CASEY, Jr., Pennsylvania
DEAN HELLER, Nevada
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
CLAIRE McCASKILL, Missouri
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
A. Jay Khosla, Staff Director
Joshua Sheinkman, Democratic Staff Director
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Hatch, Hon. Orrin G., a U.S. Senator from Utah, chairman,
Committee on Finance...........................................
1
Wyden, Hon. Ron, a U.S. Senator from Oregon......................
3
Bennet, Hon. Michael F., a U.S. Senator from Colorado............
6
CONGRESSIONAL WITNESS
Gardner, Hon. Cory, a U.S. Senator from Colorado.................
7
ADMINISTRATION NOMINEES
Bartrum, John J., nominated to be Assistant Secretary for
Financial Resources, Department of Health and Human Services,
Washington, DC.................................................
8
Johnson, Lynn A., nominated to be Assistant Secretary for Family
Support, Department of Health and Human Services, Washington,
DC.............................................................
10
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL
Bartrum, John J.:
Testimony....................................................
8
Prepared statement...........................................
25
Biographical information.....................................
26
Responses to questions from committee members................
31
Bennet, Hon. Michael F.:
Opening statement............................................
6
Gardner, Hon. Cory:
Testimony....................................................
7
Hatch, Hon. Orrin G.:
Opening statement............................................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
35
Johnson, Lynn A.:
Testimony....................................................
10
Prepared statement...........................................
36
Biographical information.....................................
37
Responses to questions from committee members................
42
Wyden, Hon. Ron:
Opening statement............................................
3
Prepared statement...........................................
48
Communication
American Public Human Services Association (APHSA)...............
51
(iii)
NOMINATIONS OF JOHN J. BARTRUM, TO BE
ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR FINANCIAL
RESOURCES, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES; AND LYNN A. JOHNSON,
TO BE ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
FAMILY SUPPORT, DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
----------
TUESDAY, MARCH 20, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on finance,
Washington, DC.
The hearing was convened, pursuant to notice, at 10:12
a.m., in room SD-215, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon.
Orrin G. Hatch (chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Thune, Heller, Scott, Cassidy, Wyden,
Stabenow, Cantwell, Nelson, Carper, Bennet, McCaskill, and
Whitehouse.
Also present: Republican staff: Ryan Martin, Senior Human
Services Advisor; Caitlin Soto, Oversight Counsel; and Nicholas
Wyatt, Tax and Nominations Professional Staff Member.
Democratic staff: Joshua Sheinkman, Staff Director; David
Berick, Chief Investigator; Laura Berntsen, Chief Advisor for
Human Services; Michael Evans, Chief Counsel; Elizabeth
Jurinka, Chief Health Advisor; and Ian Nicholson, Investigator.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ORRIN G. HATCH, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
UTAH, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Chairman. The committee will come to order.
I want to welcome you all here to this committee meeting
this morning. Sorry we are starting just a little bit late.
Today we will consider the nominations of John Bartrum and
Lynn Johnson.
I would like to extend a warm welcome to each of the
nominees here today. Congratulations on your nominations, and
thank you for your willingness to serve in this administration.
These are important positions.
Mr. Bartrum, President Trump nominated you to be Assistant
Secretary for Financial Resources at the Department of Health
and Human Services. Now, this is not the first time that you
have been called upon to serve your country. In fact, you have
30 years of military experience as both an active duty officer
and as a Reserve officer.
And I personally, and I think all of us here on this
committee, want to thank you for your service.
In addition to your substantial military career, you spent
many years on Capitol Hill as a senior professional staffer to
the United States House Appropriations Committee. In that
capacity, you played a key role in funding the Department of
Health and Human Services as well as many other agencies under
its purview. Your experience has given you important insights
into the costs associated with the policies and programs
carried out by the Department.
Prior to your career on Capitol Hill, you served as part of
the National Security Division of the Office of Management and
Budget in the Executive Office of the President. At OMB, you
were responsible for the budget of the Departments of Defense
and Veterans Affairs.
It is obvious from your background that you have a good
deal of experience crafting and implementing Federal budgets. I
am sure these experiences will serve you well in the position
for which you have been nominated. If confirmed, you will
oversee HHS's budget and provide guidance to the Secretary on
all aspects of financial management.
As I am sure you are well aware, Medicare and Medicaid are
expanding too quickly. According to the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services, national spending on mandatory health
programs is projected to grow at an average of 5.5 percent per
year between 2017 and 2026 and will reach $5.7 trillion by
2026. This trajectory is unsustainable.
Now, I have a long history of supporting entitlement reform
and believe that we need to continue to find ways to curb
excessive government spending while increasing access to high-
quality, affordable care.
Now, I do not think I need to say this, but I will anyway.
We have our work cut out for us, Mr. Bartrum.
On the other hand, Mrs. Johnson, President Trump nominated
you to be Assistant Secretary for Family Support at the
Department of Health and Human Services. Currently, you serve
as Executive Director of Jefferson County Human Services, where
you oversee a number of workforce and social services programs,
including TANF.
Prior to your position with Jefferson County Human
Services, you ran a consulting firm in Colorado that focused on
mental health, high-risk youth, and child welfare, among other
things. I am sure these experiences will serve you well in the
position to which you have been nominated.
If confirmed, Mrs. Johnson, you will oversee a wide range
of more than 60 programs with a budget of more than $53
billion, making it the second-largest agency in the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
You will oversee major programs, such as TANF, child
welfare, child care, child support, and Head Start, partnering
with States and communities to help families achieve prosperity
and independence. You will also be charged with implementing
laws passed by Congress to aid children and families across the
country.
Last month, after years of hard work on both sides of the
aisle, Congress passed and the President signed into law the
Family First Prevention Services Act. Now, this law has the
potential to improve the lives of tens of thousands of children
and their families across this country.
The opioid epidemic has hit families hard, and the number
of children entering foster care due to parental substance
abuse is continuing to climb. Fortunately, this new law will
help address the epidemic by providing more help to families to
address substance abuse issues.
Mrs. Johnson, if confirmed, you will be charged with
leading the agency in implementing this law. And I know members
of this committee are eager to work closely with you to make
sure it is implemented quickly and as intended so that families
will get the help that they need.
I look forward to working with you both and hope that we
can get your nominations reported and confirmed in short order
so that we can get to work.
We have a great deal of work ahead of us on these issues,
and I look forward to working with HHS as we work to achieve
our shared goals.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Hatch appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Now, before I turn to my colleague, Senator
Wyden, I have some foundational questions for the nominees.
First--and you can both answer this--is there anything that
you are aware of in your background that might present a
conflict of interest with the duties of the office to which you
have been nominated?
Mr. Bartrum. No.
Mrs. Johnson. No.
The Chairman. Okay. Do you know of any reason, personal or
otherwise, that would in any way prevent you from fully and
honorably discharging the responsibilities of the office to
which you have been nominated?
Mr. Bartrum. No.
Mrs. Johnson. No.
The Chairman. Okay. Do you agree without reservation to
respond to any reasonable summons to appear and testify before
any duly constituted committee of the Congress, if you are
confirmed?
Mr. Bartrum. Yes.
Mrs. Johnson. Yes.
The Chairman. Finally, do you commit to provide a prompt
response in writing to any questions addressed to you by any
Senator of this committee?
Mr. Bartrum. Yes.
Mrs. Johnson. Yes.
The Chairman. Okay. Well, I want to thank you.
So I am now going to turn the time over to our Democrat
leader on the committee, Senator Wyden, with whom I enjoy
working.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. RON WYDEN,
A U.S. SENATOR FROM OREGON
Senator Wyden. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
And I particularly appreciate your mentioning Family First
this morning. I think it is fair to say this is one of the
biggest developments in child welfare reform in over 2 decades.
I think this is an extraordinary accomplishment. It has been a
pleasure to work with you.
We have a lot of colleagues on both sides of the aisle who
care deeply about this. I know Senator Scott does. I know
Senator Bennet does.
And what this means is that families are now going to have
additional options when they are dealing with opioids or an
alcohol problem. And we will not just be left with the choice
of leaving a youngster in an unacceptable situation at home or
shipping them off to a foster care facility. Some foster care
is good; some is not so good.
Family First is a revolution in child welfare development.
And I will just wrap up with this one point, Mr. Chairman.
If somebody had said in the winter of 2017 that this committee
would produce a 10-year reauthorization of the Children's
Health Insurance Program and begin the transformation of
Medicare so that it would not be an acute care program, but
instead would be a chronic care program, recognizing that most
of the Medicare dollars will now be spent on cancer and
diabetes and heart disease and strokes--Mr. Chairman, if
somebody had said that this committee could move these three
major bills in a polarized climate like this, in a bipartisan
way, I think they would have been seen as hallucinating.
So, Mr. Chairman, I know you are going to retire. We have
wished you and Elaine well before. But I want to take note--I
am not sure how many more hearings we will have left in this
session--that those three pieces of legislation, I think are
going to make an enormous difference for the well-being of the
people of this country.
And I want to thank you for your leadership, the chance to
work with you. And I think that is what the Finance Committee
is really all about. So let us see what else we can do between
now and the end of the year.
But I want to take special note of those bills as we move
to the nomination of these two individuals: John Bartrum,
nominated to the role of Assistant Secretary for Financial
Resources; Mrs. Lynn Johnson, Assistant Secretary for Family
Support. These are important positions, and I will just have
some short remarks.
Child welfare would be under Mrs. Johnson's purview at the
Department. And I do have some significant concerns about the
Trump administration's blocking key rules intended to help
foster children.
This committee has long made it a bipartisan priority to
help keep foster kids safe and well cared for. In order to
evaluate whether our foster care programs are succeeding at
protecting vulnerable kids and giving them a chance to get
ahead, the Federal Government needs key information from the
States, because they run the individual programs.
For example, if you want to do a better job of keeping
foster care kids out of sex trafficking, you need to know
information about how widespread the trafficking problem is,
who is being victimized, and where.
So over 3 years ago, the Congress passed a bipartisan law
to fight trafficking. HHS finally got underway revamping its
out-of-date reporting requirements, including reporting on sex
trafficking.
The last time this information was updated, colleagues, was
1993. The updates are supposed to be up and running now. But in
the last few days, regrettably, the Trump administration has
made the bizarre decision to step in and block the
Administration for Children and Families from moving forward
with this implementation.
I have tried in every way possible to warn the Trump
administration against interfering with this process. I suspect
there are some televisions being watched right now at the
Department of Health and Human Services. I am quite certain
that some of the nice people sitting behind our nominee are
also from the Department of Health and Human Services. And I
want all of these individuals to know how serious this is that
the Trump administration has stepped in to block these key
rules.
They have torpedoed them and, in the process, are standing
in the way of helping some of the most vulnerable children in
America. But they have their deregulation blinders on, and they
have decided not to listen to any warnings about how this
action could hurt kids.
Now, if confirmed, Mrs. Johnson would be in charge of these
decisions. So we are going to discuss them this morning.
But I want everybody on both sides of the aisle to know I
am not going to let this quietly pass in the night. It is too
important to vulnerable children. We have put an awful lot of
bipartisan work into child welfare, as the chairman has
correctly noted, as the chairman deserves an enormous amount of
credit on, and we should not derail it because we cannot get
good information on matters like sex trafficking.
Now, I also have concerns about the fact Mrs. Johnson has
supported legislation to allow Colorado to send foster kids to
juvenile detention facilities. This may be a common practice in
Colorado, and, apparently, it may be going on elsewhere. It
does seem to be contrary to Federal law as I read it.
If the rules need updating, then policymakers ought to make
that happen. But this is an area in the law that Mrs. Johnson
will be in charge of interpreting and enforcing, if confirmed.
So we will be anxious--and we talked about this in the office
as well--to get into those questions.
Mr. Bartrum, you have a big job. You are in charge of how
the Department is spending taxpayer dollars. To say you are a
numbers guy is an understatement. We are talking about hundreds
and hundreds of billions of dollars in Medicare and Medicaid
and children's health. And that is particularly relevant in the
Trump administration, because somehow there have been
increasingly slash-and-burn decisions with respect to
budgeting. And those are taking place no matter how many
millions of Americans are going to get harmed.
You have a long career in public service--we recognize
that--and strong qualifications. But we spent $3.5 trillion on
American health care in this country last year, and a big chunk
of it is in those programs that are under your jurisdiction, so
I will have some important questions for you.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. And again, I hope that people are
very much aware that in a polarized political time, we have
been able to navigate important legislation. And with a few
more months here before you retire, we are going to get on with
it, and I look forward to working with you.
The Chairman. Well, thank you, Senator.
[The prepared statement of Senator Wyden appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. I agree with you, and I appreciate your kind
remarks here this morning.
I understand we have two Senators here who would like to
introduce Mrs. Johnson.
Senator Bennet?
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL F. BENNET,
A U.S. SENATOR FROM COLORADO
Senator Bennet. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am grateful for
your graciousness, as always, in allowing me and my colleague,
Senator Gardner, to come here in a bipartisan way for this
introduction.
It has been my view since I have been in the Senate that it
is unfortunate that we spend too little time thinking about
families living in poverty, and especially children living in
poverty in the United States. Over 45 million of our fellow
Americans live in poverty. That includes more than one in seven
American children. One of six of our children may not know
where they will receive their next meal.
We need more people in government, Mr. Chairman, who
appreciate this, not as a matter of facts or numbers, but as a
human tragedy--people who have seen it and who have confronted
it firsthand.
And that is why it really is my privilege to introduce my
fellow Coloradan, Lynn Johnson, the administration's nominee to
serve as Assistant Secretary for Family Support at HHS.
Mrs. Johnson served as chief of staff to former Lieutenant
Governor Jane Norton and later as Deputy Director for Policy
and Human Services for former Governor Bill Owens.
But currently, she serves as Executive Director of the
Department of Human Services in Jefferson County, CO, where she
manages over 500 employees and oversee critical programs like
Head Start, Medicaid, and foster care for our State's most
vulnerable citizens.
In this role, Mrs. Johnson has promoted reforms to make
human services more integrated, more accessible, and more
responsive to vulnerable Coloradans. She appreciates that when
we fail to integrate human services, vulnerable families and
children fall between the cracks.
That is why Mrs. Johnson launched the Jefferson County
Prosperity Project. The project unites schools, businesses, and
community leaders to break the cycle of poverty with an
integrated focus on schools, families, housing, health, and
economic opportunity.
She knows that we need fresh ideas to fight poverty in
America. For example, the typical response to delinquent child
care payments is to punish the absent parent. Mrs. Johnson
thought maybe we should help that parent get a job instead.
Mrs. Johnson has also worked to make Jefferson County Human
Services more responsive to our community. She extended hours
to improve access to vital human services like food stamps and
Medicaid. She also created a Children and Youth Leadership
Commission to give Americans under 21 a voice in the policy
decisions affecting their lives.
This is just a sample of her many accomplishments in
Jefferson County. And it is why I have heard from many
Republicans, Democrats, and child advocates from Colorado who
have praised Mrs. Johnson for her deep knowledge of these
issues and, more important, for her actual record of fighting
poverty in our State.
As this committee knows, the Department of Health and Human
Services faces challenges on many fronts, from an opioid crisis
that claims the lives of more than 42,000 Americans each year
to a rapidly aging population. The Department needs creative
thinking to meet these challenges and reimagine human services
to be more efficient, integrated, and responsive to our fellow
Americans.
I am grateful to Mrs. Johnson for her willingness to serve,
for the work that she has done for Colorado. And I look forward
to her testimony.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Gardner is here. We are happy to take your
testimony at this time.
STATEMENT OF HON. CORY GARDNER,
A U.S. SENATOR FROM COLORADO
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Wyden, and my colleague, Michael Bennet.
And congratulations to both nominees here today.
Mrs. Johnson, thank you very much for your service. I am
excited to be here introducing you as well.
This is my first experience before the august Finance
Committee, so I echo--and this may be my last chance, I do not
know--but I----
The Chairman. Well, you are showing good form here.
[Laughter.]
Senator Gardner. Thank you, thank you. But certainly, I
must express my appreciation to the chairman as well for
incredible service in the Senate, distinguished service. Thank
you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Gardner. Lynn Johnson, of course--and my colleague
talked about some of the great aspects that she will bring to
this position as we consider her nomination for Assistant
Secretary for Family Support for the Department of Health and
Human Services--she just demonstrates what dedication to public
service looks like, what it means. And her tireless work on
behalf of children and families has served as an inspiration
for us in Colorado for many, many years.
She currently serves as the Executive Director of the
Jefferson County Department of Human Services and has for the
past 10 years. As my colleague mentioned, this is a department
of hundreds of employees, a budget of nearly $90 million,
overseeing the Temporary Assistance to Needy Families program,
child support services, Head Start, Community Development Block
Grants, child and adult protective services, adult and aging
programs, pretrial and community correction services, a
workforce center, Medicaid benefits, and other benefit
programs--a wealth of experience that she brings to this
position on how Federal Government programs can impact county
programs as well. And that is incredibly important.
Over the course of her career, Mrs. Johnson has garnered
great respect for her pragmatism and understanding of the
issues. Her expertise has been sought from multiple Governors
on both sides of the aisle. And she has served on such
important committees, including the committee to address child
welfare, welfare reform, the judicial committee for families
and the courts, and the Child and Youth Leadership Commission,
as Senator Bennet mentioned.
In addition--I think this goes to Senator Wyden's
conversation--Mrs. Johnson currently serves as the co-chair of
the Human Trafficking Subcommittee in the State of Colorado.
Her initiative, the Prosperity Project, has helped ensure
that each person, each individual, has the opportunity to reach
his or her highest potential through wrap-around services and
support. Her extensive experience and passion for the families
that she serves is unmistakable.
Her achievements in her current position are widely
recognized, and her leadership would be a tremendous asset to
the Department of Health and Human Services.
And so I enthusiastically offer my support and this
introduction and hope that the committee will join in that
support as well. But it is important, I think, to have that
local government experience. We could use a lot more of that
understanding in Washington. So thank you very much.
Congratulations on your nomination, and welcome to your
family.
Mrs. Johnson. Thank you.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A great
experience here in the committee. Wonderful. Thank you.
The Chairman. Well, you did a good job. Thank you.
We will begin with you, Mr. Bartrum, and take your
testimony at this time.
STATEMENT OF JOHN J. BARTRUM, NOMINATED TO BE
ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR FINANCIAL RESOURCES, DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, WASHINGTON, DC
Mr. Bartrum. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Hatch, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the
committee, thank you for inviting me to testify today. I would
also like to thank President Trump for his confidence in
nominating me for this position.
It is an honor to stand before you as the nominee to be the
Assistant Secretary for Financial Resources at the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, or HHS.
I would first like to take a minute to introduce and thank
my family: my wife Elizabeth and daughters Olivia and Sophia,
who are behind me on my right. I also would not be able to
serve without their support.
I must say ``hello'' to my mother Kitty in Kentucky and our
family back home in Indiana, New York, and around the country
who are likely first-time C-SPAN or Finance Committee website
viewers.
I grew up in a small town in Indiana. My father worked in a
factory and died when I was in grade school, and I faced many
challenges in my youth, including being left to live on my own
during my last years of high school. As a child, I never
dreamed an opportunity like this would be possible.
Following a family tradition in military service, I
enlisted in the Air Force. This allowed me to serve my country
while I earned money for college and changed the direction of
my life. I suspect my enlisted basic training instructor
wondered if the 18-year-old kid from Indiana would graduate
basic training, let alone serve for more than 30 years of
service, including as a senior military officer.
My military service opened up so many opportunities our
great country offers. Despite my early challenges, I went on to
earn an undergraduate degree in business administration from
McKendree College, holding degrees in bioenvironmental
engineering and survival and rescue operations, as well as a
master's in business administration from Southern Illinois
University and a juris doctorate in law from George Mason
University School of Law.
My path demonstrates how the American dream is alive as our
country opens doors beyond what a child's young imagination may
foresee.
I began my Federal career as an enlisted member of the Air
Force and later continued working for the Department of the Air
Force in a variety of positions in and outside of the United
States as a civilian employee before joining the Air Force
Reserve.
I have been mobilized in support of Operations Desert
Shield and Storm and Iraqi Freedom. I am a combat veteran who
currently serves as a Colonel in the Medical Service Corps,
which is a hospital administrator/executive-type role. I am
assigned to a Brigadier General position as the Mobilization
Assistant to the Commander of the Air Force Medical Operations
Agency, or AFMOA.
My military assignments include serving as Medical
Commander, Individual Mobilization Augmentee, or an IMA, to the
Deputy Assistant to the Surgeon General of the Air Force for
Health Care Operations and Medical Research, and IMA liaison to
the Air Force Surgeon General for Medical Reserve Forces, to
list a few.
As you noted, until February of 2017, I was a civil servant
for more than 32 years. In my last position, I served for 7
years as a professional staffer on the House Appropriations
Committee, working on HHS appropriations issues with a specific
focus on biomedical research, public health, and health care.
Prior to this position, I was the Budget Director for the
National Institutes of Health, or NIH, advising the NIH
Director on appropriations, budget, and policy issues and was
also responsible for NIH-wide budget policy, planning,
analysis, formulation, and presentation.
I joined the NIH from the Executive Office of the
President's Office of Management and Budget, or OMB, as a
senior OMB examiner in the National Security Division, working
on management, policy, budget, and development issues for the
Department of Defense health, medical, and research activities.
In addition, I worked to improve the coordination between DOD
and the Department of Veterans Affairs.
My position at OMB followed 3 years working at the
Department of Veterans Affairs on medical budget, health-care
policy, and other veterans' issues.
All these years later, it is still an honor to serve as an
active Reserve officer and an honor to have served as a civil
servant for more than 3 decades. With your support, I look
forward to reentering government with another opportunity to
serve the American people.
The Assistant Secretary for Financial Resources at HHS is
responsible for development of the annual HHS budget, financial
management, grants policy, and information technology policy.
This position has an important role in the coordination of
these activities across HHS's divisions.
I look forward to serving in a key role that works to make
the best use of available resources to enhance and protect the
health and well-being of all Americans.
Mr. Chairman, I believe my education and experience
demonstrate a strong understanding of the Federal budget, the
HHS budget, and the HHS public health, health, and medical
research programs and uniquely qualify me for this position.
If I receive the confidence of the Senate to serve as
Assistant Secretary, my desire is to ensure that my office and
I will serve as a resource to Congress to best serve our
Nation. I look forward to serving our Nation as the Assistant
Secretary for Financial Resources at HHS.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. I
look forward to answering your questions.
The Chairman. Well, thank you so much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bartrum appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Mrs. Johnson?
STATEMENT OF LYNN A. JOHNSON, NOMINATED TO BE
ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR FAMILY SUPPORT, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
AND HUMAN SERVICES, WASHINGTON, DC
Mrs. Johnson. I want to thank Senators Gardner and Bennet
for supporting me today. It was an honor to have them both with
me.
Thank you, Chairman Hatch, Ranking Member Wyden, and
distinguished members of the Finance Committee. It is a
tremendous honor and opportunity to appear before you today as
the President's nominee to be the Assistant Secretary for
Family Support.
First, I would like to introduce you to my family. My
husband Lance encouraged me to accept the nomination so I can
serve my country the best way I know how. I know that, should I
be confirmed, the rest of the family will also be serving
America. My sons Greg and Kyle on this side, my daughter Brett,
my mother-in-law Judy from Iowa, and my college roommate Tina
from Arizona, are also here with me.
Unfortunately, my parents, Don and Marilyn, were not able
to get here today. But they and my siblings, my extended
family, my staff, my Jeffco Prosperity Project families and
friends are all watching. I am thankful for all of them, and I
know I could not have made this journey without them.
My family moved from Ohio to Colorado when I was young.
Growing up, my parents instilled in me the dedication to serve
others. My mom is a teacher; my dad served in the Army, worked
for General Motors, and loved to play baseball. They are an
example of what is great in America.
Looking back on my criminal justice career, I learned
lessons from people who made some horrible decisions and
suffered the painful consequences of rejection by society.
Success stories were accompanied by failures in our criminal
justice, education, mental health, and human services systems.
Top-heavy bureaucracy, coupled with the inability of
systems to work in harmony, let offenders slip through the
cracks, allowed the homeless and hungry to continue to suffer,
and denied battered children the dignity of help they so
rightfully deserved. Systems are made to be improved.
After leaving criminal justice, my fortune led me to work
with Governor Bill Owens. He championed successful outcomes for
vulnerable populations and challenged me to do the same. Here I
learned policy, politics, and how difficult it was to decrease
red tape, rules, and regulations.
Children, mothers, fathers are hungry now, so we need to
act now. No more lengthy talking, no more lengthy planning.
As the Director of Jefferson County Human Services, I
learned the workforce systems from the Department of Labor;
anti-poverty programs from Head Start; child welfare programs,
adult programs, and all of the eligibility programs from Health
and Human Services; some of the housing programs from HUD; and
SNAP programs from the Department of Agriculture.
We continually worked to integrate our systems to improve
our outcomes. We set out to change the culture. We created a
power of partnership with faith-based entities, partnered with
nonprofits to maximize resources, and, most importantly,
created the Jeffco Prosperity Partnership, JPP.
We moved with people from poverty to prosperity. JPP
wrapped services around Head Start families to ensure children
graduated high school and parents achieved full self-
sufficiency at the same time.
The greatest triumph is the dignity and respect each family
learns and earns moving out of government systems, becoming
productive citizens, and giving back social capital so others
can reach the American dream.
This nomination--and your confirmation--is the next great
challenge, a challenge to reduce abuse and neglect, poverty,
unemployment, homelessness, human trafficking, and hunger
nationwide. I know we can, and I know I am up to the task.
For hundreds of years, we have deliberated on how to
address society's ills. If we do not act now, first, fast,
focused with a definition of success, leaders sitting in these
same seats years from now will be having these same
discussions. Together, we can avoid putting Band-Aids on
problems, and we can eliminate costly root causes.
The billions of dollars invested by government and
philanthropy in communities can be reduced, because we can show
a return on investment that will create a thriving, safe, and
healthy society and one that all other countries worldwide will
want to emulate.
Every day, I will work to earn your confidence. I will
fight so the American people are better off. Together, we will
make a difference. I will make it my mission to listen and
always value dignity and respect for all of the people,
children, and families we serve.
If confirmed, I will be responsive to your intent, follow
the laws, and work closely with you to make good things happen.
I hope you support me to lead this challenge.
I thank you for your consideration and look forward to
answering any questions.
The Chairman. Well, thank you so much.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Johnson appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Thank you to both of you, both for being here
today and for your willingness to serve the American people at
this very important time at the Department of Health and Human
Services.
I know you have both been meeting with my colleagues and
their staffs in recent months and providing all sorts of
documents to the committee. That has been a matter we just have
to go through.
So instead of asking you another question, I would like you
both to just talk a little bit about your goals, should you be
confirmed. Can you each talk a little bit about what you hope
to accomplish in your time at HHS?
And we will start with you, Mr. Bartrum, and then Mrs.
Johnson, and then I will turn to our ranking member.
Mr. Bartrum. Thank you, sir. I think that is a great
question, because I think, as a sailor sailing on the sea, you
know, we have to look at what is our point of reference. And I
think we want to look at the North Star. We do not want to look
at a shooting star that fades out quickly and we end up with a
shipwreck.
And so looking at our vision, I think, is important. And my
vision is to support the mission of HHS, which is to enhance
and protect the health and well-being of all Americans, in line
with the Secretary's priorities.
And so in doing so, part of what I hope to help accomplish
is to improve the coordination, efficiency, and effectiveness
of programs across the agency. And in that, the Office of ASFR
and the staff there, they have a unique position where they sit
across all of the Department and are looking across all the
different programs.
And so part of what I plan to do is to meet with the staff
and to do a self-assessment and to look at, what are the
opportunities and what are the challenges that face the
Department in helping us implement these goals so that we can
look forward towards the future.
So that is part of where I am headed, sir: supporting the
mission of the Department.
The Chairman. Well, thank you.
Mrs. Johnson?
Mrs. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also support the
mission of the Administration for Children and Families, also
known as Family Support.
But what I would like to see, should I be confirmed, is an
additional sense of urgency to help assist individuals to be
better off, reduce abuse and neglect, enhance the services that
would eliminate poverty--not just help people get food, but
also get food so they can move forward in a successful way.
So the long-term outcome is a priority for me, and that has
to be wrapped around with a sense of urgency.
I also would like to look at the administrative burdens
that are placed on local communities and on nonprofits, as well
as the States, to identify whether we can be more efficient,
more streamlined, and eliminate some duplication by working
well with others so that we can better serve in the fastest way
possible.
As I said in my opening, individuals are hungry now, and we
need to be able to serve now in a quick way. The guidance that
ACF provides to the States and the locals can be enhanced, and
we can become better partners with those who are actually
serving on the ground.
The Chairman. Well, thank you. I think you both are
excellent choices, and you are both above politics. I think you
would be terrific in these positions.
So we will turn to Senator Wyden.
Senator Wyden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mrs. Johnson, as you know, I was going to lead off with the
2-year freeze at the Department on this rule that requires the
agency to collect information that is crucial to preventing sex
trafficking of young people in foster care.
This rule, the AFCARS rule, to modernize foster care data
has not been updated in more than 2 decades now. And getting
this is absolutely a prerequisite to keeping vulnerable kids
from being trafficked. And that is why we have to get these
upgrades.
So I am going to start with two ``yes'' or ``no''
questions. Did you support the bipartisan legislation
Preventing Sex Trafficking and Strengthening Families Act?
Mrs. Johnson. Yes, I did.
Senator Wyden. Okay. Does the law require that States
report whether youth in foster care were victims of
trafficking? That is a ``yes'' or ``no.''
Mrs. Johnson. Yes.
Senator Wyden. Okay. Now, over a month ago, Congressman
Davis and I wrote the Secretary about the need for the
Department to stop blocking this effort to get this
information. Without warning, the Department finalized the
delay.
Last Thursday, the Department announced it would shelve the
new reporting requirements and declared it would reopen the
entire rulemaking, going back to square one, in effect starting
all over.
My view is, as I told you in the office, this is
indefensible. So this is just my takeaway for you and all the
people watching, as I said, on their televisions at the agency
and at the Department. You have to do more to convince me that
you are going to do more for these vulnerable kids than just
side with the political people who want this delay.
I made it clear before, and I will say it again: I enjoyed
our visit. I know that you have done good work in the past in a
number of areas, but I need to be clear that your nomination is
not going forward with my support unless there is a commitment
from the Department to get this done and a timeline to do it.
You are not at the Department now, so you cannot give it.
But for all those people watching, I just want it understood
that, while I have seen you do some good work, I am not going
to be able to clear your nomination with my support until there
is a timeline to get this rule out and a commitment to do it.
Now, let me ask you about another issue which you know a
lot about, and that is the one that restricts the use of title
IV-E funds to support the placement of foster kids in
facilities used primarily for juvenile detention.
Pretty much any group out there that is advocating for the
children says you should not place foster kids in detention
facilities. And in my view, the Federal law could not be
clearer: foster care funds cannot be used for this purpose. Yet
it is widespread in your home State of Colorado, and you are on
record supporting this practice.
So, if confirmed, you are going to be responsible for
interpreting and enforcing the law. How do you interpret the
Federal restriction on the placement of foster kids in
detention facilities?
Mrs. Johnson. Thank you, Senator Wyden, and thank you for
the time you spent with me in your office.
The process and practice in the State of Colorado is a
crossover youth-type model. The courts can place a child into a
detention system through the Department of Youth Corrections,
or they can place a delinquent child to the Child Welfare
Program. That is when the staff in the counties do an
assessment and provide assessments back to the court to
determine when and where a young child, a youth, would go.
With that practice, there are 30 licensed residential child
care facilities, approximately 30, in the State of Colorado
that can accept title IV-E. They are licensed as an RCCF. And
the one in particular that you are speaking of, Ridgeview
Academy, is also a charter high school that does not have walls
or locks or bars, any of that type of thing.
The goal, I believe--and it was before my time--was that
the troubled youth, whether in either system, would be placed
in a nontraditional setting. The mental health treatment and
the educational treatment at this RCCF has been helpful for
some troubled youth, but it is not the answer for everybody.
And homes with parents or two adults are the best placement,
and I agree with you.
Senator Wyden. My time is up. And I just would like to give
you a written assignment for next week. And that is, Federal
law, in my view, as I said, is completely clear: you should not
place foster kids in detention facilities. Foster care funds
cannot be used for this purpose.
So I would like, within a week, a written explanation of
how you are going to interpret and enforce this statute. Can
you get that to me in a week?
Mrs. Johnson. Yes, sir, I can.
Senator Wyden. Very good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Whitehouse?
Senator Whitehouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, to both of our nominees.
Mrs. Johnson, thank you very much for your service as a
parole officer. I was a U.S. attorney and worked with our
parole officers very closely. It is a terrific responsibility,
and I thank you for the years you spent in that particular
service.
Now, I want to ask you one thing about the opioid epidemic
that is ravaging Rhode Island and many other States. In
particular, we are seeing babies who are born opioid-dependent.
In some cases, the mom is doing everything right, she is in
recovery, she is getting medication-assisted treatment, and
that medication puts the baby in the same position, when born,
of being opioid-dependent.
And in order to solve that problem, we are finding,
particularly through the work of Women and Infants Hospital,
which is a very excellent leading OB/GYN hospital in Rhode
Island, that you really need to look at the social determinants
around that family and engage with the mom in a way that brings
in a lot of other supports. And if you can do that, you can
bring down the time spent in a hospital, you can improve
outcomes. But it does take pulling a lot of things together.
Is this an area that you would be interested in supporting
through the various programs that you will oversee?
Mrs. Johnson. Thank you, Senator Whitehouse.
Absolutely. I think my strength is pulling community
resources together, whether it is in my own agency or in the
community to wrap around a person-centered practice, working
with the family, the parent, and the child at the same time,
and the safety supports that wrap around them, especially with
addiction.
It is not an easy thing to conquer. And so I would commit
to working on this to enhance practices, but also to look
throughout the country to find where are the services for these
individuals. Are there enough substance abuse practices that
are successful? And then, how do we best take care of the
children?
Senator Whitehouse. Perhaps we could even get you to Rhode
Island to visit Women and Infants Hospital to see their
program. I will extend you that invitation.
Mrs. Johnson. That would be an honor. Thank you.
Senator Whitehouse. Mr. Bartrum, I have some favorite
graphs that I spend a lot of time thinking about. And this is
one that shows the CBO's projection of Federal health-care
expenditures.
This top line is the red line here, and back here in 2010
is where this red line estimate was generated. And that was the
predicted spending on Federal health care through those years.
We found the spending trend has been different than what
CBO had predicted going forward.
In addition to being on the Finance Committee, I am on the
Budget Committee. And in the Budget Committee, we do our work
in 10-year increments. So here is a 10-year increment from 2018
to 2027. And in that period, something happened that caused a
departure from the original projection that has saved us $3.3
trillion in Federal health-care spending.
I did not see benefit cuts in that period. What I have seen
are things like Rhode Island's physician-led ACO, Coastal
Medical, taking advantage of the ACO provisions of the
Affordable Care Act to drive costs per patient down $560, on
average, per year. And they started below average to begin
with, so this is not like those McAllen, TX pirates--nobody
here is from Texas, I hope--who were overcharging like crazy.
This was a more efficient-than-average practice.
And what I would like you to pledge to me is that you will
help me understand why that took place, help me understand what
the Department believes, what its experts and the people who do
these kind of projections believe might explain how we reduced
anticipated Federal health-care costs by $3.3 trillion over 10
years without cutting benefits.
Because if we can do that inadvertently, it is something I
would like to do deliberately. Will you pledge that you will
work with me to help understand why this took place?
Mr. Bartrum. Senator, I certainly would pledge to work with
you. And I would appreciate the opportunity to work with you
and understand your details more. Because I think that you and
I would both agree that the cost of health care is not
affordable and that we need to make sure that we have
affordable care and we have access to care and that people have
the ability to get the types of care when and where they need
it.
And I would suggest that we probably also agree that there
probably need to be some changes to how the system operates and
the way the modern operation of the world goes.
I mean, think about years ago how----
Senator Whitehouse. Fee-for-service----
Mr. Bartrum. Yes, just think about how technology has
changed how you make your travel reservations. You used to use
a travel agent; now you do it all online from your phone. And I
do not think that the health-care industry has leveraged the
technologies in the way that we could.
So I would be happy to work with you.
Senator Whitehouse. Great. I look forward to working with
you.
I thank the chairman.
The Chairman. Well, thank you, Senator.
Senator Scott?
Senator Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And good morning to the panel. Thank you both for your
willingness to serve. These are interesting times, important
times, and certainly we need your expertise.
Over 430,000 children were in the Nation's foster care
system in 2016. That represents an increase of about 40,000
kids since 2012.
My understanding is that about 34 percent of the increase
is due to substance abuse. So we can look specifically to the
opioid crisis and its impact on destabilizing and then
separating families. The power of this addiction seems to have
no end, and so the importance of having child placement
services cannot be overemphasized.
Our Nation's child-placing agencies, whether they are
private, faith-based, or otherwise, serve a critical need in
providing such youth with the resources and care they need to
have access to opportunity down the road.
Mrs. Johnson, I am sure that you are aware of the fact that
in December 2016, the Obama administration moved to finalize a
rule which would strip title IV-E funding from faith-based
child-placing agencies that consider religious beliefs when
placing children.
This year, Miracle Hill Ministries, an outstanding
organization that serves as South Carolina's largest provider
of foster families for children without special needs, was
notified that they will lose their funding unless they choose
to ignore their faith when considering foster families.
This is particularly disturbing when just last year South
Carolina's Department of Social Services reported that it
needed hundreds more foster families to meet growing demands.
Mrs. Johnson, would you agree that our Nation's child-
placing agencies should have the resources necessary to
continue providing critical services to our Nation's most
vulnerable youth, be they private, faith-based, or otherwise?
Mrs. Johnson. Thank you, Senator Scott. I do agree that we
need to have the best placements and the best adult role models
for our children throughout the entire country.
I do believe that the Family First Act will also help
decrease some of that need, but that means we need to increase
the ability and the resources for two-parent families that will
be available.
From my experience in Jefferson County, what we have done
is to create the Power of Partnership, which is over 150 faith-
based entities. We have brought in the nonprofit entities,
businesses, because it takes everybody to find placements for
these youth and children. And you are absolutely right, there
are not enough. And that, I believe, drives some of the care
increases.
So if we can work more with excellent placements that have
good resources, really wrap around these kids so we can have
success--I know in my community our groups have come together
to completely eliminate any waiting lists for youth and
children who are waiting for parents. And I hope we could do
this through all placements in the Nation.
Senator Scott. Thank you. I hope you would agree to work
with me to find workable solutions for folks like Miracle Hill
Ministries.
I noticed in your comments that you have had some success,
significant success, in Jefferson County in working with faith-
based organizations. And I believe that the Obama
administration's stripping title IV-E funds from such
organizations like Miracle Hill has unintended consequences.
And I would hope that you would be willing to work with me to
find ways to overcome those obstacles for these kids who seem
to be growing in our care as opposed to decreasing in our care.
Mrs. Johnson. Yes, sir, I would look forward to it.
Senator Scott. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Cantwell?
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, continuing on this IV-E issue, obviously the
State of Washington has utilized the IV-E waiver for an
initiative we have, called Differential Response, which is
intervention designed to prevent families and children from
entering the foster care system where it can be avoided.
The program allows investment to keep families together--
counseling, support services--so that foster care is not the
first response.
So, obviously, we worked with Chairman Hatch on this in the
Family First Prevention Services Act, which was included in the
budget 2 years ago.
So, if confirmed, will you commit to continuing to help the
implementation of the IV-E waivers?
Mrs. Johnson. Thank you, Senator Cantwell.
Yes, my county is also a Differential Response county. And
the primary prevention efforts that are done to help families
stay strong and healthy are the most important efforts that we
can make so a child does not enter any system. And so I am very
supportive of the IV-E efforts to wrap around a family to keep
them strong.
Senator Cantwell. So do you support helping other States to
utilize this fund for prevention programs and services?
Mrs. Johnson. I would follow the law in accordance with the
Family First Act to use these funds.
Senator Cantwell. Okay. Yes, okay.
We are going to keep innovating; that is the key thing in
the State of Washington. We are going to keep innovating, so
thank you for your help on that.
The Speaker has talked about welfare reform, and that is
his next focus. What would you do as far as reforming these
programs?
Mrs. Johnson. Thank you, Senator.
The welfare reform efforts have been successful, but they
are over 20 years old. Economics have changed, and the
individuals whom we serve are looking to stand on their own two
feet through employment and what I see today as multiple
employments.
More individuals seem to be walking into our offices not
unemployed, but under-employed. And so the incomes they are
making are still not enough to move them out of government
systems.
So what I would like to see with welfare reform is more
integration with the systems that are in agencies other than
HHS and ACF, in addition to working more with the communities.
I would also like to look at the relief of administrative
burdens on the local and State agencies that we spend a lot of
time on, rather than looking at people in the eyes and helping
them to move forward in a successful way.
I would like to look at outcomes that are driven around the
issues of poverty more than just a work participation rate.
Employment is critical. Training is critical. Education is
critical.
Senator Cantwell. What about housing?
Mrs. Johnson. Housing is probably one of the biggest issues
I am dealing with in my community today. Housing, first--it is
hard to get a job when you are living on the streets, so we
should be looking at the housing issues and looking at the
health issues.
The social determinants of the health and well-being of a
community also impact an individual. So I would like to look at
the whole picture and measure those outcomes, not whether we
are being compliant, but whether we are actually moving to
success and people are standing on their own two feet, and
maybe even 2 years after they are out of our system.
Senator Cantwell. Well maybe, if you are successful, you
could have a moment with Speaker Ryan, because I do not think
he gets the housing crisis that we are in. And just as your
State has been successful, the chairman's State has been
successful with housing veterans. My State has had great
success, despite the complexity of everything from workforce
issues to returning veterans to all of it. It is so clear that
housing stabilizes and increases the income potential of these
individuals and gets us out of our cost scenarios as well when
they have a safe place to be.
So how we get this across to our House colleagues, I just
do not know. You have said it well: it is an investment that
needs to be done in conjunction with these programs. You need
to look across these other sectors. But I could not agree with
you more: housing is a very big issue right now. But
unfortunately, our House colleagues just do not seem to quite
understand how critical that issue is.
So thank you very much.
The Chairman. Senator Cassidy?
Senator Cassidy. Thank you both. Again, I will echo what
Senator Scott said: thank you both for what you are doing.
Mr. Bartrum, nice to see you again.
I do not really know if I have a question for you except
kind of a plea. My office every now and then starts digging
into some of the money that is spent by different Federal
agencies, and you are always a little bit shocked--NIH funding
studies of folks in China to get their attitudes regarding
sexuality and that sort of thing, nothing to do with the U.S.
Nation. And we are spending money there.
And you have no culpability for this. And I think they have
now finished that sort of activity. But unless somebody in
Congress had dug into it, we would probably still have that
activity.
And so, oftentimes, it seems like Federal agencies and HHS
are a black box. And I am not trying to bust them, I am just
trying to bring value for the U.S. taxpayer.
You do not have to comment on that. But just as we look
forward to working with you, hopefully in collaboration we can
seek the best bang for the taxpayer buck, if that makes sense.
Mr. Bartrum. Senator, I would be happy to work with you.
And furthermore, I am happy to talk to you about some of the
ideas we talked about when I met with you in your office. And
so I look forward, if I am confirmed, to meeting with you and
looking into these issues.
Senator Cassidy. That would be great. It is too soon for me
to speak about it, but I am digging into some NIH assets which
seem to be underutilized and yet of significant expense. So if
it is underutilized, do we still need it? Or can you pare back
the expense? That sort of thing. So just to kind of tip a hand
about future conversations.
Ma'am, I am intrigued by some of the work you have done.
One thing my staff showed to me is this kind of
multigenerational approach to poverty, which just makes total
sense to me. If you do not address more than one generation at
once, you may not be successful.
Can you just comment on you all's efforts there and give us
some insights into that?
Mrs. Johnson. Yes, Senator. Thank you.
The effort to work with families through my United States
probation and parole experience and then working in this
agency--I have seen that we have placed individuals into
programs, they have gotten healthy, and then we have placed
them back into dysfunctional homes.
And the other issue that I saw so much--it is from
listening to the families--is that as they were placed back
into the homes, and we did not create a safety net to help them
be successful for the long term.
So the generational approach, while you are working with a
child, a mother, a father, a grandmother--in my program, I have
a 73-year-old great-grandfather raising his kids--matters. And
while all are getting healthy together, we then bring in their
neighbors--and many of you know this as 2Gen or Whole Family--
but as we work on the whole picture at the same time, it saves
money and it also ensures a bigger success when government gets
out of the picture.
Senator Cassidy. Well, I just recall former Senator Franken
once spoke of going to a drug rehab for adolescents on an
Indian reservation, and the kids were all bummed out. And he
discovered that that is because they knew they were returning
to a dysfunctional home life, which would be thwarting their
attempt to remain out of drug abuse.
Now, it seems pretty daunting, though. You are speaking
about not just a child and a parent, but you are speaking about
a whole family and then a whole community. And that would enter
into crime, education, built infrastructure, schooling, et
cetera.
Thoughts?
Mrs. Johnson. Yes, sir. Once we break down the turf and the
silos around who does what professionally, everybody has the
same end goal of success for the human beings that we serve. So
as we are moving on a path to success with the families, not
for them, they end up helping each other.
Senator Cassidy. So let me ask you--I smile when you say
break down the silos. It hardly seems anything is more siloed
than the Federal Government.
On the other hand, you would actually be attempting, from
your Federal role, to break down silos in local and State
government. Correct? And thoughts on how to do that?
Mrs. Johnson. My experience has been strictly relationship
building. And then as we change practice, the hardest thing
will be that all of the funding is siloed. The relationships
and the crossover between agencies are much easier than
identifying how to legally----
Senator Cassidy. I have a few seconds left. We once looked
at whether or not Medicaid could work with HUD--Housing and
Urban Development; I guess that is two different agencies--to
address the problem of homelessness feeding into the problem of
mental health, the lack of structure.
And apparently there are grant programs out there that
would do that. I am just not sure how successful--I just do not
know, they may have been successfully implemented. But clearly,
they would want to go to scale.
I am out of time.
But anyway, I applaud you both. I thank you. I look forward
to working with you and thank you for the good work you have
already done.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Carper?
Senator Carper. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, one and all.
I want to talk a little bit about opioid addiction and
overdose, which continue at epidemic levels, not just in my
State of Delaware, but throughout the country.
According to CDC's recent report, I am told that emergency
room visits for opioid overdoses increased by 30 percent over
the last 2 years, 2016 and 2017. And the same report indicated
that in my State of Delaware, emergency room visits increased
by roughly 100 percent, three times the national average.
And it is alarming, actually extremely alarming, and more,
it is a little bit frustrating. I am told that more than 75
percent of the $500 million that we in Congress allocated for
combating this epidemic in 2016 remained unused by States.
Think about that. This is money that we allocated in 2016,
and so far about 25 percent of the $500 million has been used
by States, but three-quarters of it has not.
Given your combined experience in appropriations--this is
for Mr. Bartrum--but given your combined experience in
appropriations, budgeting, and State government, how do we help
the States access Federal dollars to deal with the opioid and
other drug addiction challenges a lot more quickly, please?
Mr. Bartrum. So first, Senator, I am very supportive of
your position on opioids and trying to get behind this opioid
crisis.
And part of the work that I did on the Appropriations
Committee was working with--and I am sure you are familiar with
Chairman Hal Rogers and his opioid programs--and being able to
help him with some of the CDC programs.
On the specific issue of what is going on here with these
particular grant problems, if I am confirmed, I would like to
work with you to understand that data more so that I can dig
into these grant programs and find out a little bit more detail
so that we can look and see what the solutions are.
Because I think we all have the same goal on this, and I do
not think there is any divergence on where we want to be, which
is we do not want to have this crisis.
Senator Carper. All right, thank you.
Do you have anybody here in your family today, Mr. Bartrum?
Mr. Bartrum. I do. I have my wife Elizabeth and my
daughters Sophia and Olivia.
Senator Carper. Olivia, Sophia, would you raise your hands?
You are really good to be here and cut school so you could back
up your dad. [Laughter.]
And your wife, what is your wife's name?
Mrs. Bartrum. Elizabeth.
Senator Carper. Elizabeth, thank you for your willingness
to share your spouse with our country.
And, Mrs. Johnson, do you have any family members here?
Mrs. Johnson. Yes, sir, I do. My daughter is here, my two
sons, my husband, my mother-in-law.
Senator Carper. Which one is your mother-in-law?
Mrs. Johnson. Judy Johnson; she is from Iowa.
Senator Carper. Judy Johnson. There is a baseball field
named after you in Wilmington, DE where the Kansas City Royals'
farm team, the Wilmington Blue Rocks, plays baseball. And it is
called Judy Johnson field, and Judy Johnson was a great
baseball player from Delaware in the Negro League.
So it is very nice to see you and your family. Welcome, one
and all.
Mrs. Johnson. Thank you.
Senator Carper. I must say, I spent 8 years as Governor of
Delaware. We spent 8 years focused on root causes and
stabilizing and strengthening families. That is what we did for
8 years. I am very proud; it is some of the best work we did.
Our new Governor, who was actually my Cabinet Secretary
back in those days--Secretary of Finance--our new Governor has
recreated the Family Services Cabinet Council to focus for
however long he is Governor on strengthening the basic building
block of our society, and that is our families.
I have a question on root causes and contraception access
for you, if I could. And I am very much encouraged by your
interest in addressing root causes of poverty and finding ways
to build stronger families. When we spend so much time
addressing symptoms or problems, we do not go to the root
causes. And my sense is that you are interested in going after
root causes.
But based on your extensive experience, what do you think
are some of the root causes of poverty, and what should we be
doing to help build more resilient families and communities?
That is a big question, but let me follow up and just
mention, in our State of Delaware and your home State of
Colorado, Iowa and other States, both red and blue States,
State leaders have found that improving education and access to
contraception, especially long-acting, reversible
contraception, known as LARC, has helped mothers and families
better plan their pregnancies, leading to better health
outcomes for mothers and their children and saving State and
Federal dollars.
And my question is, do you believe it is important that we
do everything we can to improve and expand access to
contraception for women and their families?
Mrs. Johnson. Thank you, Senator. I believe that we should
have access to all quality medical care for our children, our
youth, and our women throughout the entire Nation. And what
they need should be very person-centered to prevent poverty.
Senator Carper. Marian Wright Edelman once said--she is a
giant in the area of families and supporting families and all--
she used to say that if a 16-year-old girl becomes pregnant,
drops out of school, does not marry the father of her child,
there is an 80-percent likelihood that they will live in
poverty--8-0--80 percent.
She went on to add, if that same young woman does not
become pregnant at 16, graduates from high school, waits until
21 to have a child and actually marries the father of her
child, the likelihood of that family living in poverty is 8
percent. Eighty percent on the one hand, 8 percent on the
other, which suggests to me that we should be trying to make
sure that they do not have that first child at 16 and actually
wait well into their early or later years to bring a child into
the world.
In my State and I think across the country, half of the
pregnancies are unplanned--half the pregnancies are unplanned.
Actually, we have made great progress in reducing teenage
pregnancy as you know, but we still have half of our
pregnancies unplanned, and we could do a better job than that.
And one of the most encouraging elements in that battle
could be these--we call them LARCs, but they are part of the
solution; I am convinced they are part of the solution.
And we have a program in Delaware that is called Upstream.
I do not know if you have ever heard of Upstream. We brought it
in from California, and it is, I think, going to be a game
changer. Young girls, or not-so-young girls, do not take their
oral contraceptives. They may not have the money to get them,
and the idea that they can have a long-acting contraceptive
that can last years and years and years--you do not have to
remember anything, you do not have to pay for anything else--I
think that is the place to go.
What do you think?
Mrs. Johnson. As I said before, I think that that is one of
the reasons TANF has reduced out-of-wedlock and unintended
pregnancies, both as one of the four purposes of TANF.
But I also agree. We work very closely with the youth in
our Jeffco Prosperity Project. And we have discussions about
healthy choices; we have discussions about education.
I do believe, as you said earlier, education is the number
one, most important effort to be made to end poverty--quality
education--plus opportunity and this safety network that wraps
around individuals. So all of those discussions, everything you
just said, needs to be wrapped around these individuals as they
need it, one person at a time.
Senator Carper. Yes.
Mr. Chairman, you have been very generous with the time.
I just want to conclude with four words, and those four
words are: long-acting reversible contraception.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
You have really acquitted yourself well, both of you. And
we are grateful that you have appeared here. We are grateful
you are willing to serve our people in this country. And I
think both of you will be excellent people to serve in our
Federal Government. So we are grateful to you.
And with that, we are going to recess until further notice,
and we will move ahead.
And I want to thank everyone for their attendance and
participation today. I recognize that each of the nominees is
anxious to get to work, and I hope that we can work in a
bipartisan way to get these highly qualified nominees reported
to the floor in short order.
Now, there is a lot of work left for us to accomplish
before the end of this year, and I would like to once again
encourage my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to reach out
to me with any ideas or suggestions so that we can continue the
fine bipartisan work of this committee.
With regard to questions for the record, I ask that you
submit them by close of business this Friday, March 23rd.
And with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:22 a.m., the hearing was concluded.]
A P P E N D I X
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
----------
Prepared Statement of John J. Bartrum, Nominated to be Assistant
Secretary for Financial Resources, Department of Health and Human
Services
Chairman Hatch, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the committee,
thank you for inviting me to testify today. I would also like to thank
President Trump for his confidence in nominating me for this position.
It is an honor to stand before you as the nominee to be the Assistant
Secretary for Financial Resources at the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS).
I would first like to take a minute to introduce and thank my
family: my wife Elizabeth and daughters Olivia and Sophia. I would not
be able to serve without their support. I must say ``hello'' to my
mother Kitty in Kentucky and our family back home in Indiana and in New
York, who are likely first-time C-SPAN viewers.
I grew up in a small town in Indiana. My father worked in a factory
and died while I was in grade school, and I faced many challenges in my
youth, including being left to live on my own during my last years of
high school. As a child, I never dreamed an opportunity like this would
be possible for me.
Following a family tradition in military service, I enlisted in the
Air Force. This allowed me to serve my country while I earned money for
college and changed the direction of my life. I suspect my enlisted
basic training drill sergeant wondered if the 18 year-old kid from
Indiana would graduate basic enlisted training, let alone serve for
more than 30 years, including as a senior military officer. My military
service opened up so many of the opportunities our great country
offers.
Despite my early life challenges, I went on to earn an
undergraduate degree in business administration from McKendree College,
holding degrees in bioenvironmental engineering and survival and rescue
operations as well as a master in business administration from Southern
Illinois University and a juris doctorate in law from George Mason
University School of Law.
My path demonstrates how the American dream is still alive as our
country opens doors beyond what a young child's imagination may
foresee.
I began my Federal career as an enlisted member of the Air Force
(USAF), and later continued working for the Department of the Air Force
in a variety of positions in and outside of the United States as a
civilian employee and joining the USAF Reserve Forces. I have been
mobilized in support of Operations Desert Shield and Storm and Iraqi
Freedom.
I am a combat veteran who currently serves as a Colonel in the
Medical Service Corps (Hospital Administrator/Executive) assigned to a
Brigadier General position as the Mobilization Assistant to the
Commander of the Air Force Medical Operations Agency (AFMOA). My
military assignments included serving as Medical Commander, Individual
Mobilization Augmentee (IMA) to the Deputy Assistant to the USAF
Surgeon General (SG) for Health Care Operations and Medical Research,
and IMA Liaison to USAF/SG for Medical Reserve Forces to list a few.
Until February of 2017, I was a civil servant for more than 32
years. In my last position, I served 7 years as a professional staffer
on the House of Representatives Appropriations Committee, working on
HHS appropriations issues with a specific focus on biomedical research,
public health, and health care. Prior to this position, I was the
Budget Director for the National Institutes of Health (NIH), advising
the NIH Director on appropriations and budget policy issues and was
also responsible for the NIH-wide budget policy, planning, analysis,
formulation, and presentation.
I joined NIH from the Executive Office of the President, Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) as a senior OMB examiner in the National
Security Division, working on management, policy, and budget
development issues for the Department of Defense (DoD) health, medical,
and research activities. In addition, I worked to improve the
coordination between DoD and the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).
My position at OMB followed 3 years working at the VA on medical
budget, health care policy, and other veterans' issues.
All these years later, it is still an honor to serve as an active
Air Force reserve officer and to have served our government as a civil
servant for more than 3 decades. With your support, I look forward to
re-entering government with another opportunity to serve the American
people.
The Assistant Secretary for Financial Resources at the Department
of Health and Human Services is responsible for development of the HHS
annual budget, for financial management, and for grants policy and
information technology policy. The position has an important role with
the coordination of these activities across HHS's divisions. I look
forward to serving in a key role that works to make the best use of
available resources to enhance and protect the health and well-being of
all Americans.
Mr. Chairman, I believe my education and experience demonstrate a
strong understanding of the Federal budget process, the HHS budget, and
the HHS public health, health, and medical research programs and
uniquely qualifies me for this position.
If I receive the confidence of the Senate to serve as Assistant
Secretary, my desire is to ensure my office and I work to serve as a
resource to Congress to best serve our Nation. I look forward to
serving our Nation as the Assistant Secretary for Financial Resources
at HHS.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you today. I
look forward to answering your questions.
______
SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE
STATEMENT OF INFORMATION REQUESTED
OF NOMINEE
A. BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION
1.
Name (include any former names used): John Joseph Bartrum.
2.
Position to which nominated: Assistant Secretary for Financial
Resources (ASFR) for Department of Health and Human Services.
3.
Date of nomination: July 19, 2017.
4.
Address: (list current residence, office, and mailing addresses):
5.
Date and place of birth: February 22, 1966; Grand Rapids, MI.
6.
Marital status (include maiden name of wife or husband's name):
7.
Names and ages of children:
8.
Education (list secondary and higher education institutions, dates
attended, degree received, and date degree granted):
August 2000-May 2004: juris doctorate in law from George Mason
University School of Law.
August 1992-May 1994: master in business administration,
Southern Illinois University.
May 1985-May 1990: bachelor in business administration,
McKendree College.
1988: associate degree in survival/rescue operations, Community
College of the Air Force; 1991: associate degree in
bioenvironmental engineering, Community College of the Air
Force.
9.
Employment record (list all jobs held since college, including the
title or description of job, name of employer, location of work, and
dates of employment):
Squire Patton Boggs (U.S.), Washington, DC, partner, February
2017 to present.
U.S. House of Representatives, Appropriations Committee,
Washington, DC, December 2009 to February 2017--Senior
Professional Staff.
National Institutes of Health (NIH), Associate Director,
Director, Office of Budget, Bethesda, MD, October 2006 to
December 2009--Senior Executive Service (SES).
Executive Office of the President, National Security Division,
Office of Management and Budget, Washington, DC, June 2001 to
October 2006--Senior Examiner.
Assistant Secretary for Management, Office of Budget, Medical
Service Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), Washington DC,
December 1998 to June 2001--Senior Budget/Program Analyst.
United States Air Force, Europe (USAFE) International
Engagement Office HQ USAFE, Ramstein Air Base, Germany (Federal
employee), August 1996 to June 1998--International Program
Manager/Analyst, Deputy Chief.
United States Air Force, Scott Air Force Base, IL (Federal
employee), January 1994 to August 1996--Deputy Chief, Quality/
Process Improvement Division (program manager); October 1988 to
January 1994--Aircraft Maintenance Specialist.
Widick Custom Woodworking, Evansville, IN, April 1988 to
September 1988.
United States Air Force (enlisted--active duty military), 375th
Aircraft Maintenance Squadron, Scott Air Force Base, IL, June
1984 to March 1988--Aircraft Maintenance Specialist.
United States Air Force, United States Air Force Reserve
Command (officer), various positions since April 1990 to
present; current positions: Mobilization Assistant to the
Commander of the Air Force, Medical Operations Agency, San
Antonio, TX.
10.
Government experience (list any advisory, consultative, honorary,
or other part-time service or positions with Federal, State, or local
governments, other than those listed above):
No other positions other than those listed above, to include
Air Force Reserve service that is generally part-time since
1990.
11.
Business relationships (list all positions held as an officer,
director, trustee, partner, proprietor, agent, representative, or
consultant of any corporation, company, firm, partnership, other
business enterprise, or educational or other institution):
I am a part owner of three small commercial rental buildings in
Evansville, IN. The land is part of a sub-chapter S
Corporation. I hold the position as president of J&G Real
Estate Investments, Inc. Until July 2017, it was owned jointly
between my aunt and me with each having equal shares. It is a
non-paid position. The distributions are made in the form of
dividends. In July 2017, due to health conditions of my Aunt,
my wife and I purchased her shares. Therefore, my wife and I
are the owners of all shares of stock between the two of us.
12.
Memberships (list all memberships and offices held in
professional, fraternal, scholarly, civic, business, charitable, and
other organizations):
National Rifle Association (current).
Republican Party (current).
Member: First Baptist Church of Alexandria, VA (current).
Deacon: First Baptist Church of Alexandria, VA (current).
Finance committee member: First Baptist Church of Alexandria,
VA as of January 2016.
Finance committee chairman: First Baptist Church of Alexandria,
VA as of January 2017.
Society of Reserve Medical Service Corps Officers member
(current).
Virginia Bar Association (current).
U.S. Air Force Reserve Officer (current).
President of J&G Real Estate Investment, Inc., subchapter S
corporation for commercial rental property. I owned it with my
aunt until July 2017 but now own it with my wife.
13.
Political affiliations and activities:
a.
List all public offices for which you have been a
candidate.
None.
b.
List all memberships and offices held in and services
rendered to all political parties or election committees during
the last 10 years.
I have not held any offices in a political party. I have been a
member of the Republican Party.
c.
Itemize all political contributions to any individual,
campaign organization, political party, political action
committee, or similar entity of $50 or more for the past 10
years.
Squire Patton Boggs Political Action Committee (Squire Patton
Boggs PAC) Committee ID: C00401083: $1,315.75 up through May 2017.
Wendy Rogers: Principal Campaign Committee: wendyrogers.org; ID:
C00510958: $250.00 in June 2012.
Donald J. Trump for President, Inc.; Committee ID: C00580100:
$48.00 on July 11, 2016.
Joseph Murray for VA State Senate; Murray for Senate: $1,250
total contributions in 2015 ($1,000 on May 8, 2015 and $250 on October
10, 2015).
14.
Honors and awards (list all scholarships, fellowships, honorary
degrees, honorary society memberships, military medals, and any other
special recognitions for outstanding service or achievement):
Military Decorations and Medals as of July 15, 2017
Awards and Decorations
Devices
1. Meritorious Service Medal
5
2. Air Force Commendation Medal
2
3. Air Force Achievement Medal
1
4. AF Outstanding Unit Award with Valor Device
3
5. AF Organizational Excellence Award
0
6. AF Good Conduct Medal
1
7. Air Reserve Forces Meritorious Service Medal
2
8. National Defense Service Medal
1
9. Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal
0
10. Global War on Terrorism Service Medal
0
11. Humanitarian Service Medal
0
12. Air Force Expeditionary Service Ribbon with Gold Border
0
13. AF Longevity Service
6
14. Armed Forces Reserve Medal with 1 ``M'' Device
2
15. USAF NCO PME Graduate Ribbon
0
16. AF Training Ribbon
0
Other Military Honors
U.S. Air Force Reserve Selectee for the U.S. Air Force Lance P.
Sijan Leadership Award, 1999.
Scott Air Force Base Air Force Association one of the
Outstanding Airman of the Year, 1987.
Civil Service Awards
Numerous Civilian Performance Awards since 1991.
Department of the Air Force Award for Meritorious Civilian
Service.
National Institutes of Health Director's Award.
15.
Published writings (list the titles, publishers, and dates of all
books, articles, reports, or other published materials you have
written):
Books:
None.
Articles:
None published.
``Barros Appoints Five to Top NIH Posts,'' NIH Record, November
17, 2006, interviewed for the article as one of the new five senior
leaders.
Reports:
Participated in the development of the Department of Veterans
Affairs Medical annual budget justification request to Congress during
the years 1998 through 2001.
Participated in the development of the Executive Office of the
President, Office of Management and Budget, annual budget request to
the Congress from 2001 through 2006 with a primary contribution to the
Defense Health programs and Veterans programs.
Participated in the development of the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) annual budget justification request to Congress during the
years 2006 through 2009.
Participated in the development of the annual U.S. House of
Representatives Appropriations bills, reports, and hearings for the
Labor, Health, and Human Services (LHHS) subcommittee from 2009 through
2017 with a primary focus on medical research, public health, and other
health-related activities.
Other published materials:
Squire Patton Boggs client alerts (emailed to clients):
``Shaping Federal Policy--Appropriations Process''; drafted the client
alert on March 20, 2017; ``Elephants in the Room: What Is Next for
Health Policy?''; contributed to the client alert dated April 4, 2017.
House of Lords visited NIH June 4-6, 2008; Lawton Chiles
International House published the slides I presented to them on the NIH
and the budget process.
16.
Speeches (list all formal speeches you have delivered during the
past 5 years which are on topics relevant to the position for which you
have been nominated):
No formal speeches delivered during the past 5 years.
17.
Qualifications (state what, in your opinion, qualifies you to
serve in the position to which you have been nominated):
Extensive experience in Federal Government resource and budget
aspects from program operations to passing of appropriations
and management of policy implementation to support
congressional and administrative budget policy.
More than 30 years of Federal service at all levels of the
Federal Government has prepared me for this position.
Served within the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)
as Senior Executive Service Budget Director of the National
Institutes of Health.
More than 7 years as a senior professional staff member on the
House Appropriations Committee with extensive hands-on
experience of the HHS accounts.
Career professional staff member in the Office of Management
and Budget and work on health and medical research budget and
resources issues in the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Military enlisted and officer for more than 30 years with the
majority of my experience in medical care and health-care
leadership positions.
More detail provided in employment answer number 9 above.
B. FUTURE EMPLOYMENT RELATIONSHIPS
1.
Will you sever all connections with your present employers,
business firms, associations, or organizations if you are confirmed by
the Senate? If not, provide details.
Yes.
2.
Do you have any plans, commitments, or agreements to pursue
outside employment, with or without compensation, during your service
with the government? If so, provide details.
Only passive activity related to my rental property and serving
in the U.S. Air Force Reserve.
3.
Has any person or entity made a commitment or agreement to employ
your services in any capacity after you leave government service? If
so, provide details.
No.
4.
If you are confirmed by the Senate, do you expect to serve out
your full term or until the next presidential election, whichever is
applicable? If not, explain.
Yes.
C. POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
1.
Indicate any investments, obligations, liabilities, or other
relationships which could involve potential conflicts of interest in
the position to which you have been nominated.
I am not aware of any potential conflicts.
2.
Describe any business relationship, dealing, or financial
transaction which you have had during the last 10 years, whether for
yourself, on behalf of a client, or acting as an agent, that could in
any way constitute or result in a possible conflict of interest in the
position to which you have been nominated.
I am not aware of any potential conflicts.
3.
Describe any activity during the past 10 years in which you have
engaged for the purpose of directly or indirectly influencing the
passage, defeat, or modification of any legislation or affecting the
administration and execution of law or public policy. Activities
performed as an employee of the Federal Government need not be listed.
Prior to February 2017, I was a Federal employee for more than
30 years. Since February 2017, I have represented legal clients
where I primarily provided strategic advice on the Federal
Government process. However, in a couple of instances I advised
them on how to work with the agency, administration, or
Congress to shape policy through requesting appropriations
report language, educating congressional members on areas of
interests, or suggesting they work with Federal agencies to
discuss policy concerns.
4.
Explain how you will resolve any potential conflict of interest,
including any that may be disclosed by your responses to the above
items.
If I encounter any potential conflicts of interest, I will seek
the advice of the HHS career ethics officials.
D. LEGAL AND OTHER MATTERS
1.
Have you ever been the subject of a complaint or been
investigated, disciplined, or otherwise cited for a breach of ethics
for unprofessional conduct before any court, administrative agency,
professional association, disciplinary committee, or other professional
group? If so, provide details.
I am not aware of any complaint, investigation, discipline, or
other citation for breach of ethics for unprofessional conduct
against me.
2.
Have you ever been investigated, arrested, charged, or held by any
Federal, State, or other law enforcement authority for a violation of
any Federal, State, county, or municipal law, regulation, or ordinance,
other than a minor traffic offense? If so, provide details.
I am not aware of any investigation, arrest, charge, or by any
Federal, State, or other law enforcement authority for a
violation of any Federal, State, county, or municipal law,
regulation, or ordinance, other than a minor traffic offense
against me.
3.
Have you ever been involved as a party in interest in any
administrative agency proceeding or civil litigation? If so, provide
details.
I was part of a 2008 Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC) complaint.
Organization/business/entity where it took place: National
Institutes of Health.
Date of claim: On or about 2008.
My involvement in the claim: I was the supervisor of the
complainant's supervisor as I served as the agency Budget
Director.
Nature of allegations/circumstances: To the best of my
recollection the complainant resigned during her probationary
employment period after being notified of failure to progress
with her duties. The complainant filed an EEOC complaint
alleging she was discriminated against and subject to a hostile
work environment on the bases of race, disability, and
reprisal.
Resolution of the claim: My understanding is the case was
dismissed by the EEOC in 2010 without merit, according to the
Department of Health and Human Services attorney (General Law
Division), Holly Rich. It was EEOC Case No. 531-2010-00086X;
Agency Case No. HHS-NIH-0014-2009.
Divorced on May 29, 1997.
Full name of former spouse: Last: Woltering; First: Diane;
Middle: Carole.
Date of birth: November 17, 1961 (estimated).
Place of birth of former spouse: City: Breese; State: IL.
Country: Former spouse was a United States citizen.
Date/place married: November 10, 1994; Belleville, IL.
Divorce date/place: May 29, 1997 (estimated); Belleville, IL.
4.
Have you ever been convicted (including pleas of guilty or nolo
contendere) of any criminal violation other than a minor traffic
offense? If so, provide details.
I am not aware of ever being convicted of any criminal
violation other than a minor traffic offense against me.
5.
Please advise the committee of any additional information,
favorable or unfavorable, which you feel should be considered in
connection with your nomination.
None.
E. TESTIFYING BEFORE CONGRESS
1.
If you are confirmed by the Senate, are you willing to appear and
testify before any duly constituted committee of the Congress on such
occasions as you may be reasonably requested to do so?
Yes.
2.
If you are confirmed by the Senate, are you willing to provide
such information as is requested by such committees?
Yes.
______
Questions Submitted for the Record to John J. Bartrum
Question Submitted by Hon. John Thune
Question. Mr. Bartrum, my office recently met with a nursing
program in South Dakota that has previously accessed Federal
competitive grants through the Indian Health Service (IHS) aimed at
growing the nursing workforce serving Native Americans. They raised
concerns that in the last round of awards, their grant was approved,
but not awarded due a restriction imposed on the number of grants per
IHS region.
While the university recognizes the intent for the grants to be
competitive and the fact that there are limited resources, the concern
stems from language in Federal law stating that the Secretary shall
award one of the nursing grants to the University of North Dakota. It
was indicated to the nursing program that its application could not be
funded due to IHS's determination that it would only award funds to one
university in the Great Plains Area, and University of North Dakota
must receive one by law.
It appears that there has been at least one instance in the past
where multiple universities in the Great Plains Area have been awarded
funds simultaneously to the University of North Dakota receiving
funding. Simply put, the nursing program wants to ensure that their
application can compete moving forward and that they are not
automatically discounted from consideration due to the set aside in law
for North Dakota.
If confirmed, will you commit to working with my office on this
issue, and more broadly, to improving access to quality health-care
services for tribal members?
Answer. If confirmed, I look forward to working with your office on
this important issue and working toward our shared goal of improving
access to quality health care for tribal members.
______
Question Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
Question. The President's Fiscal Year 2019 budget request for the
Department of Health and Human Services proposes $1,120 billion in
mandatory funding. This is over 90 percent of the Department's annual
budget and represents billions of dollars in operating and
administrative costs for programs that are absolutely essential to the
American people, including Medicare, Medicaid, CHIP, and TANF. As the
key advisor to the Secretary on all policy decisions with a budgetary
or programmatic impact, you will play a central role shaping the future
of these programs.
If confirmed, what will be your key considerations when advising
the Secretary on policy decisions that have a budgetary impact on
mandatory programs?
How will you weigh a policy's impact on cost savings, provider
payments, beneficiary access, and program integrity?
Where do you draw the line between ``number crunching'' and policy
development?
How will you balance the Secretary's and administration's
priorities with Congress's directive?
Answer. If confirmed, I would faithfully transmit the budgetary
impact and analysis provided by each HHS division, based on their
feedback as subject matter experts. The President's budget is a policy
document intended to express the administration's position on programs
that have a budgetary impact, and sets a benchmark for Congress's
consideration. If confirmed, I will faithfully execute the laws as
passed by Congress.
______
Follow-up Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
Question. If confirmed, what will be your key considerations when
advising the Secretary on policy decisions that have a budgetary impact
on mandatory programs?
Answer. If confirmed, my key considerations when advising the
Secretary on policy decisions that have a budgetary impact on mandatory
programs will be to best support the HHS mission of ensuring the health
and well-being of all Americans in line with the Secretary's priorities
and the available resources. It will be my job to solicit Department-
wide input from both career and political staff, as well as seek the
input of subject matter experts, to ensure that adequate and informed
impact analysis is appropriately weighed and reflected in any policy
decision.
Question. How will you weigh a policy's impact on cost savings,
provider payments, beneficiary access, and program integrity?
Answer. The balance of the impact on cost savings, provider
payments, beneficiary access, and program integrity is based on
supporting the HHS mission to enhance the health and well-being of all
Americans within current law and available resources. Just as in
Congress, consideration of all potential impacts, budgetary or
otherwise, is critical to the policy making process. As such, a
policy's impact on cost savings, provider payments, beneficiary access,
and program integrity would all be important elements to weigh.
Question. Where do you draw the line between ``number crunching''
and policy development?
Answer. If confirmed, I will work collaboratively with leaders in
HHS who are the program policy experts to develop a balance of the
Secretary's priorities and HHS mission in line with congressionally
passed laws and available resources. My experience in the Office of
Management and Budget and on the House of Representatives
Appropriations Committee staff has taught me to understand various
options are available to address issues which need to be balanced
against the available resources and priorities.
For example, when I was on the Appropriations Committee staff
developing the fiscal year 2015 appropriations bill, the chairman
desired an approach to better address the opioid epidemic. I worked
with various policy experts related to the issue to recommend options.
The options ranged from using existing Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) programs to a more targeted new CDC effort. The
Chairman, based on the policy experts' research, decided to move
forward with a targeted CDC effort to build local capacity and support
state data systems to improve surveillance to best support the health
and well-being of all Americans. Through my examination, inquiry, and
data synthesis, I was able to help drive solutions and resources in the
best possible way on this critically important issue.
Question. How will you balance the Secretary's and the
administration's priorities with Congress's directive?
Answer. Whether in the legislative branch developing budgets or
crafting appropriations bills, or in the executive branch developing
budgets, policy choices drive the identification of topline targets and
inform all the numbers that follow. If confirmed, I would work
collaboratively with the Department leaders and Congress to address the
administration's priorities and those instilled upon the Department by
Congress. The President's budget, for example, is a policy document
intended to express the administration's position on programs and sets
a benchmark for Congress's consideration. If confirmed, I will
faithfully execute the laws as passed by Congress to enhance the health
and well-being of all Americans.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Debbie Stabenow
Question. Last year, there were 55.5 million total Medicare
beneficiaries, including nearly 2 million in Michigan.
Would you advise against any cuts to the Medicare program and
seniors' benefits, if confirmed?
Answer. The President has clearly stated his, and the
administration's commitment to ensuring Medicare beneficiary access to
care remains a top priority. Any policies seeking to strengthen the
fiscal solvency and long-term sustainability of the program to ensure
it existence for future generations to come, must be done so in a
manner that does not impede current beneficiaries' access to care.
Question. Despite the President's promise not to cut Medicaid,
every major health-care proposal that came before Congress last year as
well as the HHS budget included Medicaid cuts over $1 trillion dollars.
At ASFR, you are providing guidance on all budgetary aspects, and
will be involved in advising on the next budget request.
Do you support block-granting and cutting the Medicaid program?
Would you recommend that Medicaid expansion be ended?
Answer. I agree with the administration's repeated call to provide
States with the flexibility to customize their Medicaid program to fit
the needs of each State's unique population. While there is no one-
size-fits-all solution, States must be able to customize a program that
works best for their residents, while ensuring that patients have
access to high-quality health care.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sherrod Brown
Question. As you have previously acknowledged, it takes resources--
including financial resources--to ensure the successful implementation
of any policy. The successful implementation and day-to-day execution
of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) is no different. As Assistant
Secretary for financial Services you will be responsible for estimating
the resources necessary to carry out the various programs and policies
under the jurisdiction of HHS.
If confirmed, will you commit to truthfully estimating the
resources required to successfully implement and ensure successful
management and execution of all laws of the land, including the ACA?
Will you commit to answering questions raised by members of both
the majority and the minority in Congress in a both truthful and prompt
manner?
Answer. Yes, if confirmed, I commit to being responsive to all
members of Congress in a truthful and prompt manner, and I will
faithfully execute the laws as passed by Congress.
Question. In 2015, the Department of Health and Human Services
announced that it would be investing $110 million from the non-
recurring expenses fund (NEF) in the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention's (CDC) National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health (NIOSH) center in Cincinnati, Ohio for site selection,
acquisition, and construction of a new research facility. This project
is ongoing and construction is expected to start later this year. Last
year, Senator Portman and I wrote to then Secretary Price to express
our support for this project and ask for a status update. We were
pleased when the Department responded that work on a new NIOSH facility
in Cincinnati remains underway and the Department plans to continue
prioritizing this project. We have since spoken with Secretary Azar
about our enthusiasm for seeing this project completed in a timely
manner.
If confirmed, will you commit to working with Senator Portman and
me to ensure this project remains a Department priority, that the funds
that have been publicly committed to this NIOSH project remain
dedicated to this project, and that you will work with your team and
others in the Department to ensure timely completion of this project?
Answer. Yes, if confirmed, I look forward to working with both your
office and Senator Portman's office on this project.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert P. Casey, Jr.
Question. This administration has undertaken a systematic
dismantling of protections for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
(LGBT) Americans and has worked to quietly push programs administered
by the Department of Health and Human Services away from serving LGBT
individuals, such as by limiting Federal agency data collection on the
needs of LGBT youth and older Americans. How will you ensure that
programs administered by HHS are not hampered from serving the LGBT
community?
Answer. If confirmed, I would work to enhance and protect the
health and well-being of all Americans, including the LGBT community.
Question. The mission of the Department of Health and Human
Services is ``to enhance and protect the health and well-being of all
Americans,'' including by ``fostering advances in . . . public
health.''
Do you agree with this mission statement?
How will you promote health, if confirmed as Assistant Secretary
for Financial Resources?
What approaches to promoting public health do you feel are the most
effective?
How will you engage with the full range of stakeholders, from both
the public sector and the private and non-profit sectors, to promote
public health? Do you see value in seeking input from nongovernmental
stakeholders, even when opinions may differ?
Answer. As I stated in my opening testimony before the committee, I
look forward to serving in a key role that works to make the best use
of available resources to enhance and protect the health and well-being
of all Americans. I would seek to faithfully transmit the budgetary
impact and analysis provided by each HHS division, based on their
feedback as subject matter experts, which is formed, in part, from the
input they receive from various nongovernmental stakeholders and
experts in their field.
______
Prepared Statement of Hon. Orrin G. Hatch,
a U.S. Senator From Utah
WASHINGTON--Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch (R-Utah)
delivered the following opening statement at a Finance Committee
hearing considering the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS) nominations of John Bartrum to be an Assistant Secretary of
Health and Human Services and Lynn Johnson to be an Assistant Secretary
for Family Support.
Today we will consider the nominations of John Bartrum and Lynn
Johnson. I would like to extend a warm welcome to each of the nominees
here today. Congratulations on your nominations and thank you for your
willingness to serve in these important positions.
Mr. Bartrum, President Trump nominated you to be Assistant
Secretary for Financial Resources at the Department of Health and Human
Services. This is not the first time you have been called upon to serve
your country. In fact, you have 30 years of military experience as both
an active duty officer and as a reserve officer. We thank you for your
service.
In addition to your substantial military career, you spent many
years on Capitol Hill as a Senior Professional Staffer to the United
States House Appropriations Committee. In that capacity, you played a
key role in funding the Department of Health and Human Services as well
as many other agencies under its purview. Your experience has given you
important insights into the costs associated with the policies and
programs carried out by the Department.
Prior to your career on Capitol Hill, you served as a part of the
National Security Division of the Office of Management and Budget in
the Executive Office of the President. At OMB, you were responsible for
the budget of the Department of Defense and Veterans Affairs. It is
obvious from your background that you have a good deal of experience
crafting and implementing Federal budgets. I'm sure these experiences
will serve you well in the position for which you have been nominated.
If confirmed, you will oversee HHS's budget and provide guidance to
the Secretary on all aspects of financial management. As I'm sure you
are well aware, Medicare and Medicaid are expanding too quickly.
According to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid, national spending
on mandatory health programs is projected to grow at an average of 5.5
percent per year between 2017 and 2026 and will reach $5.7 trillion by
2026.
This trajectory is unsustainable.
I have a long history of supporting entitlement reform and believe
that we need to continue to find ways to curb excessive government
spending while increasing access to high-quality, affordable care.
I don't think I need to say this, but I will anyway: we have our
work cut out for us, Mr. Bartrum.
On the other hand, Mrs. Johnson, President Trump nominated you to
be Assistant Secretary for Family Support at the Department of Health
and Human Services. Currently, you serve as executive director of
Jefferson County Human Services, where you oversee a number of
workforce and social services programs, including TANF. Prior to your
position with Jefferson County Human Services, you ran a consulting
firm in Colorado that focused on mental health, high-risk youth, and
child welfare among other things. I'm sure these experiences will serve
you well in the position for which you have been nominated.
If confirmed, Mrs. Johnson, you will oversee a wide range of more
than 60 programs with a budget of more than $53 billion, making it the
second largest agency in the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. You will oversee major programs such as TANF, child welfare,
child care, child support, and Head Start--partnering with States and
communities to help families achieve prosperity and independence.
You will also be charged with implementing laws passed by Congress
to aid children and families across the country. Last month, after
years of hard work on both sides of the aisle, Congress passed--and the
President signed into law--the Family First Prevention Services Act.
This law has the potential to improve the lives of tens of thousands of
children and their families across this country. The opioid epidemic
has hit families hard, and the number of children entering foster care
due to parental substance abuse is continuing to climb. Fortunately
this new law will help address the epidemic by providing more help to
families to address substance abuse issues.
Mrs. Johnson, if confirmed, you will be charged with leading the
agency in implementing this law, and I know members of this committee
are eager to work closely with you to make sure it is implemented
quickly, and as intended, so that families will get the help they need.
I look forward to working with you both, and hope that we can get
your nominations reported and confirmed in short order so that you can
get to work. We have a great deal of work ahead of us on these issues.
And I look forward to working with HHS as we work to achieve our shared
goals.
______
Prepared Statement of Lynn A. Johnson, Nominated to be Assistant
Secretary for Family Support, Department of Health and Human Services
Thank you, Senators Gardner and Bennet, for supporting me today. It
is an honor to have you both with me. Thank you, Chairman Hatch,
Ranking Member Wyden, and distinguished members of the Finance
Committee. It is a tremendous honor and opportunity to appear before
you today as the President's nominee to be the Assistant Secretary for
Family Support.
Before I continue, I would like to introduce you to my family. My
husband Lance encouraged me to accept this nomination so I can serve my
country in the best way I know how. Should I be confirmed, I know that
he and the rest of my family will also be serving America. My sons Greg
and Kyle and my youngest daughter Brett are all here today. My mother-
in-law Judy from both Arizona and Iowa and my college roommate Tina,
who made the trek from Arizona, are here with me. My parents, Don and
Marilyn from Ohio and Colorado, and my brothers, sister, nieces,
nephews, aunts, uncles, my staff, and friends are all watching right
now. Without all of them, I could not have made this journey through my
career. I am thankful for them.
My family moved from Ohio to Colorado when I was young. Growing up
in Colorado, my parents instilled in me the dedication to serve others.
My Mom was a teacher, and my Dad served in the Army and loved to play
baseball. They are an example of what is great in America. With great
pride and humility I want to note many families who have moved
themselves out of poverty and have taught me so much about dignity,
respect and the valuable voice for our most vulnerable people are
watching right now.
Looking back on my Criminal Justice career, I learned lessons from
people who made some horrible decisions and suffered the painful
consequences of rejection by society. Success stories were accompanied
by failures in our criminal justice, education, mental health, and
human services systems. Top-heavy bureaucracy coupled with the
inability of systems to work in harmony let criminal offenders ``slip
through the cracks,'' allowed the homeless and hungry to continue to
suffer, and denied battered children the dignity of help they so
rightfully deserved. I cannot imagine ever saying ``no'' to an
opportunity to serve my country and to dedicate myself to having an
impact and to make a positive difference.
Systems are made to be improved. After leaving criminal justice, my
fortune led me to work with Governor Bill Owens, known for more action
and less talk. He championed successful outcomes for vulnerable
populations and challenged me to further the cause. Here I learned
policy, politics, and how difficult it was to decrease red tape, rules,
and regulations. I learned that the American people do not want to wait
any longer for bureaucracy to plan and plan and plan to make a
difference. Children, mothers, fathers are hungry now, so we need to
act now.
In 2007 I became the Director of Jefferson County Human Services.
This was my Ph.D. in serving. I had the opportunity to work with others
in the helping professions from staff to partners to the children and
families who walk in our doors and to maximize their God-given
potential. I didn't waste a single moment. I learned the workforce
systems from the Department of Labor; anti-poverty programs from Head
Start; child welfare programs, adult programs, and all of the
eligibility programs from HHS; some of the housing programs from HUD;
and the SNAP program from the Department of Agriculture. We continually
worked to improve our outcomes. We set a course for community
partnerships at the highest levels. We set out to change the culture.
We created a power of partnership with over 150 faith-based entities
serving people first, partnered with nonprofits to maximize resources,
and, most importantly, created the Jeffco Prosperity Partnership (JPP).
We moved with people from poverty to prosperity. This all was
accomplished through a whole-family model that has demonstrated great
success. JPP started with life coaches wrapping services around Head
Start families to ensure children graduate high school and parents
achieve self-sufficiency. The highest success is the dignity and
respect each family learns and earns moving out of government systems,
becoming productive citizens, and giving back social capital so others
can reach for the American dream. Because of this, we are ending
poverty in Jefferson County with a goal to end it throughout America.
The chance to serve my country as the Assistant Secretary for
Family support is my next great challenge. The challenge is to reduce
abuse and neglect, poverty, unemployment, truancy and dropouts in our
schools, homelessness, human trafficking, and hunger for all of our
Nation's communities. Based on my journey, I believe we can, and I
believe I am up to lead the task at hand. I know that ACF is a large
agency that has huge responsibilities. If we don't act now, fast,
focused with a definition of success, leaders sitting in these same
seats years from now will be having these same discussions. By working
with this esteemed body of government, with the executive branch, State
and local governments, businesses, non-profit partners, and faith-based
entities, and most importantly by working and doing with, not for, our
most vulnerable populations, we can make the difference that we will
all be proud of. Together we can avoid putting Band-Aids on problems
and we can eliminate costly root causes. The billions of dollars
invested in the United States by government and philanthropy in
communities can be reduced because we can show a return on investment
that will create a thriving, safe, and healthy society, and one that
all other countries worldwide will want to emulate. Every day, I will
work to earn your confidence. I will fight so we can say the American
people are better off because together we made a difference. I will
make it my mission to listen and always value dignity and respect for
all of the people, children, and families we serve.
If confirmed, I will be responsive to your intent, follow the laws,
and work closely with you to make good things happen. I hope you
support me to lead this challenge. I thank you for your consideration
and look forward to answering any questions.
______
SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE
STATEMENT OF INFORMATION REQUESTED
OF NOMINEE
A. BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION
1.
Name (include any former names used): Lynn Ann Johnson; maiden
name: Mestnik.
2.
Position to which nominated: Assistant Secretary for Family
Support for the Department of Health and Human Services.
3.
Date of nomination: June 16, 2017.
4.
Address (list current residence, office, and mailing addresses):
5.
Date and place of birth: April 7, 1959, Wiesbaden, Germany.
6.
Marital status (include maiden name of wife or husband's name):
7.
Names and ages of children:
8.
Education (list secondary and higher education institutions, dates
attended, degree received, and date degree granted):
I attended the University of Northern Colorado and obtained a
bachelor of science major in special education, rehabilitation
and related services with a minor in business administration in
May 1981. I attended Arizona State University and graduated
with a masters in social work in May 1983. I attended the
Federal Judicial Center Leadership Institute with a completion
certificate in 1997 and attended the Harvard Executive
Education at the Kennedy School of Government in August of
2013.
9.
Employment record (list all jobs held since college, including the
title or description of job, name of employer, location of work, and
dates of employment):
Arizona Department of Corrections, Phoenix, AZ, 1982-1987. In
1982-1983 I was a policy analyst, a project coordinator, and a
legislative assistant. I worked for the policy liaison, Judy
Burris. From 1983-1987 I was an Arizona State Parole Officer
managing a caseload of up to 100 criminal cases, conducting
arrests, searches, and seizures. The parole chief was Jim
Armstrong. Bob Altweis and Lee Gaugler directly supervised me.
From 1987 through 1994, I worked for the United States
Probation Office in Arizona and Colorado. From 1987 through
1992 I was a U.S. Probation Officer in the District of Arizona,
with offices in Phoenix, Tempe, and Mesa, AZ, conducting
investigations, making recommendations on the disposition of
cases for the court, writing court reports, responding to
motions, and managing a caseload of offenders in addition to
implementing training for co-workers. In 1992, I did the same
work in the District of Colorado, offices located in Denver and
Lakewood, CO, and was promoted to mental health specialist from
1994 through 1999. This position entailed managing a caseload
of offenders needing mental health treatment. I managed a
caseload of sex offenders in addition to providing the Federal
Judicial Center assistance on nationwide training on the
management of sex offenders. In Arizona, the chief was Robert
Thomas and in Colorado, the chief was Richard Miklic.
From 1999 through 2003, I was employed by the State of Colorado
working in the Office of Governor Bill Owens starting as a
senior policy analyst, becoming the Director for the Governor's
Office for Family and Children and the Head Start Collaboration
Director. I was promoted to Deputy Director for Policy and
Initiatives in 2000, ultimately moving to deputy chief of staff
for policy in March 2002 through January 2003. My direct
supervisors were Richard O'Donnell and Roy Palmer.
From January through April of 2003, I was employed by the State
of Colorado as chief of staff for Lieutenant Governor Jane E.
Norton, directly supervised by her. I was responsible for the
direct day-to-day operations of the office.
In April 2003 through July 2007, I did consulting work as
president/owner of Lynn A. Johnson, Inc. I worked on numerous
projects dealing with mental health, youth issues,
developmental disabilities, and education. Specific projects
were done for the National Alliance for the Mentally Ill
(NAMI), Rite of Passage (ROP), Developmental Pathways Community
Centered Board, CCB Partners, Fund for Colorado's Future, and
University of Denver Graduate School of Social Work. I worked
out of my home in Lakewood, CO.
From July 2007 to present, I have been the Executive Director
of the Jefferson County Department of Human Services, in
Golden, CO. This agency is responsible for Workforce (WIOA),
Head Start, Medicaid and other benefit programs, Community
Development Block Grants (CDBG), Temporary Assistance to Needy
Families (TANF), child support services, child and adult
protection, child welfare, adult and aging programs,
delinquency services, and pretrial and community corrections.
In this position, I manage over 650 employees and a 90+
million-dollar budget. I report to a county board of
commissions and am currently supervised by county manager Don
Davis.
10.
Government experience (list any advisory, consultative, honorary,
or other part-time service or positions with Federal, State, or local
governments, other than those listed above):
None.
11.
Business relationships (list all positions held as an officer,
director, trustee, partner, proprietor, agent, representative, or
consultant of any corporation, company, firm, partnership, other
business enterprise, or educational or other institution):
None.
12.
Memberships (list all memberships and offices held in
professional, fraternal, scholarly, civic, business, charitable, and
other organizations):
Children's Ark Child Care Board--parent member.
Colorado Human Services Directors Association--member.
Friends for Youth--board member.
National Association of Public Child Welfare Administration--
president-elect and vice president.
American Public Human Services Association--member.
Colorado Human Trafficking Council--Governor-appointed member.
.Alpha Phi International Fraternity--member.
13.
Political affiliations and activities:
a.
List all public offices for which you have been a
candidate.
None.
b.
List all memberships and offices held in and services
rendered to all political parties or election committees during
the last 10 years.
Area coordinator, caucus chair, and county and State delegate
for the Jefferson County Republican Party.
c.
Itemize all political contributions to any individual,
campaign organization, political party, political action
committee, or similar entity of $50 or more for the past 10
years.
Donations to Congressman Mike Coffman (R-CO) $100 or less.
14.
Honors and awards (list all scholarships, fellowships, honorary
degrees, honorary society memberships, military medals, and any other
special recognitions for outstanding service or achievement):
Jefferson County Hall of Fame--West Chamber of Commerce 2017.
Local and State outstanding member award--American Public Human
Services Association 2016.
Award of excellence for successful transformation of Human
Services and support of substance abuse treatment--Signal
Behavioral Health Network 2009.
Betsey R. Rosenbaum Award for Excellence in Public Child
Welfare Administration--National Association of Public Child
Welfare Administrators 2011.
Children's Champion award, The Colorado Association for the
Education of Young Children 2001.
Colorado Child Care Association award, 2000.
DDRC Friend award, Developmental Disabilities Resource Center
2011.
Francis T. Ishida Award for Excellence in Customer Service,
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services' Denver Regional
Council 2010.
Impact volunteer, Mile High United Way.
Local government award Planning With Vision for the Strategic
Plan for Aging Well in Jefferson County, Denver Regional
Council of Governments (DRCOG) 2012.
Lynn Johnson Day in Jefferson County, Jefferson County Board of
County Commissioners proclamation, June 14, 2012.
Outstanding service and professional commitment--Rite of
Passage, Inc.
Outstanding woman of Jefferson County--The West Chamber 2012.
Recognized for outstanding service, loyalty, and dedication,
the U.S. District Court and the U.S. Probation Department for
the District of Colorado 1992-1999.
Serving our Seniors (SOS) award, Colorado Senior Lobby 2013.
15.
Published writings (list the titles, publishers, and dates of all
books, articles, reports, or other published materials you have
written):
None.
16.
Speeches (list all formal speeches you have delivered during the
past 5 years which are on topics relevant to the position for which you
have been nominated):
American Public Human Services Association--``TED Talk.''
Human Trafficking PowerPoint--standard speech and training
collaborations speech.
Triad presentation.
Colorado Human Services Directors Association Integration.
Human Trafficking.
NACO Integrated, Generative Services.
The Jeffco Prosperity Project for the Power of Partnership
Conference on Human Trafficking.
Arvada K-8 Working Together.
Live Well San Diego presentation on integration.
The Good News Breakfast--formal speech.
Metro State University--formal speech.
ROP slide presentation on integration and juvenile justice.
Human services standard talking points and PowerPoint.
Jeffco Thrives PowerPoint on integration and reaching
excellence.
Local Human Service Directors speech.
Two Gen and the generative approach--Harvard.
Two Gen and integration to generative thinking Tennessee
Early childhood and Jeffco Prosperity Project for the TRIAD,
early childhood.
17.
Qualifications (state what, in your opinion, qualifies you to
serve in the position to which you have been nominated):
I have dedicated my life to serving my country by working with
the most vulnerable of people from offenders, to abused
children, to the homeless, mentally ill, addicted, and beaten.
My education and my experience together enable me to serve well
in the position I have been nominated to. I have a broad
understanding of the multiple Federal systems working to end
poverty, abuse, neglect, and other costly issues in society. I
understand the need to integrate systems and to decrease waste
while increasing positive outcomes with dignity and respect. My
approach to systems and to those we serve enables me to be a
good steward of the tax dollar while moving families and
individuals to a place in society where they are self-
sufficient, free from abuse, and from neglect. I understand
rules, regulations, laws, budgets, and financing. I have good
experience with legislation and a broad understanding of the
judicial system. All of this together qualifies me to serve in
the position to which I have been nominated, Assistant
Secretary for Family Support (Administration for Children and
Families in Health and Human Services).
B. FUTURE EMPLOYMENT RELATIONSHIPS
1.
Will you sever all connections with your present employers,
business firms, associations, or organizations if you are confirmed by
the Senate? If not, provide details.
Yes.
2.
Do you have any plans, commitments, or agreements to pursue
outside employment, with or without compensation, during your service
with the government? If so, provide details.
No.
3.
Has any person or entity made a commitment or agreement to employ
your services in any capacity after you leave government service? If
so, provide details.
No.
4.
If you are confirmed by the Senate, do you expect to serve out
your full term or until the next presidential election, whichever is
applicable? If not, explain.
Yes, I would be honored.
C. POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
1.
Indicate any investments, obligations, liabilities, or other
relationships which could involve potential conflicts of interest in
the position to which you have been nominated.
I owned BlackRock Health Sciences Opportunities Portfolio
(SHSAX) in a personal SEP/IRA account. This has been sold.
2.
Describe any business relationship, dealing, or financial
transaction which you have had during the last 10 years, whether for
yourself, on behalf of a client, or acting as an agent, that could in
any way constitute or result in a possible conflict of interest in the
position to which you have been nominated.
None.
3.
Describe any activity during the past 10 years in which you have
engaged for the purpose of directly or indirectly influencing the
passage, defeat, or modification of any legislation or affecting the
administration and execution of law or public policy. Activities
performed as an employee of the Federal Government need not be listed.
In my role as Executive Director of Human Services, I worked
directly with the State Director and the legislature during
session as requested, to provide information, education, or
guidance on bills impacting the State or local delivery of
services. I did not act in the capacity of a lobbyist at any
time.
4.
Explain how you will resolve any potential conflict of interest,
including any that may be disclosed by your responses to the above
items.
I will comply with all of the requirements of the Office of
Government Ethics concerning potential conflicts of interest. I
have sold the BlackRock Health Sciences Opportunities Portfolio
(SHSAX) that is in a personal SEP/IRA account.
5.
Two copies of written opinions should be provided directly to the
committee by the designated agency ethics officer of the agency to
which you have been nominated and by the Office of Government Ethics
concerning potential conflicts of interest or any legal impediments to
your serving in this position.
Completed.
D. LEGAL AND OTHER MATTERS
1.
Have you ever been the subject of a complaint or been
investigated, disciplined, or otherwise cited for a breach of ethics
for unprofessional conduct before any court, administrative agency,
professional association, disciplinary committee, or other professional
group? If so, provide details.
No.
2.
Have you ever been investigated, arrested, charged, or held by any
Federal, State, or other law enforcement authority for a violation of
any Federal, State, county, or municipal law, regulation, or ordinance,
other than a minor traffic offense? If so, provide details.
No.
3.
Have you ever been involved as a party in interest in any
administrative agency proceeding or civil litigation? If so, provide
details.
I have not been named as a party in any personal litigation. I
have been named as a party in litigation in my official
capacity as Director of Human Services. Please let me know if
you need a full listing of the litigation.
4.
Have you ever been convicted (including pleas of guilty or nolo
contendere) of any criminal violation other than a minor traffic
offense? If so, provide details.
No.
5.
Please advise the committee of any additional information,
favorable or unfavorable, which you feel should be considered in
connection with your nomination.
I would be honored and completely dedicated to the agency I am
nominated to. Should I be confirmed, I would look forward to
working at the Federal level to continue the efforts I have
made to reduce unnecessary costs while at the same time assist
individuals and families to be self-sufficient and free from
government subsidies.
E. TESTIFYING BEFORE CONGRESS
1.
If you are confirmed by the Senate, are you willing to appear and
testify before any duly constituted committee of the Congress on such
occasions as you may be reasonably requested to do so?
Yes.
2.
If you are confirmed by the Senate, are you willing to provide
such information as is requested by such committees?
Yes.
______
Questions Submitted for the Record to Lynn A. Johnson
Question Submitted by Hon. John Thune
Question. Mrs. Johnson, an area of concern I've heard from some of
the tribes in South Dakota administering their own child support
programs is that they currently lack direct access to the Federal
Parent Locator Service, which helps locate noncustodial parents to
enforce child support orders. Similarly, tribes cannot utilize the
Federal offset program, which would allow them to collect past-due
child support payments from a noncustodial parent's tax refund. If
confirmed, will you commit to working with my office on finding ways to
address these concerns and ensure that tribes can successfully enforce
child support orders?
Answer. Child support is critical to the healthy growth of children
and the ability for families to become self-sufficient and move out of
poverty. If confirmed, I will commit to working with your office to
find ways to address these concerns.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Claire McCaskill
Question. Mrs. Johnson, of the 273,539 children who entered foster
care during FY 2016, one-third entered foster care because of parental
substance abuse. As the opioid epidemic continues to plague families
across the country, what steps will you take, if confirmed, to ensure
that the different child welfare systems across the country are
prepared to properly deal with the growing number of children affected
by parental substance abuse?
Answer. Parental substance abuse has impacted many children and
families throughout our country with the opioid epidemic exacerbating
the number of children affected by this crisis. Preventative measures,
access to (successful) treatment opportunities for parents and ongoing
monitoring is critical to support children in homes where a parent
struggles with substance abuse. It is also important to strengthen in-
patient programs that keep children and parents together in cases where
this is possible and in the best interest of the child.
Successful support networks must be identified in localities to
provide the best support to a caregiver with an addiction to ensure
sobriety throughout his or her lifetime. Substance abuse cannot be
addressed adequately without also looking at self-medicating issues
around mental health. In addition to treatment, primary prevention to
address substance abuse prior to addiction is paramount to ensure less
families suffer the challenges that come with substance abuse.
Addiction cannot be addressed in a silo and, if confirmed, I look
forward to working with SAMHSA and CMS, and with our State and local
partners to identify innovative programs that work for families.
Question. Mrs. Johnson, do you support collaboration and
coordination between drug courts and the child welfare system? If yes,
what are your plans for collaboration and coordination, if confirmed?
Answer. I fully support collaboration and coordination between drug
courts and the child welfare system. The courts and the child welfare
system in Jefferson County Colorado have achieved a successful drug
court/child welfare integrated program. We are extremely proud of the
success due to this collaborative effort. Our drug court known as FIT
Court has been selected as a National Peer Learning Court (PLC). There
are 450 family drug courts across the country and a total of 8 have
been selected by Children and Families Futures and OJJDP as Peer
Learning Courts. FIT Court has been selected to serve as a PLC because
of our team's commitment to evidence-supported practices, innovative
strategies to improve outcomes for children and families, and the
strong foundation of collaboration among the court, child welfare, and
substance use disorder treatment agencies.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert P. Casey, Jr.
lgbt issues
Question. The Department of Health and Human Services' (HHS) Street
Outreach Program, administered by HHS's Administration for Children and
Families (ACF), supports organizations around the country that work
with homeless, runaway, and street youth to help them find stable
housing and services. The program's goal is to prevent the sexual abuse
or exploitation of young people living on the streets or in unstable
housing and prepare them for independence. While previous funding
announcements specifically stated that grantees were required to
address the unique needs of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and
queer (LGBTQ) youth, the 2017 announcement removed that requirement as
well as all mentions of LGBTQ youth. Furthermore, in previous years,
applicants were required to submit an ``LGBTQ Accessibility Policy''
assurance, which Stated that the needs of LGBTQ individuals would be
taken into consideration and that the applicant would establish
policies prohibiting harassment. The 2017 funding announcement did not
require applicants to submit this assurance.
HHS's decision to eliminate LGBTQ youth as a focus of the program
ran counter to its own findings and recommendations and could have
serious repercussions on the lives of at-risk LGBTQ youth. According to
a 2016 study released by HHS, while 3 to 5 percent of youth in this
country self-identify as LGBT, one-third of youth served by the Street
Outreach Program reported being lesbian, gay, or bisexual, and HHS's
own study also found that LGBT youth served by the program ``were
significantly more likely to have experienced victimization on the
streets (including being beaten up, robbed, sexually assaulted or
raped, threatened with a weapon, or assaulted with a weapon) than their
heterosexual counterparts.'' HHS also found that LGBT youth supported
by the program faced barriers accessing services, including the lack of
LGBT-friendly policies and staff. Because of these barriers, HHS
concluded that programs and services funded by the Street Outreach
Program would need to be especially sensitive to LGBT youth and that
additional information about the needs of LGBT youth, as well as more
effort, was needed to better serve these individuals. HHS's decision to
remove requirements to address the unique needs of LGBTQ youth leave
the Department in contradiction of its own recommendations.
If you are confirmed, how will you ensure that all ACF programs,
including the Street Outreach Program, meet the unique needs of the
LGBTQ community?
Answer. Should I be confirmed, I will commit that all ACF programs
will treat all children and youth fairly and with compassion and
respect for their human dignity. Should I have the opportunity to lead
ACF, I am committed to following Congress's lead in seeing that the
agency supports the well-being of all the children and youth its
programs touch, and promotes positive youth development that includes
quality care and nurturing for success as healthy adults.
cooperation
Question. If you are confirmed, do you commit to providing
thorough, complete, and timely responses to requests for information
from all members of Congress, including requests from members in the
minority?
Answer. Yes, I will commit to working with and responding in a
thorough, complete, and timely manner to all members of Congress.
impact of childhood trauma
Question. Ongoing research, including studies funded by the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, have demonstrated the broad
prevalence of Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) and the ways in
which these experiences can lead to lifelong health consequences. There
is also what researchers call a ``dose-response relationship,'' meaning
that as children experience more traumatic events, the negative impacts
get worse. Children who are continuously exposed to trauma can
experience developmental and behavioral problems, which may not be
recognized as a symptom of their ongoing or residual trauma. These are
the children that most need our help.
The trauma can come from many sources these days: community or
school violence, abuse or neglect, witnessing domestic violence in the
home, exposure to parental substance abuse, and even being removed from
one's home. In some ways, we have started to adapt to this
understanding of trauma, such as through the work this committee has
done with the Family first Prevention Services Act to move our child
welfare system towards a prevention-focused system that works to
stabilize and support vulnerable families where possible, and only
removing children from their homes as a last resort. However, we must
ensure that we continue to inform our work with the latest research on
trauma and the impact of trauma on children, so that we can ensure we
are providing the best resources and support for these vulnerable
children.
If confirmed, how will you ensure that the Administration for
Children and Families promotes trauma-informed and trauma-sensitive
systems for children?
Answer. Should I be confirmed, the use of trauma-informed and
trauma-sensitive systems should continue to be identified as a best
practice. All individuals who work with children/youth and parents in
our systems should be trained on the identification and care for
individuals with trauma. This would also include the parents who were
at one time, the child with a high ACE score. Through Jefferson
County's early childhood program, we work with mental health and
education systems to identify areas of trauma. Our Head Start has
created an innovative therapeutic classroom for the children needing
low stimulus and highly trauma-informed teachers. We have also trained
all staff who work with children and youth. In addition, we provide
trauma informed therapy to any staff who have witnessed horrific
situations through their day to day work.
It would be helpful to work with the institutions of higher
learning to ensure this training is also provided in degree programs.
Question. How will you ensure that children who must be removed
from their caregivers and placed in foster care are not re-traumatized
by the child welfare system?
Answer. This is a difficult question and one practitioners have
been asking for many years. The Family first Prevention Services Act is
a good first step towards reducing trauma of change and lack of
stability. There needs to be however, coordinated efforts from multiple
systems from human services, health, mental health, education, and
others to ensure children are not re-traumatized. Primary prevention
efforts to strengthen marriage and families, enhanced supports for
schools to identify and care for children, enriched parenthood
programs, and further support for foster parents will all assist
towards the desired goal. The effort to integrate and collaborate
within government and within a community will be critical to these
efforts.
Question. How can you ensure that the child welfare system and
child welfare workers are supported so that children who present with
challenging behaviors can be identified, given appropriate support, and
achieve permanency in their placement through reunification, kinship
care, or adoption?
Answer. The child welfare system and child welfare workers do not
operate in a silo. Identification of the multi-disciplinary teams
necessary to adequately care for children with challenging behaviors
assists the child welfare worker and the system move towards a
successful outcome for children and families. It is critical that the
system have standards for best practice, available resources,
appropriate case load numbers, and clear expectations for professional
behavior. The ability to legally share data with other helping systems
assists families as well as workers. In my current position, we work
hard to ensure that our child welfare workers are adequately paid, that
we are an ``Employer of Choice'' for the workers, and that they are
best trained and supported during difficult cases. We provide stress
relief through therapy and other activities and stress a healthy work/
life balance. Our staff are the most valuable resource to ensure
children and families are safe and healthy. They must have the tools
and resources to do the job.
child welfare
Question. We have a responsibility to protect children in foster
care, because we--society--have accepted the responsibility to care for
them and ensure their well-being until they can be reunited with their
family or found another permanent home.
I have heard multiple reports that the child welfare system is
being particularly strained by the opioid epidemic, and the number of
children needing services due to parents with substance use disorders.
If confirmed, how do you plan to support caregivers and children
impacted by the opioid epidemic who intersect with the child welfare
system?
Answer. Parental substance abuse has impacted many children and
families throughout our country with the opioid epidemic exacerbating
the number of children affected by this crisis. Preventative measures,
access to (successful) treatment opportunities for parents, and ongoing
monitoring are critical to support children in homes where a parent
struggles with substance abuse. It is also important to strengthen in-
patient programs that keep children and parents together in cases where
this is possible and in the best interest of the child.
Successful support networks must be identified in localities to
provide the best support to a caregiver with an addiction to ensure
sobriety throughout his or her lifetime. Substance abuse cannot be
addressed adequately without also looking at the self-medicating issues
around mental health. In addition to treatment, primary prevention to
address substance abuse prior to addiction is paramount to ensure less
families suffer the challenges that come with substance abuse.
Addiction cannot be addressed in a silo and, if confirmed, I look
forward to working with SAMHSA and CMS, and with our State and local
partners to identify innovative programs that work for families.
Question. How do you plan to enhance interstate collaboration and
sharing of child welfare best practices?
Answer. Should I be confirmed, I would encourage continued
collaboration with our non-profit partners (NGOs) such as the Alliance
for Strong Families and Communities, American Public Human Services
Association and their affiliate National Association for Public Child
Welfare Agencies, Casey Family Programs, Annie E. Casey, the Child
Welfare League, State and local partners, and so many more to continue
an integrated approach to enhance best practices and share in peer
monitoring and reviews between child welfare departments. The multitude
of organizations who deeply care about our families and children will
be essential to the success of our child welfare practices.
Question. How do you plan to increase access to mental health and
behavioral health services for children in foster care?
Answer. Should I be confirmed, I will coordinate closely with the
offices in ACF as well as with our partner agencies CMS and SAMHSA on
the issue of mental health and behavioral health services. Enhancing
the care and access in mental and behavioral health is critical for the
success of our families and children.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
interpretation and enforcement of federal law
Question. Mrs. Johnson, if confirmed, there is a Federal law you
will be responsible for enforcing that restricts the use of title IV-E
funds to support the placement of foster children in facilities used
primarily for juvenile detention. Dozens of groups advocating for
children say you shouldn't place foster children in detention
facilities. And in my view, Federal law is clear. Foster care funds
cannot be used for this purpose.
How would you interpret the Federal restriction on the placement of
foster youth in facilities that operate primarily for juvenile
detention? Please be specific in describing your views on the types of
characteristics and caseload makeup that should determine whether a
facility operates in such a way.
Answer. The Federal restriction on the placement of foster youth in
facilities that operate primarily for juvenile detention is clear.
States determine and fund detention in ways that are different than a
Residential Child Care Facility. The licensing to be a Residential
Child Care Facility is also thorough and clear. I would follow the law
regarding the use of title IV-E funding and, should there be areas of
concern, would work with Congress to clarify the placements, purpose,
and funding.
It is clear that using title IV-E funds to support the placement of
foster children in residential child care facilities is allowable. What
could use more clarity is the response to behaviors of our youth who
may have been abused and/or neglected but who are acting out as teens,
sometimes in ways that would appear delinquent. If confirmed, it would
be my goal that these youth, if possible not end up in a high-end
system of detention. It is critical that all children and youth in our
systems be treated so that they can be cared for in a normalized manner
to become successful and healthy adults. This should also include the
priority of the least restrictive environment, and stable educational
efforts.
bipartisan foster care report
Question. Mrs. Johnson, Chairman Hatch's oversight and human
services policy staff spent 2\1/2\ years with my team investigating the
expanding role of privatized foster care services in many States. You
had a productive conversation with the bipartisan committee staff about
the report's findings during your due diligence meetings. Included in
the report were policy recommendations for the States and Tribes, the
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and for Congress to
consider. Among the recommendations for HHS, establishing a common
definition for therapeutic foster care (TFC), aiding States to
accurately collect provider-specific outcomes data (consistent with
AFCARS, NCANDS, and the CFSRs), and establishing maximum caseload
guidelines were included. As part of the committee's investigation,
staff repeatedly found instances where States lacked definitional
consistency and simply had no feasible way to collect specific data
metrics requested by the committee (and required by Federal law).
Please identify which HHS-specific policy recommendations outlined
in the report you would consider acting on if confirmed to lead the
Administration for Children and Families (ACF) and which you would not
and explain why.
Answer. The recommendations provided for States and Tribes,
Department of Health and Human Services, and Congress are thorough and
necessary. Should I be confirmed, rather than chose a few
recommendations, I would want to prioritize the recommendations and
evaluate the impact of change. The level of oversight for all
placements should be reviewed and issues of oversight identified. The
support for enhanced oversight of foster families to ensure robust
background checks would require the child welfare system access to
criminal investigation data bases. This access would also not only
ensure timely placement, it also would reduce multiple placements due
to not having to wait for the background information. I would take into
consideration all recommendations after receiving evaluative results,
would proceed with prioritization and take steps to implement such
policies.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert Menendez
Question. One of the concerns with programs like Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) is that many families who could
benefit from the program have been excluded due to restrictive
definitions of eligibility. The President has proposed deep cuts to
TANF in addition to promoting work requirements in Medicaid and cuts to
nutrition programs.
Do you support cuts to TANF?
Can a program be deemed successful if many individuals continue to
experience hardship but are unable to access assistance?
Following up on that question, what plans do you have to help
individuals who fall in the middle ground between eligibility for anti-
poverty programs and true financial stability?
What plans do you have to ensure people are not falling off an
assistance cliff as they work toward financial security?
Answer. If confirmed, I look forward to working with leaders of ACF
and the Office of Management and Budget to build upon what has been
learned over the years and to ensure the TANF program is successful in
reducing the number of individuals who are in poverty and in need of
such services as well as to ensure that funds are used in the most
effective manner.
In Jefferson County, we started what is known as the Jeffco
Prosperity Project. This effort wraps around individuals who need
services to assist them in moving from generational poverty to success.
The families and individuals in the project provide the insight and
guidance on barriers and what should change in government systems. Non-
profit organizations, businesses, faith-based entities, local
communities, and the government departments all participate in
neutralizing the issues around eligibility and especially the cliff
effect. These efforts are done in a whole family/multi-generation model
to ensure success for parents and break the cycle of poverty for the
children. Employment, education, training, child care assistance,
substance abuse treatment, physical, oral, and mental health care,
housing, financial assistance, transportation, food, and much more is
needed to move from abject poverty to self-sufficiency. Should I be
confirmed, I would work with Congress to ensure that TANF assists
individuals to successfully move towards true financial stability, out
of poverty with dignity and with respect.
Question. As part of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, Congress
passed the Family First Prevention Services Act. Can you commit to
ensuring Family First will be fully implemented in the manner intended
by its bipartisan supporters in Congress?
Answer. Yes, should I be confirmed, I will commit to ensuring the
Family First Prevention Services Act is fully implemented in the manner
intended by its bipartisan supporters in Congress.
Question. Will you also commit to providing this committee updates
on the implementation process?
Answer. Yes, I will commit to providing updates on the
implementation process of the FFPSA.
Question. The opioid epidemic has taken a toll on the country in
many ways, and one of the most devastating has been the impact on
children. You've mentioned previously working to break down silos--what
opportunities do you see to coordinate amongst the various Departments
and with States to improve outcomes for children caught up in the
opioid epidemic?
Answer. Most of our systems, health, mental health, education,
substance abuse, housing, human services, judicial, and others can all
have an impact on primary prevention as well as identification of
issues before they become a crisis. No one system can solely handle the
opioid epidemic or other issues by itself. Should I be confirmed, I
would be excited about the opportunity to work with Federal agencies,
States and local entities, HHS and ACF departments. Collaboration and
integration to move toward common goals, reduce duplication of efforts
and prioritize person centered, family serving efforts could promote
and enhance true outcomes for all people.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Debbie Stabenow
Question. Funding for early childhood education is one of the best
Federal investments we can make, and I am a strong supporter of Head
Start and Early Head Start.
Can you describe any previous experience overseeing or working with
Head Start grantees?
Answer. I was the Head Start State Collaboration Director when I
worked for Governor Bill Owens. I currently manage a Head Start in
Jefferson County. Head Start is the center of all our poverty
initiatives and the lead on the Jeffco Prosperity Project. In this
project we are currently working with Head Start families until their
children graduate from High School. At the same time, we work with the
family to reach full self-sufficiency.
Question. What changes would you recommend at the Federal level, if
any? Would you recommend increased Federal investment in the program?
Answer. Head Start is an anti-poverty initiative, not just an early
learning initiative. Should I be confirmed, I would like to look at the
funding for both Early Head Start and Head Start before recommending
additional funding. I would also like to look at the standards and
guidelines to ensure we are not placing unnecessary burdens on the
staff. The care of the family and children is of utmost importance.
Question. I was proud to work with the HHS Administration for
Children and Families to expand Head Start services in Flint in
response to the water crisis.
The comprehensive services that Head Start and Early Head Start
provide, including developmental screenings, referral to health-care
services, and family services are particularly important in helping
children overcome lead exposure.
Can you elaborate on the role the agencies you would be overseeing
should play in responding to a public health crisis like the one in
flint?
Answer. Should I be confirmed, the people serving agencies I would
oversee could play a significant role in responding to an issue such as
the one in flint. Cooperation and coordination with other agencies,
providing information and services to families and children can be very
helpful. Guidance and assistance to the community, as requested by a
community would be a priority.
Question. Do you have experience working with programs funded
through the SSBG?
Answer. Yes, I have experience working with programs funded through
the SSBG.
Question. The FY 2019 HHS Budget eliminates funding for SSBG, which
would leave many States, including Michigan, with tough choices on
where to cut services.
In Michigan, the SSBG is administered by the Michigan Department of
Health and Human Services (MDHHS) and funds the following programs:
children's foster care, adult protective services, runaway and homeless
youth services, domestic and sexual violence prevention and treatment,
and multicultural services.
What do you believe is the role of the SSBG, and what changes would
you recommend?
Answer. In my current role, SSBG has been used to provide many
innovative senior services. Should I be confirmed, I would need to
review SSBG to provide recommended changes.
Question. Do you support eliminating the SSBG?
Answer. As a nominee I have not been involved with the policy
decision-making process for the development of the President's budget,
therefore I cannot speak to the policy rationale.
Question. The Community Services Block Grant (CSBG) is another
vital program States use to help lessen poverty and address the needs
of low-income individuals.
Michigan's Federal CSBG allocation is about $23 million per year,
and the State uses the money to help families achieve self-sufficiency,
promote financial wellness, and find meaningful employment.
In Michigan, the CSBG has eliminated nearly 556,640 poverty
conditions, helped service more than 1.9 million volunteer hours, and
served 182,000 people, 50,000 being children. Unfortunately, this
program is zeroed out in the administration's proposed budget.
Do you support funding the CSBG? Given your substantial experience
in State government, how would you expect States to respond to the
elimination of the CSBG?
Answer. In my current role, CSBG has been used to assist with
issues impacting homelessness and poverty. However, as a nominee I have
not been involved with the policy decision-making process for the
development of the President's budget, therefore I cannot speak to the
policy rationale.
______
Prepared Statement of Hon. Ron Wyden,
a U.S. Senator From Oregon
The committee meets this morning to discuss the nomination of two
individuals to serve at the Department of Health and Human Services,
Mr. John Bartrum, nominated to the role of Assistant Secretary for
Financial Resources; and Mrs. Lynn Johnson, nominated to the role of
Assistant Secretary for Family Support.
Since child welfare would be under Mrs. Johnson's purview at HHS, I
want to start my remarks with some major concerns I have over the Trump
administration blocking key rules meant to help foster kids.
Everybody wants foster kids to be safe and well cared for. In order
to evaluate whether our foster care programs are succeeding at
protecting our most vulnerable youth and giving them a chance to get
ahead, the Federal Government needs key information from States, which
run each individual program.
For example, if you want to do a better job of keeping foster kids
out of the world of sex trafficking, you need information about how
widespread a problem trafficking is today, who it's victimizing, and so
on.
Over 3 years ago, Congress passed a bipartisan law to fight
trafficking, and HHS finally got underway revamping its out-of-date
foster care reporting requirements, including reporting on sex
trafficking. In fact, the last time HHS updated any of these
requirements was in 1993. Those updates were supposed to be getting up
and running right about now. But just in the last few days, the Trump
administration made the baffling decision to step in and block the
Administration for Children and Families from moving forward with
implementation.
Now, I've warned the Trump administration against interfering with
this process. By torpedoing these rules, the Trump administration is
standing in the way of helping some of the most vulnerable kids in the
country. But they've got their deregulation blinders on, and they
decided not to listen to any warnings about how this action could hurt
kids.
If confirmed, Mrs. Johnson would be in charge of these decisions,
so I plan to discuss this further with her today. But I want to make
one thing clear: I am not going to let this go. This committee has put
in a lot of bipartisan work on child welfare, including very recently
passing the biggest improvements to the system in decades. I want to be
able to continue this type of bipartisan work, including with the
administration.
I've also got serious concerns about the fact that Mrs. Johnson has
supported legislation to allow Colorado to send foster kids to juvenile
detention facilities. While this may be a common practice in Colorado,
and somewhat similar approaches may be taken in other States, it's
contrary to Federal law as I read it. If the rules on this need
updating, policy makers ought to make that happen. But this is an area
of the law that Ms. Johnson will be in charge of interpreting and
enforcing if she is confirmed. I look forward to hearing from her
directly about this issues in question.
With that, I'll turn to Mr. Bartrum's nomination to be the HHS
Assistant Secretary for Financial Resources. This is a big job that has
a lot of influence over how HHS spends taxpayer dollars.
To say the person in this role is just a ``numbers guy'' is a
serious understatement. When you've got major decisions affecting the
spending of Medicare, Medicaid, the Children's Health program, and more
coming across your desk, you've got a lot of influence over policy.
That's particularly relevant in the Trump administration, which takes a
slash-and-burn approach to health-care budgeting no matter how many
millions of Americans it stands to harm.
Mr. Bartrum has a long career as a public servant, and his
qualifications are strong. But these bigger questions dealing with
health-care budgeting are what I'm hoping to discuss with him today.
I want to thank both nominees for being willing to serve and
appearing before the committee today.
______
Communication
----------
American Public Human Services Association (APHSA)
1133 Nineteenth Street, NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: (202) 682-0100
Fax: (202) 204-0071
www.aphsa.org
March 20, 2018
The Honorable Orrin G. Hatch
The Honorable Ron Wyden
Chairman
Ranking Member
Committee on Finance
Committee on Finance
U.S. Senate
U.S. Senate
219 Dirksen Senate Office Building
219 Dirksen Senate Office Building
Washington, DC 20510
Washington, DC 20510
Dear Chairman Hatch and Ranking Member Wyden:
The American Public Human Services Association (APHSA) is a bipartisan,
nonprofit membership organization representing state and local health
and human service agencies through their top-level leadership. Through
our member network and three national Collaborative Centers, APHSA
seeks to influence modern policies and practices that support the
health and well-being of all children and families and that lead to
stronger communities.
On behalf of APHSA, it is my pleasure to recommend Lynn A. Johnson for
the Assistant Secretary for Family Support appointment with the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Mrs. Johnson's expertise and wisdom in the field of human services,
drawn from her work with three administrations of Governors in Colorado
and national leadership positions, is well known. Mrs. Johnson has
served as a leader in APHSA's Local Council and the National
Association of Public Child Welfare Administrators. Mrs. Johnson has
strong connections to state and local health and human services leaders
across the country and is perfectly positioned to engage these
stakeholders in developing new solutions to address the changing needs
of children, youth, and families.
Mrs. Johnson is a renowned visionary and innovator, implementing new
program models that serve families. She has a proven record of
developing cross-cutting programs that focus simultaneously on the
needs of parents and children to ensure the whole family's success. We
trust that she will use this opportunity to identify solutions in
communities across the country and address the administrative burdens,
unnecessary rules and regulations that get in the way of success for
families.
Mrs. Johnson works with sincere motivation to serve communities and
citizens. Her dependability and drive are character traits that cannot
be taught and are crucial to any leadership position. She continually
demonstrates dedication to going above and beyond and exhibits her
contributions to change lives for the better. Not only does she take
initiative to learn the regulations and intricacies of human services
with phenomenal expertise, she also takes the time to learn related
systems and understand how systems can work together to achieve
efficient and effective solutions.
We urge you to quickly confirm Lynn A. Johnson as the Assistant
Secretary for Family Support appointment with the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services. We have full confidence in Mrs. Johnson's
ability to support state and local human services leaders and develop
programs and systems that will make a difference in the lives of
children and families.
Sincerely,
Tracy Wareing Evans
President and CEO
