- PERSPECTIVES ON THE 340B DRUG PRICING PROGRAM
[Senate Hearing 115-810]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-810
PERSPECTIVES ON THE 340B
DRUG PRICING PROGRAM
=======================================================================
HEARING
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION,
LABOR, AND PENSIONS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
ON
EXAMINING PERSPECTIVES ON THE 340B DRUG DISCOUNT PROGRAM
__________
MARCH 15, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
29-412 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION, LABOR, AND PENSIONS
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee, Chairman
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming		PATTY MURRAY, Washington
RICHARD BURR, North Carolina		BERNARD SANDERS (I), Vermont
JOHNNY ISAKSON, Georgia			ROBERT P. CASEY, JR., Pennsylvania
RAND PAUL, Kentucky			MICHAEL F. BENNET, Colorado
SUSAN M. COLLINS, Maine			TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
BILL CASSIDY, M.D., Louisiana		CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
TODD YOUNG, Indiana			ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
ORRIN G. HATCH, Utah			TIM KAINE, Virginia
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas			MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska			TINA SMITH, Minnesota
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina		DOUG JONES, Alabama
David P. Cleary, Republican Staff Director
Lindsey Ward Seidman, Republican Deputy Staff Director
Evan Schatz, Democratic Staff Director
John Righter, Democratic Deputy Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
STATEMENTS
THURSDAY, MARCH 15, 2018
Page
Committee Members
Alexander, Hon. Lamar, Chairman, Committee on Health, Education,
Labor, and Pensions, Opening statement.........................
3
Murray, Hon. Patty, Ranking Member, a U.S. Senator from the State
of Washington, Opening statement...............................
1
Witnesses
Siegel, Bruce, MD, MPH, President and CEO America's Essential
Hospitals......................................................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
7
Summary statement............................................
11
Reilly, Lori M., Executive Vice President, Policy, Research, and
Membership, Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of
America, Washington, DC........................................
11
Prepared statement...........................................
13
Summary statement............................................
34
Veer, Sue, MBA, President and Chief Executive Officer, Carolina
Health Centers, Inc., Greenwood, SC............................
35
Prepared statement...........................................
37
Summary statement............................................
42
Hill, Joseph, M. III, MA, Director, Government Relations
Division, American Society of Health-System Pharmacists,
Bethesda, MD...................................................
42
Prepared statement...........................................
44
Summary statement............................................
46
PERSPECTIVES ON THE 340B
DRUG PRICING PROGRAM
----------
Thursday, March 15, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m. in
room SD-430, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lamar
Alexander, presiding.
Present: Senators Alexander [presiding], Isakson, Cassidy,
Young, Roberts, Murray, Casey, Bennet, Baldwin, Murphy, Warren,
Kaine, Hassan, Smith, and Jones.
The Chairman. The hearing will come to order.
Senator Murray has an important engagement that she needs
to go to.
We are going to explore today the 340B Program. We welcome
our witnesses.
I have asked Senator Murray if she will make her opening
statement first, and then I will make mine. Then we will hear
from the witnesses, and then as Senators come and go, we will
have 5 minutes. We will have rounds of questions.
Senator Murray.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR MURRAY
Senator Murray. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for that
accommodation. I really appreciate it.
Thank you to all of our witnesses who have come today to
talk about the 340B Program, which has helped a lot of our
hospitals and health centers stretch their resources and serve
their communities.
Today's hearing is very important and long overdue. For
over a quarter of a century, the 340B Program has been a
critical safety net for health providers that bear the burden
of caring for some of our patients and communities with the
greatest needs and fewest resources.
The 340B Program was started in 1992 with a simple goal: to
stretch scarce Federal resources to provide more comprehensive
services to vulnerable populations.
The way it works is equally simple: it requires
pharmaceutical companies to make drugs more affordable for
certain health providers serving vulnerable populations and low
income patients. Those savings can help those providers stretch
their resources even further.
Like at St. Mary Medical Center in Walla Walla, Washington.
In 2016, 2 out of every 5 patients they saw were on Medicare;
another 1 in 5 was either on Medicaid or uninsured. 340B
savings helped that hospital support basic school-based health
clinics for at-risk elementary and high school students, run a
drive-through flu clinic to provide free vaccines to hundreds
of low income families, and provide low cost or free
medications.
At Sacred Heart Medical Center and Children's Hospital in
Spokane, one-third of their 2016 patients were on Medicare,
another third on Medicaid or uninsured.
When one of their elderly patients did not know how he
could afford a $400 medicine, 340B savings helped the hospital
charge only $80, one-fifth of the cost; that is a price he
could manage. He is not the only one. Sacred Heart gives away
as much as $55 million a year in free and discounted care.
You can also see 340B at work at the University of
Washington, which has used 340B savings to stretch its reach
with innovative initiatives, like the University's tele-pain
program, which is combating the opioid epidemic through
innovative audio and video conferencing support for providers
treating rural patients who struggle to manage chronic pain.
This program does not just work in Washington. Participants
cover Wyoming, Montana, Oregon, Idaho, and beyond.
The University also runs the Third Avenue Center, which
provides physical and mental healthcare to women who experience
homelessness. The center is co-located at the YWCA Angeline's
Women's Shelter, so that vulnerable women can access
coordinated care in a safe environment.
These great programs are made possible by 340B savings, and
they are just a few examples of how the 340B Program can be a
great resource for doing good.
Of course, for us to ensure this Program does good, we have
to ask whether it is implemented well, and we have to ask
whether we can make it better.
Accountability and transparency are important to address
concerns about whether entities are using the 340B savings
appropriately, and whether pharmaceutical manufacturers are
providing discounts fairly. We can, and should, provide
accountability in a way that strengthens and preserves this
Program.
Unfortunately, despite President Trump's repeated promises
to tackle drug prices, when it comes to the 340B Program--which
actually helps reduce drug costs--his record shows only broken
promises and backward steps. Like when he sabotaged an attempt
to make sure drug companies play by the rules.
When Congress passed the Affordable Care Act, we gave the
Health Resources and Services Administration, HRSA, new tools
to keep the 340B Program accountable.
HRSA has taken steps to provide greater education and
conduct more audits to prevent hospitals and providers from
taking advantage of the system. After the HHS Inspector General
found many drug companies were overcharging, HRSA finally
drafted a rule to make sure drug companies were actually giving
the full discounts required.
However, President Trump continues to delay that rule
designed to hold drug companies accountable for overcharging.
And President Trump took another enormous step backward when
his Administration implemented a significant cut to the 340B
Program.
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services has
traditionally reimbursed 340B eligible hospitals for drugs at
the same rate as all other hospitals. However, this year, they
are making unnecessary cuts and paying less than 80 percent of
market price, reducing the ability of 340B providers to offer
the outstanding services patients and families count on.
Skyrocketing drug prices are a dire problem and they
deserve our urgent attention and serious solutions. Needless to
say, rolling back rules to prevent overcharging from drug
companies, and cutting back programs that help make drugs more
affordable, is not going to get the job done.
The cost of 340B discounts to the pharmaceutical industry
is about 1 percent of the total U.S. drug market. That is by no
measure a big dent. It is a single penny out of every dollar.
But that small penny, that small percent, can make a big
difference.
It can make a difference to the low-income patients and
communities who could not otherwise afford the treatment they
need.
It can make a difference to the hospitals and health
centers who could not otherwise stretch their resources far
enough to care for these communities.
I really appreciate all of our witnesses who are here today
to talk about how we can make sure this 340B Program is
accountable enough to fulfill its intent and strong enough to
continue serving our communities for generations to come.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for accommodating me. My
staff is here. I will submit my questions for the record.
We have other Senators here as well, again we appreciate
all of your contributions.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Murray.
I know you have an important engagement I appreciate your
extra effort in being here early.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ALEXANDER
The Chairman. The 340B Drug Pricing Program was created by
Congress in 1992 to help qualifying hospitals and clinics that
treat low-income patients.
The program requires drug manufacturers that participate in
Medicaid to provide discounts on prescription drugs or
treatments, including treatments for cancer, diabetes, or HIV
to qualifying hospitals and clinics.
The hospitals and clinics may then provide the drugs at the
reduced price to low-income patients. Or they can sell the
drugs at a higher price to patients who have insurance and keep
that money and use it to provide care to low-income patients or
for other purposes.
According to the Government Accountability Office,
approximately 40 percent of all hospitals in the United States
participate in the 340B Program. In just the last 5 years, the
number of hospitals and treatment sites participating in the
340B Program has nearly doubled to almost 38,000 in 2017.
Today's hearing will focus on two things:
First, what is the purpose of the 340B Program and is it
fulfilling that purpose?
Second, should there be changes in the law so that the
Program can fulfill its purpose?
First, we need a better understanding of that purpose, and
why the 340B Program exists, and how it is being used.
Today, there is confusion about that. Confusion about the
program's goals and requirements because Congress did not make
clear in the 1992 law creating it what the purpose of the
Program actually is.
The closest the law came to defining the purpose is a House
of Representatives' report, to which Senator Murray referred,
which accompanies the legislative text, and which says the
program was created, ``To permit covered entities to stretch
scarce Federal dollars as far as possible, reaching more
eligible patients and providing more comprehensive services.''
This has usually meant helping low-income patients afford
their medications and healthcare, and to ensure that qualifying
health centers can provide care to their most vulnerable
patients.
Here is an example of 340B in practice from Saint Thomas
Hickman Hospital in Hickman County, Tennessee. The hospital
participates in the 340B Program.
A Hickman County resident with diabetes was unable to
afford the $332 cost of insulin, and went into a diabetic coma.
He was told about the 340B Program at Saint Thomas Hickman, and
was able to buy the insulin for $8.90.
According to Saint Thomas Hickman, the 340B Program has
also helped the hospital expand mental healthcare services and
reduce emergency room visits.
The Health Resources and Services Administration, the
Health and Human Services agency that oversees the Program,
estimates that hospitals and clinics purchased $12 billion of
discounted prescription drugs through the 340B Program in the
year 2015.
The House Energy and Commerce Committee has estimated that
just a year later, in 2016, the 340B hospitals and clinics
spent more than $16 billion on discounted drug purchases, up
from $12 billion; a 30 percent increase.
340B hospitals saved about $6 billion in 2015, according to
those figures, by buying prescription drugs at a discount. That
$6 billion represents about 1.3 percent of the total purchases
of prescription drugs in the United States in 2015.
In other words, about 1.3 percent of the total amount spent
on prescription drugs in the United States is devoted to the
hospitals and clinics that qualify for the 340B Program.
Hospitals will point out that, according to the Department
of Health and Human Services, hospitals spent more than $50
billion in 2013 on uncompensated care; that is, services to
patients that are not reimbursed.
Hospitals and clinics use the $6 billion in savings that
they generate through the 340B Program to help offset the money
they spend in uncompensated care.
On the other hand, we also know there are instances where
340B hospitals and clinics may not be using the savings
directly to help low-income patients afford their medications
or provide care.
There is no limit in the statute that says what hospitals
may or may not spend the money on.
Some have criticized this, such as Dr. Rena Conti from the
University of Chicago and Dr. Peter Back from Memorial Sloan-
Kettering who have found that, ``The 340B Program is being
converted from one that serves vulnerable patient populations
to one that enriches hospitals and their affiliated clinics.''
This is why there have been reports--including from the
Health and Human Services Office of the Inspector General, the
Government Accountability Office, the National Academies, and
the House Energy and Commerce Committee--that suggest that
while the 340B Program does provide real benefits, there needs
to be more clarity around what the program allows and does not
allow.
For example, one 2011 report by the Government
Accountability Office recommended increased oversight of the
Program and that the Health Resources and Services
Administration, or HRSA, issue and finalize guidance on the
definition of a 340B patient.
Last year, the National Academies recommended more
oversight and regulation to ensure that the program directly
benefits patients.
I hope today we can learn more about the Program, and how
it might be improved so hospitals and clinics can continue to
provide low-income patients with help to afford their health
care.
Now, I would like to ask the four of you if you could
summarize your comments in about 5 minutes. It will then allow
more time for questions and conversation with Senators.
First, we will hear from Bruce Siegel, the President and
Chief Executive Officer of America's Essential Hospitals. Dr.
Siegel leads AEH, a trade association that represents more than
300 safety net hospitals and health systems.
Second, we will hear from Lori Reilly, the Executive Vice
President of Policy, Research, and Membership at PhRMA, the
Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America. Ms.
Reilly leads the Policy and Research Department at PhRMA, a
trade association of brand drug manufacturers.
Third, we will hear from Sue Veer, President and Chief
Executive Officer of Carolina Health Centers, Inc. Ms. Veer
leads Carolina Health Centers, which serves as the medical home
for over 27,000 patients in the State of South Carolina.
Finally, we will hear from Joseph Hill, the Director of the
Government Relations Division for the American Society of
Health-System Pharmacists. Mr. Hill leads the Government
Relations Division for that trade association that represents
45,000 member pharmacists, student pharmacists, and primary
technicians.
We welcome, again, all of our witnesses.
Dr. Siegel, let us begin with you. Welcome.
STATEMENT OF BRUCE SIEGEL, M.D., MPH, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, AMERICA'S ESSENTIAL HOSPITALS, WASHINGTON,
DC
Dr. Siegel. Thank you.
Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and honorable
Members of the Committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today about how the
340B Program supports our hospitals, and the many people and
communities they serve.
My name is Dr. Bruce Siegel, President and CEO of America's
Essential Hospitals. We represent 325 hospitals and health
systems that form the backbone of the Nation's healthcare
safety net.
Our members are public and nonprofit hospitals across the
Nation from the Appalachian foothills of Tennessee, to Center
City Philadelphia, to the Louisiana bayou, to Utah's Great Salt
Lake. They are the trauma centers, and burn units, and
neighborhood clinics for these and hundreds of other
communities.
Our hospitals are diverse, but they share one defining
mission: to care for all people regardless of social,
financial, or health status.
Hospitals with this mission are precisely those Congress
targeted when it created 340B more than 25 years ago. Congress'
intent was explicit and clear: to protect hospitals from
runaway drug prices.
What was a problem then, remains a problem today. Remember
that 340B grew from an urgent need for action when drug prices
surged as manufacturers reacted to Medicaid's Rebate program.
We are no less at-risk now than we were then. Skyrocketing
drug costs threaten our hospitals and patients, and the 340B
Program is still our best defense against high drug prices.
Our hospitals care for the poorest and most complex
patients. About half of their patients are uninsured or
Medicaid beneficiaries. These are people who face daunting
barriers to good health and to healthcare access in communities
where 4.6 million families live below the poverty line. They
struggle with food insecurity, homelessness, and other social
challenges.
Meeting this mission means our hospitals operate with thin
margins. Many barely break even and in some States--Colorado,
Indiana, Louisiana, Utah, Washington and others--they operate
at a loss.
Our average member hospital provides $61 million a year in
uncompensated care, more than 8 times that of other hospitals.
You can see why our hospitals depend on 340B savings.
How they use those savings reflects another clearly stated
congressional goal for 340B: to stretch scarce resources and
provide more comprehensive services. Our hospitals stay true to
this mission. Here are some examples.
Medication adherence programs for cancer and HIV patients
at Boston Medical Center; medical homes for the uninsured at
VCU Health in Richmond, Virginia; oncology and stroke services
for underserved at Erlanger Medical Center in Chattanooga; AIDS
drug assistance at the University of Utah; treatment for cancer
patients at East Alabama Medical Center; home infusion therapy
at the University of Kentucky HealthCare; home health dialysis
at the University of Virginia; and medication therapy
management at Hennepin County Medical Center in Minneapolis.
We would be happy to share other examples with the
Committee.
Our hospitals take stewardship of the 340B Program
seriously because their patients and communities depend on it.
They comply with rigorous Program audits, including significant
data requests, and also address concerns.
Since 2012, HRSA has conducted more than 800 audits of 340B
providers mostly hospitals. Yet, the agency has conducted only
11 audits of drug makers since manufacturer audits began in
2015, and the agency has not shared its protocol for those
audits.
Because 340B supports hospitals with manufacturer
discounts--not with Government spending--it saves taxpayer
dollars. In fact, any limit on 340B access would leave local,
state, and Federal Governments on the hook for a larger share
of uncompensated care costs.
We need 340B today as much as we needed it in 1992 and for
the same reason: high and rising drug prices. Consider this:
our hospitals cannot dictate to Medicaid how much the program
will pay for their services. But one 340B stakeholder can, and
does, dictate its prices and no amount of misdirection from the
drug industry will change that simple fact.
We stand ready to work with this Committee, and other
policymakers, to preserve and strengthen the 340B Program
without restricting its support for hospitals that serve our
most vulnerable patients.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Siegel follows:]
prepared statement of bruce siegel
Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and honorable Members of
the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to speak today about how
the 340B Drug Pricing Program helps low-income patients and their
hospitals--and how we can work together to strengthen this vital
program.
My name is Dr. Bruce Siegel, president and CEO of America's
Essential Hospitals. We are an association of 325 hospitals and health
systems that form the backbone of the Nation's health care safety net.
Essential hospitals care for millions of people in every corner of our
country--from the largest cities to broad regions of urban, suburban,
and rural communities. In fact, one in 10 U.S. residents are born at an
essential hospital. \1\ Essential hospitals are diverse: large academic
medical centers with statewide or regional scope and unique specialty
services, multi hospital systems with extensive outpatient networks,
and city and county public hospitals that anchor communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Roberson B, Ramiah K. Essential Data: Our Hospitals, Our
Patients--Results of America's Essential Hospitals 2015 Annual Member
Characteristics Survey. America's Essential Hospitals. June 2017.
www.essentialdata.info. Accessed March 12, 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
But underlying this diversity is a shared and defining mission: to
provide care to all people, regardless of social, financial, or health
status.
It was precisely for hospitals with this mission that Congress
created the 340B program more than 25 years ago. The historical record
is clear: The legislative authors of this program were explicit in
their language and unequivocal about their intention to protect
hospitals of the safety net from the existential threat of
unsustainable drug costs.
To understand our ardent support for the 340B program, you first
must understand the patients and communities our hospitals serve. About
half of our hospitals' patients are uninsured or Medicaid
beneficiaries. \2\ Nearly half of essential hospitals' discharges in
2015 were for racial and ethnic minorities. \3\ On average, each of our
member hospitals cares for more than 17,000 inpatients annually, more
than 67,000 emergency department (ED) patients, and more than 350,000
outpatients. \4\ In states represented by HELP Committee Members, our
hospitals saw 1.3 million inpatient discharges, 4.9 million ED visits,
and 28 million non-emergency outpatient visits in 2016. In the context
of 340B, it is important to note hospital outpatient clinic patients
are nearly four times as likely as those treated at physician offices
to be Medicaid, self-pay, or charity care patients, and almost twice as
likely to live in high-poverty communities. \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Ibid., 11.
\3\ Ibid., 10.
\4\ Ibid., 18.
\5\ Comparison of Cancer Patients Treated in Hospital Outpatient
Departments and Physician Offices. KNG Health Consulting, LLC. November
2014.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The communities our hospitals serve are no less disadvantaged. They
are home to an estimated 4.6 million families living below the Federal
poverty line and more than 21.5 million individuals without health
insurance. \6\ Social determinants of poor health also loom large:
Federal data show essential hospitals serve communities where more than
275,000 individuals struggle with homelessness and 8.5 million people
have only limited access to healthful food. \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Roberson B, Ramiah K. Essential Data: Our Hospitals, Our
Patients--Results of America's Essential Hospitals 2015 Annual Member
Characteristics Survey. America's Essential Hospitals. June 2017.
www.essentialdata.info. Accessed March 12, 2018.
\7\ Ibid., 12.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Essential hospitals work diligently not only to care for patients
who face financial hardships, but also to help everyone in the
community overcome social and economic factors that contribute to poor
health. For example, they provide medical respite programs for the
homeless and, for those living in hunger, food pantries, community
gardens, and meal delivery services. Typically, they do these things on
their own dime.
This dedication to mission and to reaching beyond their walls
requires essential hospitals to commit resources always in short
supply. Our hospitals operate with a margin of only 3.2 percent, less
than half that of other U.S. hospitals. \8\ Many barely break even, and
in many states--Colorado, Indiana, Louisiana, Utah, and Washington, for
example--they operate at a loss. Our 325 hospitals represent only about
6 percent of all U.S. hospitals but bear nearly 17 percent, or about $6
billion, of the Nation's uncompensated care. \9\ Our average member
sustains about $61 million annually in uncompensated care--more than
eight times that of other U.S. hospitals. \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Ibid., 15.
\9\ Ibid., 14.
\10\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wide gaps often exist between those average uncompensated care
costs and 340B savings at these hospitals. In Tennessee, for example,
Regional One Health, in Memphis, reports uncompensated care costs eight
times greater than its 340B savings. Grady Health System, in Atlanta,
reported more than $174 million in unreimbursed and uncompensated costs
in 2015, more than four times its 340B savings. These gaps between
uncompensated costs and 340B savings are not atypical, and collectively
provide one example of how essential hospitals more than meet their
responsibility to vulnerable patients as good stewards of the 340B
program.
With these numbers in mind, it is not surprising our hospitals and
the patients and communities they serve depend on every available
source of support. These hospitals rely on a patchwork of Federal,
state, and local support, and losing any piece puts the whole at risk.
The savings our members achieve through the 340B Drug Pricing Program
is a key piece of that patchwork. The program is vitally important not
only to providing vulnerable patients with affordable drugs, but to
sustaining the many comprehensive services on which these people and
their communities depend.
Congress envisioned 340B as supporting this broader mission, and
lawmakers explicitly stated this as their intention for the program. In
the 1992 House report that accompanied legislation establishing the
340B program, they wrote, ``In giving these `covered entities' access
to price reductions the Committee intends to enable these entities to
stretch scarce Federal resources as far as possible, reaching more
eligible patients and providing more comprehensive services.''
I added emphasis to those last words to underscore a critical
point: Congress designed the 340B program to do more than reduce drug
costs for entities serving low-income patients. Lawmakers also intended
for it to support a variety of comprehensive services consistent with
the mission of safety-net providers, such as essential hospitals, and
that our members provide daily.
We have few tools as effective as 340B for countering high drug
prices. And we have no tools as cost-effective as 340B for the Federal
Government and taxpayers: Support to hospitals comes from manufacturer
discounts, not taxpayer dollars. In fact, restricting 340B likely would
leave state and local governments picking up the tab for uncompensated
care, or necessitate further Federal investments.
How Essential Hospitals Use 340B Savings for Vulnerable Patients
Our hospitals' work to care for low-income patients and provide
entire communities with high-intensity, lifesaving services--trauma
care, burn units, disaster response, and others--reflects Congress'
vision for the 340B program. The list of comprehensive services made
possible by 340B savings is long: free clinics and community programs
for primary and chronic condition care; cancer and transplant care,
including costly chemotherapy and anti-rejection drugs; medical respite
care for the homeless and case management for underserved patients;
training for rural hospital partners in high-risk labor and delivery
and other specialized care.
Not only do 340B savings support more services, they result in
better care and better care outcomes. Boston Medical Center (BMC) fills
more than 1 million prescriptions annually at its pharmacies, with
three-quarters provided through the 340B program. The hospital's 340B
savings support its successful Specialty Pharmacy Program for more than
1,000 cancer, HIV, and other patients. Patients enrolled in this and
other BMC programs reliably have medications in hand thanks to 340B--95
percent receive their medication compared with only 40 percent
community-wide.
Particularly impressive are the improvements to access and outcomes
for the hospital's cancer and HIV patients due to 340B. BMC has
decreased the time it takes patients to get cancer drugs from an
average of 11 days using outside pharmacies to the same day, using the
hospital's 340B-supported pharmacy. Medication adherence has improved
significantly, too, through use of the hospital's pharmacy: More than
90 percent of oncology and HIV patients have and take their medications
compared with previous rates of 50 percent to 70 percent. Better health
outcomes have followed, such as those for patients with hepatitis C.
Patients who complete hepatitis C therapy have nearly a 100 percent
chance of full recovery, and 340B has driven therapy compliance from a
community-wide average of 60 percent to 99 percent at BMC.
Our hospitals across the country have similar patient stories of
better access to care, better health, and cost savings through their
participation in the 340B program, including these examples:
East Alabama Medical Center (EAMC), Opelika, Alabama--At EAMC, a
patient mix that includes a high number of uninsured and Medicaid
patients contributed to $50 million in uncompensated care costs in
2016. Although falling well short of covering this gap, the 340B
savings the hospital achieved--$10 million that same year--helped EAMC
make cancer treatment available to indigent, uninsured, and
underinsured patients.
Hennepin County Medical Center (HCMC), Minneapolis--HCMC admitted a
homeless, uninsured man nine times over 4 months at a cost of $225,000,
or more than $56,000 a month. Pharmacists in a hospital medication
therapy management program made possible by 340B savings taught the man
how and when to take his medications. After regular clinic visits and
improved care management, his medical expenses dropped to $36,000--
$4,000 a month--in just 9 months.
UK HealthCare, Lexington, Kentucky--UK HealthCare's 340B savings
allow the health system to maintain dedicated pharmacy staff to help
indigent, self-pay, and underinsured patients receive needed
medications through copayment assistance and other financial support
programs. The system, which lacks its own home infusion pharmacy,
extends care through a contract home infusion pharmacy with the help of
the 340B program.
Erlanger Health System, Chattanooga, Tennessee--Without its 340B
savings--$9 million in 2014, or about a tenth of its $92 million in
uncompensated care costs--Erlanger could not have provided some trauma,
oncology, and stroke services programs to underserved patients. The
health system's 340B savings also fully fund a pharmacy at its Dodson
Avenue Community Health Center, which offers face-to-face counseling on
medication therapy, adherence, and chronic disease management.
University of Utah Health Care, Salt Lake City, Utah--With its 340B
savings, University of Utah Health Care provides an AIDS drug
assistance program in which patients receive drugs at cost plus a minor
fee. It also partners with rural hospitals to help them successfully
care for patients with peripherally inserted central catheter lines or
with high-risk pregnancies, increasing capacity for emergency and
critical care and improving operating room procedures. This keeps
patients in their communities and avoids costly transfers to other
hospitals.
University of Virginia (UVA) Health System, Charlottesville,
Virginia--UVA Health System has one of the highest case mixes in the
United States, evidence that it cares for many of the sickest patients.
It also provides more than $250 million in uncompensated care annually.
The health system's 340B savings are vital to maintaining specialty
services, such as home health and dialysis, and access to specialized
pharmacy services for patients at high-risk of readmission.
VCU Health, Richmond, Virginia--Savings from the 340B program made
possible the VCU Health Virginia Coordinated Care program, which
contracts with primary care providers to offer a medical home for
23,000 low-income, uninsured people. The program has lowered ED use and
costs and made medications available to the 80 percent of outpatients
who otherwise lack prescription drug coverage.
Essential Hospitals as Good Stewards of 340B
Since its inception, the 340B program has incorporated rigorous
requirements for how hospitals and other covered entities qualify for
and use the program. Rules implementing the program control how
hospitals procure and dispense 340B drugs, maintain 340B drug
inventories, ensure only eligible patients receive discounted drugs,
and avoid duplicate discounts through the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program.
The program also has adequate safeguards to prevent hospitals from
diverting 340B drugs to ineligible patients and to ensure they make
appropriate contractual arrangements with outside pharmacies to extend
the reach of 340B discounts to more vulnerable patients and underserved
communities.
In short, the 340B program is subject to substantial oversight and
monitoring. The Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA),
the Federal agency that oversees the program, conducts regular audits
of hospitals and other covered entities to ensure compliance with
program requirements. HRSA employs a comprehensive audit process, with
pre-audit, onsite, and post-audit phases, an evolving notice and
hearing process for findings, and a corrective action plan and
repayment component. Since it began auditing covered entities in 2012,
HRSA has conducted 825 audits, mostly of hospitals. Audit reports,
including the agency's findings and corrective actions by covered
entities, are publicly available on the HRSA website.
By contrast, HRSA has conducted only 11 manufacturer audits since
2012, the first year the agency began actively checking drug maker
compliance. This stark disparity suggests a need for more work to bring
parity to the audit process and protect hospital and their patients
from overcharges and inappropriately denied discounts.
Our member hospitals and health systems undergo HRSA audits
regularly to ensure their compliance with 340B program rules, and they
provide substantial data and respond to many questions as part of these
audits. When auditors find problems, essential hospitals diligently
correct shortcomings in their programs and, if warranted, return
savings to manufacturers. Our members work daily to be good stewards of
the 340B program because they know their patients and communities
depend on it.
340B: Necessary in 1992, Necessary Today
The 340B program grew from an urgent need for action after
manufacturers responded to the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program with
changes in discounting practices that caused drug prices to surge
nationally. We are no less at risk today of unsustainable drug costs,
and the 340B program remains our best hedge against high prices.
Again, stories from our hospitals illustrate the point. Without the
340B program, a UVA Health System patient with diabetes, hypertension,
high cholesterol, and heart disease could not afford the high cost of
insulin and 11 other medications necessary to treat the patient's
chronic illnesses--medications that otherwise would cost $24,000 a
year, or well more than double the patient's annual income.
It is unfortunate that stories like this are more the rule than the
exception at our hospitals. The patients our hospitals serve are those
least able to afford the crushing cost of prescription medications and
physician-administered drugs, especially those with cancer and other
devastating diagnoses. Restricting access to affordable drugs through
the 340B program would irrevocably harm care, destabilize hospitals on
which millions of Americans rely, and put patients at risk--maybe
gravely so.
America's Essential Hospitals and its members thank the Committee
for its interest in ensuring program integrity and transparency for the
340B Drug Pricing Program. We share those goals and stand ready to work
with this Committee and all stakeholders to strengthen the 340B program
without restricting access to it by hospitals that care for our most
vulnerable patients.
Thank you.
______
[Summary Statement of Bruce Siegel]
America's Essential Hospitals represents 325 hospitals and health
systems that form the backbone of our Nation's health care safety net.
They serve communities of all sizes and include nonprofit health
systems of every stripe--from city and county public hospitals to major
teaching institutions. But they share a defining mission: to care for
all people, regardless of social, financial, or health status. This
mission is reflected in essential hospitals' patients, who are poorer,
sicker, and more complex than those at other hospitals. The communities
these hospitals serve, where social and economic hardships challenge
health and access to care, also reflect this mission.
It was for hospitals with this mission that Congress created the
340B Drug Pricing Program more than 25 years ago. The historical record
of 340B is clear: Lawmakers intended to protect the safety net and its
hospitals from the existential threat of runaway drug prices. The 340B
program was Congress' answer to surging drug prices caused by
manufacturer discounting practices in reaction to Medicaid drug
rebates. We are no less at risk today than we were then of
unsustainable drug costs and rising prices threatening our hospitals
and their patients. The 340B program is as necessary today as it was in
1992.
Essential hospitals' commitment to serving the Nation's most
vulnerable patients comes with severe demands on resources. The average
essential hospital operates with a margin less than half that of other
U.S. hospitals and sustains about $61 million annually in uncompensated
care, more than eight times that of other hospitals. So, it is no
surprise these hospitals depend on 340B savings as part of a patchwork
of support they need to meet their mission.
Essential hospitals use their 340B savings consistent with
Congress' intent that the program help hospitals ``stretch scarce
Federal resources as far as possible, reaching more eligible patients
and providing more comprehensive services.'' Our hospitals do this by
providing affordable drugs and many comprehensive services made
possible by 340B savings, including free clinics and community programs
for primary and chronic condition care; cancer and transplant care;
medical respite care for the homeless and case management for
underserved patients; and many other valuable programs. Hand in hand
with this service, our hospitals work to protect 340B program
integrity, routinely complying with rigorous program audits and
correcting shortcomings. Our members strive to be good stewards of the
340B program because they know their patients and communities depend on
it.
We have few tools as effective as 340B for countering high drug
prices, and no other tools as cost-efficient: 340B support comes from
manufacturer discounts, not taxpayer dollars. In fact, restricting 340B
likely would leave state and local governments picking up the tab for
uncompensated care, or necessitate further Federal investments. We look
forward to working with lawmakers and all stakeholders to strengthen
and preserve the 340B program.
______
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Ms. Reilly, welcome.
STATEMENT OF LORI M. REILLY, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, POLICY,
RESEARCH, AND MEMBERSHIP, PHARMACEUTICAL RESEARCH AND
MANUFACTURERS OF AMERICA, WASHINGTON, DC
Ms. Reilly. Thank you, Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member
Murray, and Members of the Committee for inviting me to
participate in today's hearing.
I want to be clear from the outset that PhRMA, and its
member companies, are supportive of the 340B Program and we are
proud of the discounts that we provide to community health
centers, Ryan White Clinics, and other grantees that are good
stewards of this Program and are essential to America's safety
net.
At the same time, we believe this program in its current
form and, in particular, its nearly unregulated use by DSH
hospitals is deeply flawed and in need of reform.
The 340B Program began over 25 years ago to address an
unintended consequence of the Medicaid Rebate statute. As a
condition of participating in Medicaid, pharmaceutical
companies are obligated to provide discounts that average
around 50 percent to entities that participate in 340B.
In recent years, the Program has experienced explosive
growth and now constitutes 8 percent of all branded
prescriptions in this country. And when you consider certain
classes of medicine, for example, breast cancer medicine, it is
about 33 percent of all sales in this country.
While growth of the Program alone may not be concerning, it
becomes alarming when you couple it with a growing body of
evidence that demonstrates this Program has become a market-
distorting Program that is raising costs for patients and the
entire healthcare system, including the Government.
Here is why you should care.
First, under this Program, there is absolutely no
obligation that hospitals use the revenue they derive from this
Program and share those discounts back with patients no matter
how indigent those patients may be.
340B hospitals can, and often do, charge uninsured patients
the full list price, or sticker price, for a medicine even
after receiving 340B discounts.
Not only is there no requirement to share and pass along
those 340B discounts to patients, research shows that hospitals
mark up medicines, on average, 500 percent and are reimbursed
two-and-a-half times what they buy those medicines for.
While some advocates argue that 340B hospitals provide a
disproportionate share of uncompensated care, the data show
that just 25 percent of 340B hospitals are providing 80 percent
of all charity care that is being provided. And 64 percent of
340B hospitals are providing below average charity care
relative to the national average.
Second, the current structure of the 340B Program is
leading hospitals to use more medicines and more expensive
medicines compared to non-340B hospitals.
The GAO and research published in the ``New England Journal
of Medicine'' found that hospitals in the 340B Program are
using more expensive medicines and more medicines without
differences in uncompensated care or quality.
While the Administration took an important step to address
these incentives in Part B in its recent Hospital Outpatient
Prospective Payment Rule, those changes only apply to drugs
paid for in Medicare Part B and not in the commercial market.
In fact, it only represents about 13 percent of profit margins
in the 340B Program.
Yesterday, Milliman released a study that mimicked the GAO
study, but instead of looking at Medicare claims, looked at
commercial claims and found that in 340B hospitals, per capita
spending on drugs is three times higher for patients in 340B
versus non-340B hospitals. These incentives lead to higher
costs for patients and higher costs for the Government and the
broader healthcare system.
Third, 340B is providing greater provider consolidation,
which also increases costs for everyone. DSH hospitals have
strong incentives to purchase off campus physician clinics
because every time they do, those prescriptions automatically
become eligible for discounts that average 50 percent. But once
a clinic is acquired by a hospital, costs go up, not down for
patients in the healthcare system.
Drugs for patients with cancer and autoimmune diseases are
twice as high in the hospital setting relative to the physician
office, according to a study by Magellan Health. As a result,
economists believe 340B's perverse incentives are accelerating
consolidation and purchasing of community clinics by 340B
hospitals.
Change is clearly needed in this Program.
Given the evidence that this Program is driving up
healthcare costs, and is not required to directly benefit
patients, updated standards focused on DSH hospitals are
necessary to ensure that patients, and that those providers
that are providing care for true safety net patients, are
helped.
We believe there are five key areas of reform that Congress
should be focused on, and my testimony goes into great detail
about the changes that we believe are necessary to things like
the patient definition, eligibility criteria for DSH hospitals
and the ``child sites'' they acquire, as well as contract
pharmacies.
Last, but not least, we need greater accountability and
reporting requirements. I applaud Senator Cassidy's leadership,
that of Congressmen Bouchard and Peters, as well as Senator
Grassley for the work they are doing in this regard.
Thank you, again, to the Committee for holding this
hearing, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Reilly follows:]
prepared statement of lori m. reilly
Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray and Members of the
Committee, thank you for inviting me to participate in today's hearing
and thank you for devoting a full Committee hearing to the 340B
program, which is an important topic that deserves attention from
everyone concerned about rising health care costs.
The Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA)
represents the country's leading innovative biopharmaceutical research
companies devoted to discovering and developing medicines that enable
patients to live longer, healthier and more productive lives. The
biopharmaceutical sector is one of the most research-intensive
industries in the United States: Since 2000, PhRMA member companies
have invested more than half a trillion dollars in the search for new
treatments and cures, including $65.5 billion in 2016 alone.
The 340B Program Plays a Critical Role in America's Safety Net
PhRMA and our member companies strongly support the 340B program
and the important role it plays in our health care safety-net. The 340B
program is particularly crucial to supporting the care provided by
recipients of Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)
grants (known as ``grantees''). Grantees--including Community Health
Centers, Ryan White clinics and hemophilia treatment centers--serve our
Nation's most vulnerable patients, many of whom are often without other
sources of care. These grantees are on the front lines of public health
threats and represent a lifeline for many vulnerable patients--treating
serious conditions like HIV, hemophilia and hepatitis C or providing
lifesaving cancer screenings and other health services. The 340B
program needs to be modified so that it is on a sustainable path and
can continue to support grantees and other true safety-net providers.
Any changes must seek to eliminate the growing abuses of recent years
that distort markets and increase health costs without contributing to
its safety-net mission.
I'm pleased to be testifying today with Carolina Health Centers, a
community health center grantee. Community Health Centers (CHCs) serve
as the primary medical home for more than 27 million people in 10,400
rural and urban communities across America.
\1\ The 340B discounts our
member companies and other biopharmaceutical manufacturers provide to
these health centers help CHCs deliver free and reduced cost medicines
and other services to their patients. Consistent with the purpose of
the 340B program, CHCs and other grantees typically serve a population
heavily skewed to low-income or vulnerable patients.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\
National Association of Community Health Centers, ``About Our
Health Centers,'' Available at: http://www.nachc.org/about-our-health-
centers/ (accessed March 11, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We also want to recognize the important public health role of our
Nation's public hospitals. Public hospitals play a crucial role as a
source of care for those with nowhere else to turn. Often these are the
hospitals providing high levels of charity care to low-income patients.
Analysis of Medicare data shows that 24 percent of 340B
disproportionate share hospitals (DSH) provide 80 percent of the
charity care provided by all 340B DSH hospitals. That same small
percentage of 340B DSH hospitals represent only 50 percent of total
patient costs and 45 percent of total hospital beds in all 340B
facilities, meaning that they are providing a disproportionately high
level of charity care relative to their size.
\2\ Many of the
hospitals that are shouldering this disproportionate burden are public
hospitals. The 340B program was designed to help support this type of
care.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\
Alliance for Integrity and Reform of 340B, ``Benefiting
Hospitals, Not Patients: An Analysis of Charity Care Provided by
Hospitals Enrolled in the 340B Discount Program,'' Spring 2016.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
When Congress created the 340B program a quarter of a century ago,
\3\ it was intended to assist Federal grantees, like CHCs, and true
safety-net hospitals serving large numbers of uninsured or otherwise
vulnerable patients. Under the terms of the program, hospitals and
safety-net clinics that meet certain eligibility criteria are entitled
to discounts that average about 50 percent of the cost of outpatient
prescription medicines.
\4\ As a condition of participating in
Medicaid, biopharmaceutical companies must also participate in the 340B
program.
\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\
Public Law 102-585, Veterans Health Care Act of 1992.
\4\
Congressional Budget Office, ``Prices for Brand-Name Drugs
Under Selected Federal Programs,'' June 2005.
\5\
42 U.S.C. Sec.
1396r-8(a)(1), (a)(5).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A key distinction between grantees and hospitals is in their
reporting requirements. Safety-net clinics must generally meet Federal
requirements of reinvesting their revenue into care for uninsured or
vulnerable patients as part of their grant requirements. In contrast,
current 340B program rules lack any standards for how 340B discounts
should be used by 340B hospitals or even how much hospitals can reap in
profits by marking up prices charged to patients and payers when
administering them medicines acquired at the discounted 340B price
mandated by law (see Figure 1).
The lack of program standards for use of 340B discounts by DSH
hospitals, combined with the significant growth of the program driven
by these hospitals, has greatly transformed the 340B program. It is no
longer accurate to characterize the program as primarily focused on
care for vulnerable patients by safety-net providers. Instead, 80
percent of the sales are to DSH hospitals and their child sites, more
than two thirds of which provide below average levels of free and
reduced cost treatments to uninsured or vulnerable patients.
\6\ As a
2014 Health Affairs study on 340B put it, the program has evolved
``from [a program] that serves vulnerable communities to one that
enriches hospitals.''
\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\
Alliance for Integrity and Reform of 340B, ``Benefiting
Hospitals, Not Patients: An Analysis of Charity Care Provided by
Hospitals Enrolled in the 340B Discount Program,'' Spring 2016.
\7\
R. Conti, P. Bach. ``The 340B Drug Discount Program: Hospitals
Generate Profits by Expanding to Reach More Affluent Communities,''
Health Affairs 33, no. 10 (2014): 1786-1792;.
While grantees like CHCs rely on the 340B program to help them
provide care to underserved or vulnerable populations, growing DSH
hospital abuse of 340B drives up health care costs for others in the
health care system. Economists publishing in The New England Journal of
Medicine
\8\ and JAMA,
\9\ along with the Government Accountability
Office (GAO),
\10\ have concluded that 340B creates hospital
incentives that increase costs for patients, insurers and the
government, while reducing the viability of community-based physicians.
For example, recent evidence points to the role of 340B in hospitals
buying up community-based physicians in wealthy areas
\11\ and
shifting care to the hospital outpatient setting where it is often more
expensive.
\12\ At the same time, hospitals are also able to sharply
markup the price of medicines accessed through 340B when treating
privately insured patients at acquired clinics, with no obligation to
reinvest those resources in safety-net services. In fact, a recent New
England Journal of Medicine study reports DSH hospital eligibility was
associated with lower proportions of low-income patients treated for
the conditions studied and ``no significant differences in hospital
provision of safety-net or inpatient care for low-income groups. . .''
\13\ In sharp contrast, evidence shows CHCs and other grantees are
using the 340B program as intended due to the requirements of their
HRSA grants.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\
S. Desai and J.M. McWilliams, ``Consequences of the 340B Drug
Pricing Program,'' N Engl J Med 2018.
\9\
R. Conti, P. Bach, ``Cost Consequences of the 340B Drug
Discount Program,'' JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical
Association, 2013;309(19):1995-1996. doi:10.1001/jama.2013.4156.
\10\
Government Accountability Office, Medicare Part B Drugs:
Action Needed to Reduce Financial Incentives to Prescribe 340B Drugs at
Participating Hospitals, GAO-15-442, June 2015.
\11\
R. Conti and P. Bach, ``The 340B Drug Discount Program:
Hospitals Generate Profits by Expanding to Reach More Affluent
Communities,'' Health Affairs, Vol. 33, No. 10, October 2014; Avalere
Health, ``Hospital Acquisitions of Physician Practices and the 340B
Program,'' June 2015, available at: http://avalere.com/expertise/life-
sciences/insights/avalere-white-paper-hospital-acquisitions-of-
physician-practices-and-the-34 (accessed March 11, 2018).
\12\
P. Bach and R.H. Jain, ``Physician's Office and Hospital
Outpatient Setting in Oncology: It's About Prices, Not Use,'' Journal
of Oncology Practice 2017 13:1, 4-5.''; IMS Institute for Healthcare
Informatics. Global Oncology Trend Report: A Review of 2015 and Outlook
to 2020, June 2016.
\13\
S. Desai and J.M. McWilliams, ``Consequences of the 340B Drug
Pricing Program,'' N Engl J Med 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There is a clear need for improvements to the 340B program to avoid
abuses while sustaining its focus on strengthening the safety net.
Improvements must reflect the critical role of grantees, who need
continued access to the program without being burdened by new
restrictions. At the same time, there is an urgent need to modernize
the program to assure that patients benefit and to reduce the
unintended distortion of markets and promotion of higher costs in the
health care system that have emerged as the program has strayed from
its intent.
Today's 340B Program is Nearly Unrecognizable From the Program Congress
Enacted in 1992; Changes Have Contributed to the Many Problems Now
Associated With the Program
Congress enacted the 340B drug pricing program in 1992, as part of
the Veterans' Health Care Act,
\14\ in part to address the unintended
consequences of the Medicaid rebate statute enacted in the Omnibus
Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) of 1990.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\
Public Law 102-585, Veterans Health Care Act of 1992.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As enacted in 1990, the Medicaid rebate statute required
biopharmaceutical manufacturers to provide Medicaid with steep rebates
to give State Medicaid programs the ``best price'' among most
purchasers. Consequently, sales to clinics and hospitals previously
receiving generous voluntary manufacturer discounts were suddenly
required under the Medicaid rebate law to be included in manufacturer
rebate calculations and potentially setting a new Medicaid ``best
price'' that had to be offered to the entire Medicaid program. As
described in the House Energy and Commerce Committee's 1992 report, the
``best price'' provision created a disincentive for manufacturers to
offer lower prices to safety-net facilities, because that price could
trigger higher Medicaid rebates nationwide. The report cites testimony
and other information indicating loss of manufacturer discounts or
special pricing practices at federally funded clinics and public
hospitals after OBRA 1990.
\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\
H.R. Rep. 102-384, Pt. 2 (1992), pp. 9-11.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As a result, the 340B drug pricing program arose because of the
Medicaid statute's unanticipated impact on safety-net facilities and
helped ensure discounted medicines for specified covered entities.
Original intent of the program
Congress did not create the 340B program to benefit a random
assortment of hospitals that might or might not serve as a safety net
for low-income uninsured patients. Nor does it appear that Congress
sees the program's purpose that way today. Some have suggested the 340B
program was intended to benefit hospitals, with no regard for patients.
In fact, the statute and its legislative history reflect an express
congressional intent to create a program with a very important and
targeted purpose. Meanwhile, the silence in the 340B legislative
history about practices that have become common in the program today is
noteworthy:
There are no indications that 340B was expected to
become a program dominated by DSH hospitals rather than focused
on Federal grantees who operate in an entirely different
manner, generally using 340B to provide care to uninsured or
vulnerable patients as part of their grant requirements.
There are no statements that the 340B program was
designed to be a new and unaccountable revenue stream funding
any spending a hospital selects.
There is no indication that hospitals were expected
to charge patients and their insurers markups equal to 200
percent or more above a medicine's discounted 340B acquisition
price, or often fail to provide discounts to the people who
need them.
There is no suggestion that the program would grow to
include hospital outpatient facilities in affluent communities
or cover more than 60 percent of total Part B hospital drug
purchases.
\16\
\16\
Alliance for Integrity and Reform of 340B, ``340B Hospitals
Vs. Non-340b Hospitals: Growth and Distribution of Physician-
Administered Drug Reimbursement Across Ten Therapeutic Areas,'' Feb
2016, available at: http://340breform.org/userfiles/
02.02.16%20BRG%20340B%20Part%0B%20Fact%20Sheet.pdf (accessed March 13,
2018).
There is no suggestion that 340B was intended to
drive utilization patterns and health system consolidation that
increases the cost of health care for all patients and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
insurers.
PhRMA believes that the large discounts biopharmaceutical
manufacturers provide under the 340B program should serve a targeted
purpose--helping low-income uninsured and other vulnerable patients
obtain the outpatient medicines they need--and true safety-net
hospitals qualifying for the program should be accountable for using
its benefits properly.
Medicaid expansion and growth in coverage for medicines has changed
the environment
Dramatic changes in health coverage in the quarter of a century
since 340B was created mean the program is operating in a very
different environment today. Some of these changes have contributed to
the rampant growth in the program and raise questions about how the
program is being used today. For example, Medicaid enrollment has
increased from 29 million individuals in 1992 to more than 72 million
individuals in 2016,
\17\ and the share of the U.S. population on
Medicaid has increased from 11 percent to 22 percent over that same
period.
\18\ This has contributed to a sharp increase in the number of
hospitals eligible to participate in the 340B program because of the
use of the DSH metric to determine DSH hospital eligibility for the
program. While 340B is an outpatient-only program, the DSH metric looks
at inpatient care. Consequently, more and more hospitals now qualify
for 340B discounts as the proportion of inpatient stays covered by
Medicaid increases. There is no indication in the legislative history
of 340B that this significant expansion in Medicaid eligibility and
enrollment and the resulting impact on 340B's size and character were
foreseen when the program was created. Nor is there any indication in
the 340B law's legislative history that Congress focused on the fact
that the DSH metric would expand hospital 340B eligibility if
individuals shifted from being uninsured to being covered through
Medicaid, an anomalous result of the current formula.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\
MACStats: Medicaid and CHOP-Data Book, ``Section 2, Exhibit
10: Medicaid Enrollment and Total Spending Levels and Annual Growth,
FYs 1966-2016,'' December 2017. Available at: https://www.macpac.gov/
wp-content/uploads/2015/11/EXHIBIT-10.-Medicaid-Enrollment-and-Total-
Spending-Levels-and-Annual-Growth-FYs-1966%E2%80%932016.pdf.
\18\
Analysis of MACStats: Medicaid and CHOP-Data Book, ``Section
2, Exhibit 10: Medicaid Enrollment and Total Spending Levels and Annual
Growth, FYs 1966-2016,'' December 2017 and Census Bureau Population
estimates, July 1992 and 2016.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Insurance coverage for prescription medicines has also changed
dramatically in the last couple decades. In 1992, 57 percent of
prescription medicine costs were paid out of pocket by patients, making
it crucial that biopharmaceutical manufacturers could provide free and
discounted medicines to safety-net facilities so that patients who
could not afford the out-of-pocket costs could still obtain access to
needed medicines.
\19\ By 2016, 14 percent of costs were paid out of
pocket by patients,
\20\ in part due to Medicare patients benefiting
from the Part D program and medicines being recognized as integral to
good health care. Even as coverage of medicines expanded, the 340B
program has grown dramatically--sharply outpacing overall prescription
drug sales.
\21\ This growth has been fueled by DSH hospitals' use of
the 340B program,
\22\ including their ability to take advantage of
increased prescription medicine coverage through markups on 340B
medicines used by insured patients.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\
Analysis of National Health Expenditure Accounts data.
\20\
Analysis of National Health Expenditure Accounts data.
\21\
A. Vandervelde and E. Blalock, ``Measuring the Relative Size
of the 340B Program: 2012-2017,'' Berkeley Research Group, July 2017.
\22\
Aaron Vandervelde and Eleanor Blalock, ``340B Program Sales
Forecast: 2016-2021,'' 2016, available at: http://340breform.org/
userfiles/December%202016%20BRG%20Growth%20Study.pdf (accessed March
11, 2018).
HRSA's choices in administering the program have fueled dramatic
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
program growth
The 340B program has expanded well beyond congressional intent in
part because of administrative actions by HRSA and lack of appropriate
oversight in four key areas, leading to unintended consequences:
1. Patient definition;
2. Hospital eligibility;
3. Hospital-purchased outpatient sites (called ``child
sites''); and
4. Contract pharmacies
These administrative actions and the unwillingness to course-
correct, coupled with changes in the health system, have contributed to
a transformation in the 340B program. As previously noted, today's
program is unrecognizable in size and character as compared to the
program that was created in 1992. And it's unrecognizable in many of
its current effects--for instance, promoting consolidation of services
under hospital ownership and the accompanying higher costs.
The change in the 340B program's size and character are seen in the
following points:
It took 15 years after 340B's enactment (2007) for
annual 340B sales to reach $3.9 billion. Yet in the next 9
years, between 2007 and 2016, 340B sales grew more than
fourfold to $16.2 billion at the 340B price.
\23\ The Medicare
Payment Advisory Commission's (MedPAC) May 2015 Report to
Congress provides data showing that between 2005 and 2013, 340B
sales grew seven times faster than total U.S. medicine
spending. \24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\
A. Fein, ``EXCLUSIVE: The 340B Program Hits $16.2 Billion in
2016; Now 5 percent of U.S. Drug Market,'' Drug Channels Blog, May 18,
2017.
\24\
Analysis of data from MedPAC, ``Report to the Congress:
Overview of the 340B Drug Pricing Program,'' May 2015, pp. 11-12.
In 2004, more than a decade after enactment, Federal
grantees accounted for 55 percent of 340B sales and hospitals
accounted for 45 percent. By 2016, grantees' share of sales had
dropped to just 13 percent while hospitals' share of 340B sales
increased to 87 percent. \25\ The clear majority of 340B sales
to hospitals are to DSH hospitals, accounting for about 80
percent of 340B hospital sales. \26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\
Mathematica, The PHS 340B Drug Pricing Progam: Results of a
Survey of Eligible Entities, August 2004. Apexus, 340B Health Summer
Conference, July 2016; Apexus, 340B Health Summer Conference, July
2016.
\26\
Chris Hatwig, Apexus Update, 340B Health Summer Conference,
2016.
340B purchases as a share of hospitals' total drug
purchases (both inpatient and outpatient) inched above 10
percent in 2005, over a decade after the program began.
\27\
Over the next 11 years, 340B purchases as a share of hospitals'
total drug purchases has consistently and steadily increased.
\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\
A. Fein ``340B Purchases Hit $12 Billion in 2015--and Almost
Half of the Hospital Market,'' Drug Channels Blog, February 23, 2016.
\28\
A. Fein, ``340B Purchases Were More than Half of the Hospital
Market in 2016,'' Drug Channels Blog, May 19, 2017.
Between 1994 and 2016, the number of child sites
increased from 34 to over 15,000.
\29\ While some of that
growth is due to changes in guidance from HRSA regarding how
340B child sites should register for 340B, there was dramatic
growth in the program even before that guidance changed. For
example, a Health Affairs study found that ``in 2011 there were
16,500 340B entity sites that were affiliated with
approximately 3,200 unique 340B entities. That is roughly
double the number of sites reported in 2001.''
\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\
HRSA OPA Data base, January 2017.
\30\
R. Conti and P. Bach, ``The 340B Drug Discount Program:
Hospitals Generate Profits By Expanding To Reach More Affluent
Communities,'' Health Affairs, vol. 33 no. 10.
Between 2002 and 2017, the number of contract
pharmacy arrangements increased from 279 to 51,963.
\31\
Nearly 90 percent of the growth came after HRSA's 2010
subregulatory guidance authorizing unlimited contract pharmacy
networks. In 2017, two-thirds of contract pharmacy locations
were owned by one of just a few large pharmacy chains.
\32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\
HRSA OPA Data base, January 2017.
\32\
Chains included are Walgreens, Albertsons, Kroger, Rite Aid,
Walmart and CVS. A. Fein, ``The Booming 340B Contract Pharmacy Profits
of Walgreens, CVS, Rite Aid, and Walmart,'' Drug Channels, July 11,
2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The 340B Program Creates Market Distorting Incentives That Increase
Consumer Prices for Medicines, Shift Care to More Expensive Hospital
Settings and Accelerate Provider Consolidation
The 340B program is distorting the health care market by leading to
higher costs for patients and payers, according to economists and
independent government auditors. The program has been growing at an
alarming rate that is poised to continue, absent needed changes.
\33\
It is likely that 340B market distortions will have an expanding
influence if the program is left unchecked. Several factors described
below are contributing to these unintended consequences.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\
Aaron Vandervelde and Eleanor Blalock, ``340B Program Sales
Forecast: 2016-2021,'' 2016, available at: http://340breform.org/
userfiles/December%202016%20BRG%20Growth%20Study.pdf (accessed March
11, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Distorting market prices for prescription medicines
In an analysis of prescription medicine pricing published in the
New England Journal of Medicine, economists at Harvard and the
University of Chicago identified the 340B program as one factor that
was leading to higher prescription medicine prices. These economists
concluded that ``lawmakers could lower the price of prescription drugs
by reforming the Federal 340B Drug Pricing Program. [ . . . ] The scope
of the 340B program is currently so vast for drugs that are commonly
infused or injected into patients by physicians that their prices are
probably driven up for all consumers'' (emphasis added).
\34\ Another
study in JAMA noted that list prices for medicines are likely higher
than they otherwise would be ``to offset revenue losses incurred as a
larger number of drug sales become eligible for 340B discounts (and
thus fewer drugs are sold at full price).''
\35\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\
R. Conti and M. Rosenthal, ``Pharmaceutical Policy Reform--
Balancing Affordability with Incentives for Innovation,'' N Engl J Med
2016; 374:703-706.
\35\
R. Conti, P. Bach, ``Cost Consequences of the 340B Drug
Discount Program,'' JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical
Association, 2013;309(19):1995-1996. doi:10.1001/jama.2013.4156.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These economists' concern that drug prices are being driven up for
everyone because of the size of the 340B program is borne out by data
analyzing the relative share of the 340B program. Overall, 340B sales
accounted for about 8 percent of all branded outpatient drug sales in
2017, but certain therapeutic categories were disproportionately
impacted.
\36\ For example, for certain types of cancer medicines,
sales to 340B hospitals account for 33 percent of all Medicare Part B
reimbursement.
\37\ 340B Health, which represents hospitals that
participate in 340B, has erroneously reported that 340B discounts
constitute a much smaller share of drug sales, but their analysis uses
several methodological sleights of hand to artificially lower that
number.
\38\ For example, they only include a portion of legally
mandated 340B discounts and artificially decrease the value of the 340B
discounts they do include, and they compare 340B discounts to total net
pharmaceutical sales--including generics--even though 340B discounts
are largely concentrated in brand sales. They also ignore that 340B
sales are heavily concentrated in certain therapeutic areas.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\
A. Vandervelde and E. Blalock, ``Measuring the Relative Size
of the 340B Program: 2012-2017,'' Berkeley Research Group, July 2017.
\37\
Drugs sold to 340B hospitals account for 33 percent of all
Part B reimbursement for breast cancer and multiple myeloma drugs. A.
Vandervelde and E. Blalock, ``Measuring the Relative Size of the 340B
Program: 2012-2017,'' Berkeley Research Group, July 2017.
\38\
A. Dobson, K. Murray, J.E. DaVanzo, ``Assessing the Financial
Impact of the 340B Drug Pricing Program on Drug Manufacturers'' Dobson/
DaVanzo for 340B Health, July 2017.
340B creates incentives that drive up spending on prescription
medicines and undermine efforts to promote more efficient, high-quality
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
care
A range of studies demonstrate that the 340B program is creating
incentives for hospitals to drive up treatment costs. It has evolved
into a vehicle for hospitals to keep markups earned from arbitrage:
buying medicines at a legally mandated 340B ceiling price and reselling
them at a higher price. This means that in many cases, the program has
provided hospitals the opportunity and incentive to increase and
maximize 340B revenue by either prescribing more medicines or more
expensive medicines.
A 2015 GAO study investigated whether this incentive was leading to
higher drug spending at 340B hospitals and found that ``Medicare
beneficiaries were prescribed more drugs, more expensive drugs, or
both, at 340B DSH hospitals.''
\39\ The differences the GAO found
``did not appear to be explained by the hospital or patient population
characteristics.''
\40\ Instead, GAO suggested that the higher
spending was likely due to the financial incentive to obtain more 340B
revenue from patients having higher spending on medications.
\41\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\
Government Accountability Office, Medicare Part B Drugs:
Action Needed to Reduce Financial Incentives to Prescribe 340B Drugs at
Participating Hospitals, GAO-15-442, June 2015.
\40\
Ibid.
\41\
Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As noted earlier, a recent New England Journal of Medicine article
found similar patterns in the areas of hematology-oncology and
ophthalmology. Strikingly, the study also found that despite the
increase in Medicare Part B spending on prescription drugs, DSH
hospital eligibility for 340B was associated with ``lower proportions
of low-income patients in hematology-oncology and ophthalmology and
with no significant differences in hospital provision of safety-net or
inpatient care for low-income groups or in mortality among low-income
residents of the hospitals' local service areas.'' (emphasis added)
\42\ Thus, costs were higher at 340B hospitals, but these hospitals
were not treating more low-income patients and were not achieving lower
mortality rates for this vulnerable group.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\42\
S. Desai and J.M. McWilliams, ``Consequences of the 340B Drug
Pricing Program,'' N Engl J Med 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While the Administration took a first step last year toward
addressing these incentives in Part B with their changes in the
hospital outpatient prospective payment system rule,
\43\ the same
incentives that drive up costs continue to exist when hospitals serve
patients insured in the commercial market. In fact, a study from the
actuarial firm Milliman that used commercial market data found similar
patterns to those GAO highlighted in Part B. That Milliman study found
average per patient outpatient drug spending for commercially insured
patients at 340B DSH hospitals is nearly three times the spending at
non-340B DSH hospitals ($457 and $159, respectively) (emphasis added).
\44\ These cost differences are not explained by differences in overall
health of populations treated at 340B and non-340B hospitals. Higher
health care spending is ultimately paid by insurers and beneficiaries,
who pay cost sharing and premiums. Thus, these results can be used to
infer that the 340B program may be contributing to higher healthcare
costs for everyone with private insurance through higher premiums and,
for a smaller subset of patients, through higher out-of-pocket costs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\43\
80 Fed. Reg. 59216, (Dec. 14, 2017).
\44\
Milliman, ``Commercial Payers Spend More on Hospital
Outpatient Drugs at 340B Hospitals,'' March 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Many policymakers, including several Members of this Committee,
have publicly stated their interest in redesigning the health care
system to create incentives for efficient and quality health care that
rewards providers for outcomes of care, instead of volume of care
provided. As these studies demonstrate, 340B is working at cross-
purposes with those health care system goals by providing hospitals
with a large revenue stream that is derived from perverse incentives
that raise treatment costs.
Incentives that shift care from community-based physicians to more
expensive settings
Many hospitals have further expanded their ability to generate
revenue from 340B purchases by buying community-based physician
practices and then obtaining 340B discounts for prescriptions written
by those physicians. These acquired practices are often geographically
located in wealthier areas than the 340B hospitals themselves
\45\ and
have no requirement to treat uninsured or vulnerable patients.
Increasingly, hospital acquisitions of independent community-based
physician practices are leading to the closure of community cancer
clinics across the country.
\46\ Care in hospital outpatient settings
is notoriously more expensive overall. One study found hospitals charge
five times their acquisition costs for medicines administered in the
outpatient setting, and commercial payers reimburse these drugs at
rates that are 252 percent of average hospital acquisition costs
(without factoring in 340B discounts).
\47\ Because 340B hospitals
acquire drugs at prices far below average, their charges and
reimbursements are even higher compared to their acquisition costs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\45\
R. Conti and P. Bach, ``The 340B Drug Discount Program:
Hospitals Generate Profits By Expanding To Reach More Affluent
Communities,'' Health Affairs, vol. 33 no. 10.
\46\
National Cancer Policy Forum; Board on Health Care Services;
Institute of Medicine. Ensuring Patient Access to Affordable Cancer
Drugs: Workshop Summary. Washington (DC): National Academies Press
(US); 2014 Dec 23. Workshop Summary. Available from: https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK268684/; T. Hagen, ``COA: Trend of
Oncology Practice Closures, Consolidations Softens,'' Nov. 2016.
\47\
The Moran Company, ``Hospital Charges and Reimbursement for
Drugs: Analysis of Markups Relative to Acquisition Cost,'' October
2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In looking at cancer care specifically, an analysis by IMS Health
found that average costs for administering cancer medicines are
typically twice as high at hospital outpatient departments compared to
community-based oncologists, which can lead to ``higher patient cost
responsibility.''
\48\ A recent article published in JAMA Oncology had
similar findings and the authors note that ``[w]hile patients may
receive the same treatment in either setting, insurers typically
reimburse payments to HOPDs [hospital outpatient departments] at a
higher rate than to physician offices''
\49\ There is no evidence to
suggest that differences in payment are attributable to patient
characteristics or the type of care received.
\50\ Hospitals are able
to receive higher payments than physician practices from commercial
payers for the same services due to market power. This market power is
often driven by vertical integration, specifically the purchase of
oncology practices by hospitals and health systems, that gives
hospitals leverage to charge higher prices when negotiating with
commercial payers.
\51\ Lee Newcomer (UnitedHealthcare) notes this
when talking about hospital systems by stating that the hospitals can
say, ``If you want our beds, you have to take our prices for oncology
treatment.''
\52\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\48\
IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics. Global Oncology
Trend Report: A Review of 2015 and Outlook to 2020, June 2016.
\49\
A.N. Winn, N.L. Keating, J.G. Trogdon, et al. ``Spending by
Commercial Insurers on Chemotherapy Based on Site of Care,'' 2004-2014.
JAMA Oncology. Published online February 22, 2018. doi:10.1001/
jamaoncol.2017.5544.
\50\
Wynn, Barbara O., Peter Hussey, and Teague Ruder. Policy
Options for Addressing Medicare Payment Differentials Across Ambulatory
Settings. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2011. Available at:
https://www.rand.org/pubs/technical_reports/TR979.html.
\51\
R.M. Conti, M.B Landrum, and M. Jacobson. ``The impact of
provider consolidation on outpatient prescription drug-based cancer
care spending,'' Available at: http://www.healthcostinstitute.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/08/HCCI-Issue-Brief-Impact-of-Provider-
Consolidation.pdf.
\52\
L.N. Newcomer. Those who pay have a say: A view on oncology
drug pricing and reimbursement. The Oncologist. 2016 Jul 1;21(7):779-
81.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Economists have concluded that 340B's role in shifting care to more
expensive settings will drive higher costs. For example, according to
economists at the University of Minnesota, the current 340B program--if
not changed--``will ultimately end up increasing health care costs for
everyone, as patients are shifted from cheaper, community-based care to
more expensive hospital settings. . . .'' (emphasis added).
\53\
Similarly, researchers at Memorial Sloan Kettering have noted that 340B
is helping to drive consolidation of physician practices into hospitals
and that in the absence of changes ``the trend toward consolidation
will continue to drive up the cost of commercial insurance. . . .''
(emphasis added).
\54\ Similarly, the recent Energy and Commerce
report on 340B concludes that the 340B program has contributed to the
marked increase in the consolidation of private oncology practices,
that this consolidation is often profit driven, and ``in some
instances, negatively impacts the quality of patient care and can
result in increased patient cost.''
\55\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\53\
S.T. Parente and M. Ramlet, ``Unprecedented Growth,
Questionable Policy,'' Carlson School of Management at University of
Minnesota.
\54\
P.B. Bach and R.H. Jain, ``Physician's Office and Hospital
Outpatient Setting in Oncology: It's About Prices, Not Use,'' Journal
of Oncology Practice 2017 13:1, 4-5.
\55\
House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations, Review of the 340B Drug Pricing Program, January 10,
2018. Available at: https://energycommerce.house.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2018/01/20180110Review_of_the_340B_Drug_Pricing_Program.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A 2015 change to the Medicare statute designed to promote site
neutrality
\56\ has led to most new off-campus provider-based sites
being paid under the Physician Fee Schedule
\57\ instead of the
hospital outpatient prospective payment system (OPPS). However, this
change does not affect those grandfathered off-campus sites that were
billing under OPPS before November 2, 2015,
\58\ which includes
thousands of off-campus departments of 340B hospitals. Nor does this
Medicare site neutral payment policy apply to commercial payers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\56\
Social Security Act Sec.
1833(t)(1)(A)(v), (21).
\57\
These sites are paid under a special variant of the Physician
Fee Schedule that CMS developed for the off-campus hospital facilities
that no longer can bill under OPPS.
\58\
Social Security Act Sec.
1933(t)(21)(A)(99).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recent Administrative Action Is a Step Forward, But More Action Is
Needed to Modernize the 340B Program
Mounting evidence from the GAO and other independent economists
indicates that DSH hospitals' use of the 340B program is driving up
health care costs,
\59\ has led to a steady drumbeat of calls to
modernize the program. Members of the House and Senate have taken steps
to do so by introducing three bills to provide needed reporting and
accountability into how DSH hospitals use the 340B program.
\60\ These
bills vary in their scope, but all three bills exempt rural-designated
hospitals and 340B-eligible grantees from the new requirements, an
exception that PhRMA supports. We agree with the authors of the
legislation that the issue with abuse of the 340B program are not the
grantees or rural hospitals, but large DSH hospitals and their
associated child sites, many of which are in well-off communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\59\
R. Conti, P. Bach, ``Cost Consequences of the 340B Drug
Discount Program,'' JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical
Association, 2013;309(19):1995-1996. doi:10.1001/jama.2013.4156.;
Government Accountability Office, Medicare Part B Drug; P. Bach and
R.H. Jain, ``Physician's Office and Hospital Outpatient Setting in
Oncology: It's About Prices, Not Use,'' Journal of Oncology Practice
2017 13:1, 4-5.''
\60\
340B PAUSE Act, H.R. 4710, 115th Cong. (2017); HELP ACT, S.
2312, 115th Cong. (2018); Ensuring the Value of the 340B Program Act of
2018, S. 2453, 115th Cong. (2018) H.R. 4570, S. 2312, and S. 2453 (see
detailed description later in testimony).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One such piece of legislation is S. 2312, the Helping Ensure Low-
income Patients have Access to Care and Treatment (HELP ACT) introduced
by Sen. Cassidy. The HELP ACT includes many important and common-sense
reporting and accountability measures that will help all stakeholders
better understand how DSH hospitals are using the 340B program and
which of their patients are accessing 340B discounts. This legislation
also includes much-needed standards for how DSH hospitals and their
child sites qualify for the 340B program, responding to findings from
the GAO.
\61\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\61\
Government Accountability Office, ``Drug Pricing:
Manufacturer Discounts in the 340B Program Offer Benefits, but Federal
Oversight Needs Improvement,'' Sept. 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to congressional interest in increasing accountability
in the 340B program, the Trump Administration has also sought to
address concerns that 340B is increasing government and patient
spending on physician administered medicines
\62\ through changes in
the Hospital Outpatient Prospective Payment System at 340B hospitals.
\63\ Their changes lower Medicare reimbursement for 340B medicines paid
for under the Medicare Part B Hospital Outpatient Prospective Payment
System.
\64\ This policy change is expected to reduce incentives
created by the 340B program that may cause hospitals to administer more
and higher cost medicines in Part B. While this change is an important
first step, Medicare Part B represents less than one-quarter of total
hospital revenue from 340B. \65\ Because half hospital's total 340B
revenue is derived from 340B physician administered medicines purchased
by commercial payers and others outside of fee-for-service Part B,
340B's incentives to drive up cost without adding value for patients
remain intact.
\66\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\62\
Government Accountability Office, ``Medicare Part B Drugs:
Action Needed to Reduce Financial Incentives to Prescribe 340B Drugs at
Participating Hospitals,'' June 2015.
\63\
82 FR 52356.
\64\
82 FR 52356.
\65\
A. Vandervelde and E. Blalock, ``Site of Care Shift for
Physician-Administered Drug Therapies,'' Berkeley Research Group, Oct.
2017.
\66\
A. Vandervelde and E. Blalock, ``Site of Care Shift for
Physician-Administered Drug Therapies,'' Berkeley Research Group, Oct.
2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Improvements to 340B are Urgently Needed in Five Key Issue Areas: (1)
Patient Definition; (2) DSH Hospital Eligibility Standards; (3)
Standards for Off-Site Hospital Clinics (``Child Sites''); (4) Contract
Pharmacy Arrangements; and (5) Program Integrity
Issue Area 1: The 1996 patient definition should be clarified to
better define who is entitled to manufacturer discounts on 340B
medicines.
The 340B program was originally created to make prescription
medicines more accessible to low-income, uninsured, and other
vulnerable patients through safety-net facilities. Under the 340B law,
a covered entity may only claim a 340B discount under the program if
the medicine is used for the covered entity's own ``patient.''
\67\
The 340B law further prohibits covered entities from reselling or
otherwise transferring medicines purchased under the 340B program to
anyone but a ``patient'' of the covered entity (a practice commonly
referred to as ``diversion'').
\68\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\67\
42 U.S.C. Sec.
256b(a)(5)(b).
\68\
42 U.S.C. Sec.
256b(a)(5)(B).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Despite this centrality of ``patient'' to defining the program's
scope and assuring that statutory program integrity requirements are
met, throughout the history of the 340B program, there has been a lack
of meaningful standards as to when an individual qualifies as a
``patient'' of a covered entity. In fact, the current patient
definition is more than two decades old despite how much the health
care landscape in the United States has evolved during that time. This
has contributed to well-documented program abuses and violations. For
example, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Office of
the Inspector General (OIG) observed in a report focused on contract
pharmacy arrangements:
Covered entities . . . reported different methods of
identifying 340B-eligible prescriptions, and in some cases
their determinations of 340B eligibility differ from one
covered entity to another for similar types of prescriptions.
This suggests a lack of clarity on how HRSA's patient
definition should be applied in contract pharmacy arrangements.
Covered entities appear to have differing interpretations of
what HRSA guidance requires . . . there is inconsistency within
the 340B Program as to which prescriptions filled at contract
pharmacies are treated as 340B-eligible.
\69\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\69\
OIG, Contract Pharmacy Arrangements in the 340B Program, OIE-
05-13-00431 at 16. Feb. 2014.
Despite these concerns raised by government watchdog agencies,
HRSA's patient definition has not been updated or modified since 1996,
over 20 years ago.
\70\ As highlighted by HRSA itself along with GAO
and OIG, the 1996 patient definition is vague and lacks the specificity
needed to provide clear direction to covered entities and manufacturers
about who is a patient for 340B discount purposes. This has allowed
covered entities to take broad interpretations of the patient
definition guidance and use 340B medicines for individuals who in many
instances would not be considered true ``patients'' in any traditional
sense of the word, i.e., someone who relies on a provider for ongoing
and routine medical care.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\70\
See 61 Fed. Reg. 55156 (Oct. 24, 1996). Under HRSA's current
guidance, the patient definition requires that: (1) the covered entity
have a relationship with the individual ``such that the covered entity
maintains records of the individual's health care''; (2) the individual
receives health care services from a health care professional who is an
employee of the entity or provides care under contract or other
arrangements with the 340B entity, ``such that responsibility for the
care provided remains with the covered entity''; and (3) the individual
receives care from the covered entity that is consistent with the
service or range of services for which the entity receives Federal
grant funding or FQHC look-alike status (this requirement does not
apply to DSH hospitals). An individual is not considered a patient of a
covered entity if the only health care service received by the
individual from the covered entity is the dispensing of a drug for
subsequent self-administration or for administration in the home
setting. Different criteria for defining ``patients'' apply to AIDS
Drug Assistance Programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Included in the 1996 patient definition is overly broad language
that ``the individual receives health care services from a health care
professional who is either employed by the covered entity or provides
health care under contractual or other arrangements (e.g. referral for
consultation) such that responsibility for the care provided remains
with the covered entity'' (emphasis added).
\71\ HRSA itself noted
problems with the ``other arrangements'' language in its 2007 proposed
patient definition clarification, which was never finalized:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\71\
61 Fed. Reg. at 55157.
``Some [hospitals] have been contracting with health care
providers to create a loose affiliation model for outpatient
health care services. . . . This model improperly seeks to
expand the definition of a patient beyond that envisioned by
Congress in prohibiting the resale of 340B drugs outside the
eligible covered entity limits.''
\72\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\72\
Fed. Reg. at 1546-47 (emphasis added).
In 2011, GAO reported HRSA's own stated concern that the ``other
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
arrangements'' language in the 1996 patient definition was too vague:
``HRSA officials told us that the definition currently includes
individuals receiving health care services from providers
affiliated with covered entities through ``other
arrangements,'' as long as the responsibility for care provided
remains with the entity. However, HRSA does not define ``other
arrangements,'' and officials told us that what is meant by
responsibility for care also needs to be clarified. Because of
the lack of specificity in the guidance, the agency has become
concerned that some covered entities may be broadly
interpreting the definition to include individuals such as
those seen by providers who are only loosely affiliated with a
covered entity and thus, for whom the entity . . . does not
actually have the responsibility for care.'' \73\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\73\
GAO, ``Manufacturer Discounts in the 340B Program Offer
Benefits, but Federal Oversight Needs Improvements,'' Sept. 2011,
supra, at 23.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recommendations to improve the current patient definition
A clear definition of ``patient'' is required under the law and
critical to the integrity and long-term sustainability of the 340B
program. HRSA should update its 340B patient definition so that it has
clear and enforceable standards for hospitals. A revised definition of
a patient for 340B purposes should require that there is an established
relationship between the hospital and the patient such that the patient
receives medical care at the hospital's onsite facilities registered
with HRSA. HRSA has correctly recognized that an ``individual's health
care relationship with the covered entity is the most important factor
in determining'' whether an individual is a patient of a 340B covered
entity.
\74\ The patient definition should be more explicit about
identifying the factors for which a hospital is responsible for an
individual's care and treatment, including documenting and maintaining
medical records for an individual. These elements include:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\74\
72 Fed. Reg. at 1544.
(1) Clear relationship between hospital and health care
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
provider
A revised patient definition must make clear the relationship
between the hospital and the health care professional seeing
the patient. A revised patient definition should also eliminate
the language in the 1996 patient definition referring to a
patient as one who receives health care services from a
provider under ``contractual or other arrangements.'' As
discussed above, this loose ``other arrangements'' language has
been a long-standing concern for GAO and HRSA due to the
potential for abuse it creates.
HRSA should clarify in its patient definition that only an
employee or independent contractor of the hospital are
considered health care professionals who can treat a patient on
behalf of the hospital. A provider connected to a hospital
through a looser affiliation is not acting on behalf of the
hospital and that provider's patients are not the covered
entity's patients for 340B purposes.
(2) Location of services provided
The revised definition also should make clear that a patient
must receive outpatient care at a covered entity's facilities.
This service should go beyond dispensing or administration of a
medication and include the prescribing or administration of the
medicine for which the covered entity receives a 340B discount.
As HRSA has said in the past, this means discounts are not
available when only dispensing discounted medicines to an
individual for subsequent self-administration.
\75\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\75\
72 Fed. Reg. at 1544 (``An individual will not be considered
a `patient' of the entity for purposes of 340B if the only health care
service received by the individual from the covered entity is the
dispensing of a drug or drugs for subsequent self administration or
administration in the home setting.'').
(3) Requirements for hospitals eligible through a government
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
contract
The revised patient definition should make clear that if the
individual is receiving care from a covered entity that has a
contract with a state or local government, such care must be
within the scope of the contract that bestows that covered
entity 340B eligibility under subsection (a)(4)(L)(ii) of the
340B statute (42 USC 256b). This would more closely align the
patient definition for grantees (already subject to this
element in the current patient definition) and DSH hospitals.
It would also ensure that the patient remains an individual who
receives services from a covered entity consistent with the
reason why the entity is 340B eligible. For example, HRSA
should specify that where a private nonprofit hospital is 340B
eligible because it has a contract with a state or local
government to care for low-income individuals ineligible for
Medicare and Medicaid, a 340B patient of the hospital must
receive services under that contract. Likewise, for a private
nonprofit hospital that is 340B eligible because it has been
formally granted governmental powers, a 340B patient of the
hospital should be an individual who receives health care
services furnished by the hospital in connection with its
governmental powers.
Requiring that a patient of a 340B hospital receive the
services for which Congress made the hospital 340B eligible
would promote the purposes of the 340B law (to provide
discounted medicines to a private nonprofit hospital that
contracts to care for ``low-income individuals who are not
eligible for Medicaid or Medicare,'' but not for a private
nonprofit hospital with ``a minor contract to provide indigent
care which represents an insignificant portion of its operating
revenues'').
\76\ It would also make the patient definition
more symmetrical between grantees and hospitals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\76\
H.R. Rep. 102-384 (II) (1992), 12.
HRSA has never sought to explain why it applied this principle
to grantees but not hospitals, and we see no rational basis to
treat covered entity grantees differently from hospitals on
this important element of the definition of who is a 340B
patient. Accordingly, HRSA should specify in a revised
definition that a patient of a private hospital that is 340B-
eligible through a contract with a state or local government to
care for low-income individuals ineligible for Medicare and
Medicaid, must receive care under that contract. Similarly, the
revised definition should specify that a hospital eligible
because of ``formally granted powers'' can only receive
discounts for patients who receive care in connection to such
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
powers.
HRSA has authority to issue a revised patient definition
In 2015, in response to the criticism received around the program's
lack of clear standards, HRSA issued a proposed omnibus guidance
covering many aspects of the 340B program, including changes to the
patient definition. At that time, HRSA believed it had legal authority
to issue guidance on a new patient definition, and we continue to
believe that HRSA can issue a new patient definition without statutory
rulemaking authority. Congress should encourage HRSA to exercise this
authority or seek clarity from HRSA on areas where they think they lack
authority. In general, PhRMA supported these proposed changes to the
patient definition and believes finalizing such a definition would make
important strides in clarifying the patient definition and resolving
many of the inconsistencies in the way stakeholders have interpreted
this key term. We appreciate HRSA's efforts to spell out the elements
of the patient definition, which are essential to ensuring compliance
with the law regarding diversion and duplicate discounts and to
maintaining overall program integrity. However, we believe there are
some instances where entities--particularly small or rural covered
entities and grantees--need additional flexibility from the proposed
patient definition and should be allowed to continue to use the
definition now in place given their focus on safety net populations.
Key Takeaway: The GAO, OIG and HRSA have all noted that the current
patient definition is overly vague and allows DSH hospitals to obtain
340B discounts for patients who Congress never intended to qualify for
the program. HRSA should finalize a new patient definition that, at a
minimum, includes the important elements discussed above and makes
exceptions for grantees. If HRSA does not release a new patient
definition in short order, Congress should step in and create a new
patient definition that reflects these important elements in statute.
Issue Area 2: Hospital eligibility standards are outdated, and the
requirements in statute are not well enforced.
With 45 percent of all acute care hospitals participating in a
program that was first intended for true safety-net facilities,
\77\
the eligibility criteria for DSH hospitals must be reexamined. While
some of the eligibility standards are set in statute and Congress would
have to intervene to update those criteria, HHS also has an important
role to play in ensuring that only true safety-net hospitals are
eligible for the 340B program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\77\
MedPAC, ``Report to the Congress: Overview of the 340B Drug
Pricing Program,'' May 2015.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recommendations to improve DSH hospital eligibility standards
(1) Revisiting the DSH Metric
Under the 340B statute, hospitals can qualify for the 340B
program based in part on their DSH percentage,
\78\ an
inpatient measure relating to the number of Medicaid and low-
income Medicare patients treated in a hospital's inpatient
unit. Paradoxically, this means that hospitals are more likely
to qualify for 340B as more of their patients gain Medicaid
coverage and are no longer uninsured. As discussed previously,
more hospitals have become eligible for 340B due to significant
expansions in Medicaid eligibility, which could not have been
anticipated in 1992. In addition, a 340B DSH hospital
designation has no direct relationship to the amount of care
that a hospital provides to low income, indigent, or uninsured
populations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\78\
See 42 U.S.C. Sec.
256b(a)(4)(L)-(O).
Analysis of the amount of charity care DSH hospitals provide
points to the fact that some of these hospitals have a low
charity care obligation. Hospitals report the amount of charity
care they provide on their Medicare Cost Reports. Charity care
is the cost of providing free or discounted care to low-income
individuals who qualify for the hospital's charity care
program. These programs are focused on helping low-income
patients access health care that would otherwise be
unaffordable. PhRMA believes it is important to examine the
relative amount of charity care 340B hospitals provide as part
of an examination of whether 340B eligibility is truly
targeting true safety net hospitals. For example, according to
hospitals' own data, 64 percent of 340B DSH hospitals provide a
lower level of charity care than the national average for all
hospitals.
\79\ This raises questions as to whether the DSH
hospitals participating in the program are in fact the
hospitals treating large numbers of vulnerable or uninsured
patients. Additionally, in a 2015 report, the GAO found that
there were ``notable numbers'' of 340B DSH hospitals that
provided low amounts of charity care.''
\80\ MedPAC also
reported that it had found little correlation between
hospitals' DSH adjustment percentages and whether they had
either high-cost patients or a high percentage of uninsured
patients.
\81\ Finally, the 2018 Energy and Commerce report
reached the conclusion that ``it is unclear whether the DSH
metric ensures that the program is available for hospitals that
are truly serving a disproportionate share of uninsured and
vulnerable patients.''
\82\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\79\
Alliance for Integrity and Reform of 340B, ``Benefiting
Hospitals, Not Patients: An Analysis of Charity Care Provided by
Hospitals Enrolled in the 340B Discount Program,'' Spring 2016.
\80\
Government Accountability Office, Medicare Part B Drugs:
Action Needed to Reduce Financial Incentives to Prescribe 340B Drugs at
Participating Hospitals, GAO-15-442, June 2015.
\81\
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, Report to the Congress:
Medicare Payment Policy (Washington, DC: MedPAC, March 2007).
\82\
House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations, Review of the 340B Drug Pricing Program, January 10,
2018. Available at: https://energycommerce.house.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2018/01/20180110Review_of_the_340B_Drug_Pricing_Program.pdf.
It is also important to note that because DSH is an inpatient
measure being used to determine eligibility for the outpatient
340B program, it is not impacted when 340B hospitals add child
sites that serve relatively wealthy patients. As noted above,
analysis has shown that often these child sites are
geographically located in wealthier areas than the DSH
hospitals themselves.
\83\ The 2018 Energy and Commerce report
issued a recommendation for reforms to the 340B program,
suggesting that ``Congress should reassess whether DSH is the
appropriate measure for program eligibility, or whether a
metric based on outpatient population would be more
appropriate.''
\84\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\83\
R. Conti and P. Bach, ``The 340B Drug Discount Program:
Hospitals Generate Profits By Expanding To Reach More Affluent
Communities,'' Health Affairs, vol. 33 no. 10.
\84\
House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations, Review of the 340B Drug Pricing Program, January 10,
2018. Available at: https://energycommerce.house.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2018/01/20180110Review_of_the_340B_Drug_Pricing_Program.pdf.
These flaws in the DSH metric suggest that Congress should
reexamine the eligibility criteria for 340B to better link
eligibility for the program to an entity's actual provision of
a disproportionate share of outpatient charity care. Because
hospitals already report charity care in their Medicare Cost
Reports, such a metric could be relatively simple to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
operationalize.
(2) Revising Current Loose Eligibility Standards for Hospitals
Not Owned or Operated by a state or Local Government
All 340B hospitals must be owned or operated by a unit of state
or local government or a private nonprofit hospital that (a)
has been formally granted governmental powers by a state or
local government; or (b) has a contract with a state or local
government to provide health care services to low-income
individuals who are not Medicare or Medicaid eligible.
Unfortunately, there is little guidance, transparency, or
oversight to enforce these requirements. In fact, HRSA does not
even review or collect the contracts that make some hospitals
eligible for 340B discounts. Instead, the responsibility falls
on hospitals to self-report if they believe they no longer meet
the requirements. GAO noted that ``hospitals with contracts
that provide a small amount of care to low-income individuals
not eligible for Medicare or Medicaid could claim 340B
discounts, which may not be what the agency intended.''
\85\
This lack of oversight makes it difficult to ensure that
contracts are meeting congressional intent. The legislative
history states that a private nonprofit hospital that had ``a
minor contract to provide indigent care which represents an
insignificant portion of its operating revenues'' could not
qualify for 340B under the state and local government contract
test.
\86\ Yet HRSA is not enforcing this requirement which
could easily be done routinely when HRSA recertifies a
hospital's 340B eligibility.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\85\
Manufacturer Discounts in the 340 Program Offer Benefits, but
Federal Oversight Needs Improvement, GAO-11-836 (Sept.2011), p 23.
\86\
U.S. House of Representatives Report accompanying H.R. Rep.
102-384 (II) (1992).
At a minimum, HRSA should collect these contracts and post them
online. Strong and transparent standards are needed for private
DSH hospitals' contracts that confer 340B eligibility. These
contracts should not be minor contracts and instead should
represent a sizable investment of hospital resources.
Similarly, HRSA should set clear standards for how hospitals
qualify for 340B if they have been formally granted
``governmental powers.'' The governmental powers that confer
340B eligibility to a hospital should be made publicly
available by each hospital. Merely providing health care
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
services is not sufficient to meet this standard.
Recently introduced legislation offers important improvements in
hospital reporting requirements
Several Members of Congress have recently introduced bipartisan
legislation to address some of the deficiencies in hospital reporting
and accountability. S. 2312, the HELP ACT would impose reporting
requirements on DSH, cancer and children's hospitals that increase the
understanding of how the program is used. For example, these hospitals
would report the insurance status of patients who receive 340B
medicines. This will show whether uninsured patients are receiving 340B
medicines both at the DSH hospital itself and separately for each child
site. The HELP ACT would also strengthen government oversight with GAO
and OIG reports on key areas in need of being revisited, including an
evaluation into the state and local government contracts that bestow
340B eligibility on certain private DSH hospitals. The legislation
would also implement clear eligibility standards for private DSH,
children's and cancer hospitals and their offsite outpatient
facilities. Representatives Larry Bucshon and Scott Peters have
introduced legislation, H.R. 4570, the 340B PAUSE Act, that would take
many similar steps to increase understanding of how 340B hospitals
qualify for the program and which patients are receiving 340B
prescriptions. Both bills also include a commonsense temporary
moratorium on the enrollment of new DSH hospitals while data is being
collected.
The commonsense reporting requirements included in the HELP ACT and
340B PAUSE Act are focused on basic information hospitals are likely
already collecting for other purposes. For example, the data on the
insurance status of patients already is needed for payment purposes.
Further, the data requirements included in both pieces of legislation
are in line with the level of reporting already required of many
grantees as a condition of the Federal grants they receive. Federal
grantees, like Ryan White clinics, are already subject to additional
HRSA oversight as a Federal grantee. Importantly, in its January 2018
report on the 340B program, the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee
on Oversight and Investigations interviewed numerous HRSA grantees who
told the committee that ``they found the additional [340B] program
requirements manageable.''
\87\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\87\
House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations, Review of the 340B Drug Pricing Program, January 10,
2018. Available at: https://energycommerce.house.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2018/01/20180110Review_of_the_340B_Drug_Pricing_Program.pdf.
Key Takeaway: The current lax DSH hospital eligibility standards
are contributing to the growth of 340B that has led to higher costs for
patients and the health care system. Both Congress and HRSA should
update the current eligibility criteria for DSH hospitals.
Specifically, Congress should review the use of the DSH metric and HRSA
should develop and enforce eligibility standards for hospitals not
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
owned or operated by a state or local government.
Issue Area 3: Current guidance on eligibility criteria for child
sites is outdated and is driving up costs and should be updated.
The 340B law defines the types of hospitals that can participate in
the program with great specificity
\88\ but never mentions
participation of off-campus outpatient facilities associated with these
hospitals (also known as child sites). Although there is no basis in
the statute for including these sites, in 1994, HRSA unilaterally
issued guidance dramatically expanding the 340B program by permitting
child sites to participate--even if as hospitals have interpreted, they
are only loosely connected to the parent hospital and do not serve a
needy population.
\89\ Child sites have become a major source of the
program's growth and incentives. In 1994, there were a total of 34
child sites. By 2016 this had increased to over 15,000.
\90\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\88\
42 U.S.C. Sec.
256b(a)(4)(L)-(O).
\89\
59 Fed. Reg. 47884, 47885 (September 19, 1994).
\90\
HRSA OPA Data base, October 2016.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These hospital child sites are a key factor accounting for the 340B
program's explosive growth and its shift away from the program's
original goal of helping get discounted medicines to uninsured and
vulnerable patients.
\91\ For example, a 2014 Health Affairs study
found that child sites are converting 340B ``from [a program] that
serves vulnerable communities to one that enriches hospitals.''
\92\
The authors of a recent New England Journal of Medicine Perspective on
340B state that ``hospitals have purchased community practices in part
. . . to expand their footprint into wealthier neighborhoods to
`profit' from the 340B program.''
\93\ As discussed earlier in this
testimony, hospitals purchasing physician practices leads to higher
costs for many payers and other patients because commercial
reimbursement for hospital-owned practices are typically higher due to
their market power.
\94\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\91\
A. Vandervelde and E. Blalock, ``340B Program Sales Forecast:
2016-2021,'' 2016, available at: http://340breform.org/userfiles/
December%202016%20BRG%20Growth%20Study.pdf (accessed March 11, 2018).
\92\
Rena M. Conti and Peter B. Bach. The 340B Drug Discount
Program: Hospitals Generate Profits by Expanding to Reach More Affluent
Communities, Health Affairs 33, no. 10 (2014): 1786-1792.
\93\
http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/
NEJMp1716139'query=recirc_curatedRelated
_article.
\94\
As discussed earlier, while the administration recently made
changes to address 340B hospitals' incentives to increase spending in
Medicare Part B, that change will likely have a minimal impact on
incentives for future provider consolidation. The new Part B
reimbursement changes are by definition limited to the less than one
quarter of DSH hospitals' 340B profits derived from Part B fee-for-
service sales and the new policy will not impact newly acquired
outpatient sites that are not paid under the Outpatient Prospective
Payment System.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recommendation for addressing concerns with child sites
(1) Implement new eligibility standards and requirements for
child sites
At a minimum, HRSA should revisit its 1994 guidance given the
rampant growth in the number of child sites, the lack of any
requirements that these clinics serve a safety-net role and the
evidence that they are leading to higher costs for many
patients. Congress, too, should consider revising the current
child site eligibility rules.
The new standards for child site eligibility should be
developed to help prevent 340B from being an incentive for the
broad consolidation of community-based providers, which drives
up health care costs. Child sites should also be required to
provide a broad range of services and have a sliding fee scale
that shares 340B discounts with low-income patients.
Recently introduced legislation takes an important first step to
improve hospital reporting requirements for child sites
Both the HELP ACT and the 340B PAUSE Act would help improve
visibility into how child sites are using the 340B program by requiring
hospitals to report insurance status of the patients treated at each
child site and the costs of charity care provided at each site.
Currently, there is no data available about the patients treated at
child sites, and as discussed above, these patients are not factored
into the hospital's DSH metric. Such data will be valuable in
determining whether child sites are serving communities in need of
safety-net services.
Both bills also include a commonsense temporary moratorium on the
enrollment of new child sites while data is being collected. The HELP
ACT would also require that a child site of any 340B DSH, children's or
free-standing cancer hospital meet several requirements, including
adhering to the charity care policy and any sliding fee scale of its
parent hospital. These new standards would help ensure that patients
directly benefit from 340B discounts at the child site.
Key Takeaway: The current eligibility criteria for offsite
outpatient facilities (``child sites'') associated with 340B DSH
hospitals are leading to consolidation that raises health care costs
and increasing the presence of 340B sites in wealthy areas, which is
not consistent with the program's mission. Criteria must be revised and
new reporting requirements must be implemented to ensure these sites
are serving communities that need safety-net services.
Issue Area 4: Rampant growth of hospital use of contract pharmacy
arrangements must be reined in through updated guidance.
Contract pharmacies are for-profit, retail pharmacies that 340B
hospitals partner with to dispense 340B medicines to patients of the
covered entity who fill prescriptions at the pharmacy. The contract
pharmacy and the hospital then share the profit generated through the
distribution of a 340B discounted medicine, with no guarantee that
patients benefit from the 340B discount.
The 1992 statute creating the 340B program did not authorize or
even mention contract pharmacies. To address requests from covered
entities without an in-house pharmacy, HRSA issued guidance in 1996
allowing covered entities without an onsite pharmacy to contract with
one offsite pharmacy.
\95\ In 2010, the use of contract pharmacies was
dramatically expanded through Obama administration sub-regulatory
guidance.
\96\ The 2010 guidance eliminated the one pharmacy
limitation and permitted 340B entities that have an onsite pharmacy to
also use an unlimited number of contract pharmacies. This change
dramatically increased the number of contract pharmacies but did
nothing to ensure that patients benefited from this expansion. A 2014
report by the OIG stated that at the time, ``the number of unique
pharmacies serving as 340B contract pharmacies has grown by 770
percent, and the total number of contract pharmacy arrangements has
grown by 1,245 percent'' since 2010.
\97\ In 2017, there were more
than 50,000 contract pharmacy arrangements.
\98\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\95\
Fed. Reg. Vol. 61, No. 165.
\96\
Fed. Reg. Vol. 75, No 43.
\97\
HHS Office of the Inspector General, ``Contract Pharmacy
Arrangements in the 340B Program,'' Feb. 2014.
\98\
HRSA OPA Data base, March 2017.
There is no evidence patients consistently benefit from contract
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
pharmacies
Pharmacies can generate higher returns by dispensing 340B
prescriptions than non-340B prescriptions, however uninsured patients
are not always offered the 340B discounted price at contract
pharmacies.
\99\ Despite the fact that the 340B program was designed
to ensure increased access to prescription medicines for vulnerable or
uninsured patients, the 2014 OIG report found that the majority of
hospitals in their study did not ensure that they passed 340B discounts
back to uninsured patients who filled their prescriptions at a contract
pharmacy.
\100\ In contrast, the grantee covered entities in the OIG
study were more likely to have developed systems for their contract
pharmacies to pass 340B discounts on to uninsured patients.
\101\
Additionally, 340B Health, the trade association representing 340B
hospitals, has stated that contract pharmacies are typically unable to
determine who is eligible for 340B discounts at the time a prescription
is filled. In a letter to New York State, 340B Health stated, ``the
overwhelming majority of these [contract] pharmacies do not know at the
time a claim is processed whether or not it relates to a 340B drug.''
\102\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\99\
HHS Office of the Inspector General, ``Contract Pharmacy
Arrangements in the 340B Program,'' Feb. 2014.
\100\
HHS Office of the Inspector General, ``Contract Pharmacy
Arrangements in the 340B Program,'' Feb. 2014.
\101\
Ibid.
\102\
Safety Net Hospitals for Pharmaceutical Access Dec. 19, 2011
letter to Jason A. Helgerson, Medicaid Director & Deputy Commissioner
Office of Health Insurance Programs, New York State Department of
Health.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recommendations for reining in contract pharmacy arrangements
(1) Increase and improve HRSA oversight of the contract
pharmacy program
HRSA's oversight of 340B, and particularly the contract
pharmacy program, is insufficient. In 2012, as part of its
efforts to improve 340B program integrity, HRSA began
conducting covered entity audits. Many of these audits focus on
covered entities' usage of contract pharmacies, however they
are limited in scope and the fact that they continue to result
in adverse findings demonstrates that audits are not enough to
ensure program integrity.
While the 2010 HRSA contract pharmacy guidance recommends that
covered entities perform annual independent audits of their
contract pharmacies, in practice, this guidance has not
resulted in meaningful action on the part of covered entities.
The 2014 HHS OIG report on contract pharmacies found that
``[f]ew covered entities reported retaining independent
auditors for their contract pharmacy arrangements as
recommended in HRSA guidance.'' HRSA's current approach to
overseeing contract pharmacy arrangements relies heavily on
this covered entity self-policing, yet there are no rules in
place that compel processes that would ensure compliance with
the 340B statute. The OIG report states that covered entities
must notify HRSA if they find that duplicate discounts or
diversion have occurred in their contract pharmacy
arrangements, however OIG found that only 7 of 30 covered
entities they reviewed even reported that they retained HRSA's
recommended independent auditors, let alone reported findings
of diversion or duplicate discounts. OIG's overall assessment
of the current state of the contract pharmacy program was that
``without adequate oversight, the complication created by
contract pharmacy arrangements may introduce vulnerabilities to
the 340B program.'' This level of self-policing and the lack of
a framework for program compliance is not appropriate for such
a large (and growing) aspect of the 340B program. We urge HRSA
to focus its audits efforts on contract pharmacy arrangements
with DSH hospitals, given that these hospitals represent 80
percent of 340B sales and rely on arrangements that make them
more vulnerable to possible diversion of 340B discounts to non-
patients.
Additionally, HRSA currently has no oversight efforts of
covered entity arrangements with the 340B services providers
(e.g., third party administrators or TPAs) who manage most of
the back-end administration of the 340B program. Instead, as
discussed above, HRSA cites its recommendations that covered
entities conduct independent audits to ensure compliance in
these arrangements. But the lack of clear program rules and a
reliance on this covered entity self-policing approach has been
insufficient to ensure the integrity and the intended patient
impact of the 340B program.
(2) Revise lax regulations that have enabled middlemen to
benefit from the contract pharmacy program
Contract pharmacy expansion is a troubling example of middlemen
diverting resources from 340B's intended purpose of assisting
low-income or vulnerable patients. An industry of for-profit
pharmacies and their third-party administrators and consultants
has developed since 2010 with the goal of maximizing 340B
dispensing. Their only apparent motive is to financially
benefit from taking a share of the markup between the legally
mandated 340B price and the higher price paid by patients and
insurers.
There are multiple examples of the third-party marketing
strategies that boast of the revenues they can help hospitals
generate through expanded use of contract pharmacies. In 2013,
the LinkedIn profile of a Walgreens employee came to Senator
Grassley's attention. In his profile, the employee boasts about
Walgreens' ability to help clients ``Generate revenue from your
340B patients.''
\103\ Senator Grassley's subsequent letter to
the Walgreens CEO seeking additional information about
Walgreens' participation in 340B sums up the problem with the
contract pharmacy program succinctly, as he states, the 340B
program ``is not intended to subsidize pharmacies that team up
with covered entities to turn a profit.''
\104\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\103\
The link has been taken down but it was previously at http:/
/www.linkedin.com/pub/timothy-hong/28/651/511.
\104\
Senator Charles Grassley, Letter to Walgreens CEO Gregory
Watson, July 21, 2013.
Available at http://www.pembrokeconsulting.com/pdfs/
Grassley_340B_Letter_to_Walgreens_31July2013.pdf.
Additionally, other third-party vendors like Talyst, a for-
profit vendor which provides a software platform for
pharmacies, make 340B profitability the cornerstone of their
sales pitch to prospective contract pharmacy clients. Talyst
tries to sell its services by telling clients that 340B drugs
generate higher pharmacy markups than non-340B drugs and that
Talyst is the one to help them leverage that profit potential,
while underscoring that savings don't need to be passed through
to patients.
\105\ In fact, Talyst highlights that ``the
covered entities are allowed to use the benefit of these
substantial savings in any way they choose.'' Talyst is one of
hundreds of for-profit middlemen taking a cut of a program
designed to help the safety-net population. Little to no
oversight exists to monitor contract pharmacies and these
third-party vendors. HRSA and Congress must take steps to
determine how and if patients are benefiting.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\105\
http://www.talyst.com/wp-content/uploads/
Talyst_White_Paper_Benefit_Becoming_Contract_Pharmacy.pdf.
(3) Address 340B program integrity concerns driven by the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
contract pharmacy program
The contract pharmacy program inherently raises program
integrity concerns. A 2014 OIG report found that contract
pharmacy arrangements make it more difficult for HRSA and
others to identify diversion and duplicate discounts.
\106\
The 340B program prohibits covered entities from purchasing a
medicine at a 340B discount that generates a Medicaid rebate
claim.
\107\ Consequently, the law creates an absolute
prohibition on duplicate discounts. However, despite this clear
statutory imperative, current prevention methods do not stop or
prevent duplicate discounts. The increasing use of contract
pharmacies coupled with expansion of Medicaid rebates for
medicines used by Medicaid Managed Care Organization (MCO)
enrollees have exacerbated the problem of duplicate discounts--
with HRSA and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
(CMS) thus far not taking effective steps to prevent this
statutory violation. In fact, HRSA released 2014 guidance that
expressly excluded Medicaid managed care utilization from the
only mechanism HRSA has developed to prevent duplicate
discounts (the Medicaid Exclusion File), stating that it
``recognizes the need to address covered entities' role in
preventing duplicate discounts under Medicaid Managed Care, and
is working with CMS to develop policy in this regard.''
\108\
As of 2018, this policy has yet to be developed. This leaves a
critical gap in enforcing the law's duplicate discount ban as
about 55 million Americans are covered by Medicaid managed care
plans. Half of all Medicaid spending on prescription medicines
was through MCOs in 2014
\109\ and that share has likely
increased in recent years.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\106\
HHS Office of the Inspector General, ``Contract Pharmacy
Arrangements in the 340B Program,'' Feb. 2014.
\107\
42 U.S.C. Sec.
256b(a)(5)(A).
\108\
HRSA, 340B Drug Pricing Program Release No. 2014-1 (Dec. 12,
2014). The Medicaid Exclusion File mechanism requires that 340B covered
entities either ``carve in'' (provide 340B drugs to Medicaid patients
and report this practice to HRSA, so that these entities are listed on
the Exclusion File and State Medicaid programs do not bill
manufacturers for rebates on drugs furnished by these entities) or
``carve out'' (do not provide 340B drugs to Medicaid beneficiaries, so
that drugs supplied by a 340B entity to a Medicaid patient triggers a
Medicaid rebate, but not a 340B discount). Under the 2014 guidance,
this mechanism no longer applies to prevent double discounts on 340B
drugs provided to MCO beneficiaries.
\109\
KFF, ``Total Medicaid Managed Care Enrollment, 2014''
available at: https://www.kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/total-
medicaid-mc-enrollment/
currentTimeframe=0&sortModel=%B%22colId%22:%2Location%22,%22sort%22:%22a
sc%22%7D (accessed March 11, 2018); MACPAC, ``Medicaid Spending for
Prescription Drugs,'' January 2016. Available at: https://
www.macpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Medicaid-Spending-for-
Prescription-Drugs.pdf.
Continued expansion of 340B contract pharmacy arrangements is
expected to keep driving growth in the 340B program. Due to
several factors, under current law, it is projected that by
2023, contract pharmacy utilization will exceed $10 billion of
the estimated $31.5 billion in sales at the 340B price.
\110\
This growth comes against a backdrop of a contract pharmacy
program operating in a largely unregulated environment.
\111\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\110\
Berkeley Research Group unpublished estimates for PhRMA,
December 2017.
\111\
A. Vandervelde and E. Blalock, ``340B Program Sales
Forecast: 2016-2021,'' BRG, December 2016.
Key Takeaway: The current unlimited use of contract pharmacies by
hospitals is not sustainable and diverts savings from 340B to for-
profit pharmacies and other middlemen. There is also no evidence that
contract pharmacies are directly benefiting patients. HRSA should
revisit its current contract pharmacy policy for hospitals. Any new
policy must consider what role, if any, hospitals' contract pharmacies
should play in a program that has grown significantly over the past 8
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
years.
Issue Area 5: Better enforcement is needed of current 340B program
rules and guidance.
Given the important role that the 340B program plays in the health
care safety net, it is imperative that participants have a clear
understanding of the program's requirements and are adhering to the
program's statutory requirements. Unfortunately, this is not common
practice.
Six years ago, in 2012, as part of agency-wide efforts to improve
program integrity, HRSA began covered entity and manufacturer audits.
The fiscal year 2017 HRSA data show that two-thirds of all DSH
hospitals audited were noncompliant in at least one area and many were
noncompliant in multiple areas.
\112\ Currently, there are no real
repercussions for hospitals if they are found to be noncompliant with
program guidelines. For example, hospitals that obtain 340B discounts
for which they were not eligible may have to pay back those discounts,
but there are no additional penalties that would create a true
incentive to diligently prevent duplicate discounting or diversion. To
date, we are not aware of any covered entity HRSA has terminated for
violation of 340B program rules.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\112\
HRSA OPA Data base Program Integrity fiscal year 2017 Audit
Results (Accessed March 6, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, the current lack of clear program standards makes it
difficult to conduct meaningful audits of covered entities. As
mentioned earlier in this testimony, the OIG and GAO continue to state
that the current definition of a 340B patient lacks specificity,
leading to program integrity issues. While HRSA audits for incidences
of diversion, it is unclear what HRSA is auditing for since there are
not sufficiently clear standards for who constitutes a 340B patient.
A recent paper from the Berkeley Research Group shows that the 340B
program more than doubled in size from 2010 to 2015. BRG predicts that
exponential growth will continue for at least the next 5 years. At
current staffing levels, each HRSA auditor will be responsible for
providing oversight of an average of $1B in drug purchases at over
4,000 distinct covered entity or contract pharmacy locations by 2021.
\113\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\113\
A. Vandervelde and E. Blalock, ``340B Program Sales
Forecast: 2016-2021,'' 2016, available at: http://340breform.org/
userfiles/December%202016%20BRG%20Growth%20Study.pdf (accessed March
11, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Similar to our earlier comments specific to contract pharmacy, we
urge HRSA to focus its audits on contract pharmacy arrangements with
DSH hospitals, given that they represent 80 percent of 340B sales and
rely on arrangements that make them more vulnerable to possible
diversion of 340B discounts to non-patients.
Key Takeaway: A lack of clear and enforceable standards combined
with no adverse consequences for entities that violate 340B
requirements mean that the hospital audits currently taking place do
not assure program compliance. HRSA and Congress should consider ways
to improve clarity and enforcement of program rules.
Changes are Needed to Previous Administration Proposals for the 340B
Drug Ceiling Price and Manufacturer Civil Monetary Penalties Regulation
The 340B Drug Ceiling Price and Manufacturer Civil Monetary
Penalties (CMP) Regulation, developed under the Obama administration,
was set to go into effect on March 6, 2017, with enforcement scheduled
for April 1, 2017. Due to the widespread concerns it raised, the final
rule's effective date has been delayed four times since the Trump
Administration took office in January 2017.
\114\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\114\
Delays were issued on 3/21/2017, 5/22/2017, 10/1/2017, and
7/1/2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Last fall, HRSA delayed the effective date of the 340B Ceiling
Price and CMP Rule until July 1, 2018. In the notice announcing the
delay, HRSA stated that it intends to engage in further rulemaking on
issues covered in the rule. PhRMA supports rulemaking on this issue,
but we believe any HRSA rule must be consistent with the statute and
not impose undue burdens on manufacturers. Our concerns with the
previous ceiling price/CMP regulations are outlined below.
Problems with the delayed ceiling price and CMP regulation
(1) Penny pricing: One key concern PhRMA has with the delayed
rule is that it finalizes a 340B program ``penny pricing''
policy, which would require biopharmaceutical manufacturers to
effectively give away their medicines to covered entities for
free by permitting a manufacturer to only charge a penny in
many cases. Penny pricing typically occurs in specific
instances when the 340B ceiling price formula results in a zero
340B ceiling price for a particular medicine. The statutory
formula for a medicine's 340B ceiling price is a medicine's
average manufacturer price (AMP) minus its Medicaid rebate.
When a medicine's Medicare rebate equals its AMP, the resulting
340B ceiling price is zero. The 340B statute cannot be read as
requiring manufacturers to ``sell'' their medicines for a penny
to 340B entities, because under the law, the discount only
applies to bona fide ``purchases.'' However, we note that
forced transfers of medicines at 1 cent to covered entities are
not true ``purchases.'' Further, penny pricing creates
incentives for 340B entities to stockpile medicines, which can
create artificial shortages that make it difficult for patients
to get the medications they need.
In PhRMA's comment letters to HRSA, we suggested three
reasonable alternatives to penny pricing: the prior quarter
(non-penny) 340B ceiling price, the Federal Ceiling Price or
nominal price--which manufacturers could use as their 340B
ceiling prices instead of a penny price. These alternatives
would give effect to the statutory language limiting the 340B
statute to true ``purchases''--not forced transfers.
(2) Refund Requirements: The delayed rule includes two separate
sets of administratively burdensome refund requirements. Under
the first refund requirement, manufacturers must estimate 340B
prices for new medicines and then make refunds to all 340B
covered entities that purchased the new medicine during its
initial quarters on the market if a recalculated ``actual''
ceiling price turns out to be lower than the ``estimated''
ceiling prices. Under the second refund requirement,
manufacturers must recalculate 340B ceiling prices from past
quarters based on restatements of Medicaid rebate metrics and
then initiate and make refunds to covered entities on past
sales based on the recalculated ceiling price. Both refund
requirements would call for manufacturers to make costly
changes to their pricing systems and business procedures to
come into compliance and waste manufacturer resources due to
their needless complexity.
The delayed rule also requires manufacturers to pay refunds to
340B covered entities without subtracting any amounts that the
covered entity owes to the manufacturer (unless the entity
voluntarily agrees to the offset, which seems unlikely). This
policy in effect would require a manufacturer to pay a covered
entity more than it owes to the entity. Companies cannot be
required to pay more than they owe; this policy is wrong, was
not authorized by the 340B law and needs further review.
(3) CMPs: Finally, this delayed rule would permit the OIG to
impose CMPs against manufacturers without specifying any clear
standards for imposing these penalties. This omission heightens
risk for manufacturers that already are operating in a complex
program lacking clear ground rules. The 340B statute, as
amended by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
(ACA), authorizes CMPs against a manufacturer that ``knowingly
and intentionally charges a covered entity a price for purchase
of a medicine that exceeds the [340B ceiling] price'' (up to
$5,000 for each ``instance'' of overcharging), provided that
CMPs ``shall be assessed according to standards established in
regulations.''
\115\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\115\
42 U.S.C. 256b(d)(1)(B)(vi) (emphasis added).
The delayed rule failed to establish standards for assessing
CMPs. For one thing, it does not even define ``knowingly and
intentionally.'' HRSA instead gives unfettered discretion to
OIG to define ``knowing and intentionally.'' The resulting
uncertainty will cause manufacturers unnecessary costs, as the
Final Rule essentially concedes, and will not satisfy the
statute's requirements for ``standards established in
regulations.''
\116\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\116\
42 U.S.C. Sec.
256b(d).
Separately, PhRMA wishes to note our support for HRSA finalizing
and launching a new password-protected website that would provide a
secure way for 340B covered entities to access ceiling prices. Some of
our members were involved in testing this system and we urge HRSA to
launch this website as soon as possible, with appropriate safeguards
given the sensitive nature of the pricing information that will be
available on the website. The ACA requires that this site be developed,
\117\ and we look forward to covered entities having confidential
access to this information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\117\
PPACCA Sec.
7102(d)(1)(B)(iii).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Summary, PhRMA Urges Action to Bring the 340B Program in Line with
the Current Health Care System and Ensure Its Sustainability for the
Future
PhRMA strongly believes that the 340B program should continue, and
we recognize how the program helps support true safety net entities and
their patients that currently rely on the program. However, we urge
both Congress and the Administration to make changes to the program so
that its structure and rules are consistent with its roots as a safety-
net program and serve the mission of supporting access to care for
uninsured or vulnerable patients.
Currently DSH hospitals' use of the program is not serving that
mission. Instead, economists are finding that the 340B program is
raising costs for all patients and that low-income patients are not
seeing better health outcomes at 340B hospitals. They suggest these
higher costs are due to three reasons: (1) hospitals earn more 340B
revenue when patients take more medicines and more expensive medicines;
(2) 340B is contributing to the shift in care from community-based
physicians to more expensive hospital outpatient facilities; and (3)
the large share of 340B-discounted medicines purchased by hospitals for
certain conditions is driving up prices. To make matters worse,
hospitals do not have to pass along 340B savings to low-income patients
or even make them aware of the discounts. This means that uninsured or
vulnerable patients may be worse off due to the 340B program.
These market distortions are due in part to the lack of clear
program standards that would limit 340B eligibility to true safety-net
hospitals and the patients who rely on these hospitals for their care.
Instead, a combination of guidance that is either vague or overly broad
coupled with a lack of HRSA oversight has fueled dramatic growth in the
program. Unfortunately, none of this growth seems focused on ensuring
that patients benefit. Instead, this growth is centered on increasing
profits for hospitals, retail pharmacies and middlemen.
PhRMA once again thanks this Committee for its interest in the 340B
program. We urge you to continue taking a closer look at this program,
encouraging HHS and HRSA to fully consider their oversight
responsibilities and authorities, and to consider critical legislative
changes to the 340B program, not only to increase transparency and
reporting, but also to ensure the program is being executed in a way
consistent with its original intent that benefits patients, the safety
net, and the health care system as a whole.
______
[Summary Statement of Lori M. Reilly]
This is a summary of the testimony of Lori M. Reilly on behalf of
the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA), which
reiterates our support for the 340B program and recognizes the
importance of the program to our safety net. In particular, PhRMA
recognizes the crucial role 340B grantees play in providing care to the
most vulnerable among us but also highlights how flaws in the program's
current structure are distorting the health care marketplace and not
helping patients. The testimony makes the following key points:
(1) Today's 340B Program is Nearly Unrecognizable from the Program
Congress Enacted in 1992; Changes Have Contributed to the Many Problems
Now Associated with the Program (page 4). The 340B program was created
to restore voluntary discounts to grantees and safety net hospitals
that had unintentionally been impacted by the passage of the Medicaid
rebate law. At first, grantees made most of the 340B purchases, but
over time DSH hospitals have come to dominate the program. Nothing in
the 340B statute suggests the program was designed to be a major
revenue source for DSH hospitals that provide little charity care with
no accountability for how the revenue is used. A combination of
expansions in Medicaid coverage and flawed guidance under the Health
Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) have caused explosive
growth and led to this program straying from its origins.
(2) The 340B Program Creates Market Distorting Incentives That
Affect Consumer Prices for Medicines, Shift Care to More Expensive
Hospital Settings and Accelerate Provider Consolidation (page 8). A
growing body of evidence from nonpartisan, independent sources,
including The New England Journal of Medicine, JAMA, the GAO and
others, points to data showing the 340B program has now grown so large
that it is distorting market prices, affecting patterns of utilization,
leading to more provider consolidation, and driving up health care
costs for everyone.
(3) Recent Administrative Action Is a Step Forward, But More Action
Is Needed to Modernize the 340B Program (page 13). PhRMA supports the
recent Trump Administration change to Medicare Part B reimbursement at
340B hospitals as a good first step toward addressing one of the
perverse incentives in the 340B program that the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) and others have found leads to higher costs
for patients and the entire health care system. However, because
Medicare Part B represents less than one-quarter of total DSH hospital
revenue from 340B, the incentives remain intact. More needs to be done
to address other aspects of the program that are driving up costs.
Three bills recently introduced in Congress would help by addressing
concerns with how disproportionate share (DSH) hospitals are misusing
the 340B program.
(4) Improvements to the 340B Program Are Urgently Needed in Five
Key Areas: (1) 340B Patient Definition; (2) DSH Hospital Eligibility
Standards; (3) Standards for Off-Site Hospital Clinics (``Child
Sites''); (4) Contract Pharmacy Arrangements; and (5) Reporting
Requirements (page 14). Guidance released by HRSA in these five areas
have led to lax standards in fundamental parts of the program, such as
setting standards for which patients and private DSH hospitals are
eligible for 340B discounts. PhRMA believes strong requirements are
needed to limit 340B eligibility to true safety-net hospitals and the
patients who rely on these hospitals for their care. In other areas,
such as offsite outpatient facilities (also known as child sites) and
contract pharmacy arrangements, HRSA should revisit policies that
vastly expanded the 340B program and contributed to the market
distortions we see today. The program needs reporting requirements to
ensure program reforms are based on accurate data and to give HRSA
better insight into how the program is currently being misused.
In our testimony, PhRMA urges Congress and the Administration to
make changes to the 340B program so that its structure and rules are
consistent with its roots as a safety-net program and serve the mission
of supporting access to care for uninsured or vulnerable patients. We
urge you to take a fresh look at how DSH hospitals are now using this
program and to work with HRSA to ensure the enactment of common-sense
changes that protect 340B grantees while curbing the excesses in many
DSH hospitals' use of the 340B program.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Reilly.
Ms. Veer, welcome.
STATEMENT OF SUE VEER, MBA, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, CAROLINA HEALTH CENTERS, INC., GREENWOOD, SC
Ms. Veer. Thank you.
Good morning and thank you, Chairman Alexander, Ranking
Member Murray, and Members of the Committee for the opportunity
to share the perspective of Health Centers.
My name is Sue Veer, and I am the President and CEO of
Carolina Health Centers, which is a federally qualified health
center serving as the primary care medical home for 27,000-plus
patients in rural South Carolina.
Today, however, I am here in my capacity as a consultant
for the National Association of Community Health Centers,
commonly referenced as NACHC, which represents over 1,400
health centers that serve as the primary care medical home for
27 million patients in 10,000 medical sites across the country.
As a member of NACHC, I have worked to promote pharmacy
services as an integral part of the community health center
model of care, including the effective implementation and
compliant use of the 340B pharmacy program.
Largely due to my experience with my own health center
pharmacy, for the past 2 years I have served as a NACHC
consultant providing 340B training and technical assistance to
health centers and primary care associations all across the
country.
I am here today to share my perspective, as well as that of
my colleagues at NACHC, as it relates to the value of the 340B
Program for health centers and the patients we serve.
I would like to start with an underlying premise, and that
is, there is a direct correlation between access to affordable
primary care and the ability to manage both acute illness and
chronic disease. I believe there is also an undeniable
relationship between well-managed chronic disease and a
reduction in the use of more costly care like specialty care
and in-patient services.
Thus, it can be concluded that access to affordable primary
care services improves both individual and population health,
which, in turn, promotes cost effectiveness.
Community health centers, also known as a federally
qualified health centers, serve as primary care medical homes
and share a commitment to increasing access, improving health
outcomes, and driving cost effectiveness.
To that end, health centers provide access to affordable
primary care regardless of the ability to pay with a focus on
populations that would otherwise be underserved.
The 340B Program is a core element of achieving that goal
as it supports our health centers' efforts to ensure that all
patients have access to and can afford essential primary care
services, including prescription medication.
Whether through the implementation of an in-house pharmacy,
or by expanding access through contract pharmacy arrangements,
without 340B, health centers like mine would not be able to
provide effective pharmacy services for their patients. In
addition, the savings achieved enable health centers to support
essential primary care services that would otherwise be
unavailable for our patients.
This Program was originally created to enable providers
like mine, a community health center, to fulfill our mission
and serve as the Nation's primary care safety net. We have
proven to be exceptional stewards of that Program. Our mission
is consistent with the congressional intent of the 340B Drug
Pricing Program, which the Chairman stated earlier this
morning.
We serve vulnerable patients. We ensure that they can
afford their medications. We reinvest 340B savings toward
purposes that advance the safety net mission, and we adhere to
extensive reporting and oversight requirements to demonstrate
increased access to care and improved health outcomes.
It is important to note that health centers are accountable
to HRSA for both our community health center program and
participation in the 340B Program.
On the health center side, HRSA approves what is called our
``scope of project,'' and holds us accountable for Program
expectations that are detailed in a 92-page compliance manual.
It is also important to note that health center
implementation of the 340B Program is guided by each health
center's congressionally mandated community-based, majority
patients' board ensuring a focus on the needs of our patients
and the communities we serve.
Related to 340B, our boards establish mechanisms to ensure
access to affordable medication, like sliding fee scales and
participation in prescription assistance programs. And they
also require that we reinvest all of our savings into programs
that expand access to underserved patient populations. Our
boards play a majority role in identifying where those needs
are.
I want to close by assuring you that everyone in the health
center community wants Congress to have confidence in the
integrity of the 340B Drug Pricing Program, and I am happy to
answer your questions today.
However, as you hear various perspectives on the Program, I
hope you will recognize that the Program is working
exceptionally well for health centers, which serve as the
fabric of the Nation's healthcare safety net.
For that reason, we encourage policymakers to work with
health centers to best understand the responsibilities and
requirements that are unique to the community health centers
and the patients we serve.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Veer follows:]
prepared statement of sue veer
Good morning Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray and Members
of the Committee.
My name is Sue Veer. I am the President and CEO of Carolina Health
Centers, Inc. (CHC) a federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) that
serves as the primary care medical home for 27,705 patients in the west
central area of South Carolina known as the Lakelands. However, today I
am here representing the 1,400 community health center organizations
that serve as the primary care medical home for more than 27 million
patients at over across 10,000 sites across the country.
Included in my testimony is an overview of the unique
characteristics of health centers and how the creation of the 340B Drug
Pricing Program (340B program) was critical in enabling many health
centers to start providing their patients with access to affordable
pharmaceuticals. My testimony continues with an overview of the
training and technical assistance work I and others at NACHC have been
doing specific to the 340B program, and concludes with four key
perspectives on this important program, including how health centers
use the program and the resulting savings to expand access to essential
primary care and drive improved clinical outcomes.
Thank you for the invitation to serve as a witness at this hearing
and to highlight the vital importance of the 340B program to health
centers nationwide.
Background on Health Centers and the Creation of the 340B Program
Community Health Centers ensure that underserved patients have
access to quality comprehensive primary care
Community Health Centers--also known as health centers, federally
Qualified Health Centers or FQHCs--are the backbone of our Nation's
primary care safety net. Our fundamental characteristic is a commitment
to ensuring everyone has access to high-quality, comprehensive primary
care regardless of demographic, geographic, and socioeconomic barriers.
By law and by mission, health centers serve areas and populations that
the Federal Government has determined to be medically underserved, and
we are required to provide services without regard to a patient's
ability to pay. Nationally, almost a quarter of health center patients
are uninsured, and over 70 percent of them have incomes below the
Federal Poverty Level (FPL); for those patients with incomes below the
FPL, they pay no more than a nominal fee for the full range of services
we provide. An additional 20 percent of patients have incomes between
101 percent and 200 percent FPL, these patients are charged discounted
rates based on a sliding fee scale.
All health centers provide their patients with access to a
comprehensive range of primary and preventive health care services, and
many also provide dental, mental health, and substance use disorder
services. In addition, health centers provide a wide array of care
management, patient education, and assistive services that support
access to care, promote enhanced clinical outcomes, and reduce total
costs across the health care system. Over two-thirds of health centers
serve as Primary Care Medical Homes, which demonstrates health centers'
commitment to patient-focused quality and comprehensive care.
Another core characteristic of health centers is how they are
governed--namely, by their patients. Each health center organization is
an independent, non-profit corporation governed by its own Board of
Directors, and a majority of each Board's members must be actual
patients of that health center. This structure ensures that each health
center remains directly responsive to the unique needs of its patients
and community. In an era of increasing consolidation among health care
providers, health centers are local, community-based organizations.
The creation of 340B reduced drug prices for health centers and
expanded access for their patients
The creation of the 340B program in 1992 played a critical role in
health centers' ability to provide affordable care for underserved
populations. Prior to that time, the majority of health centers were
unable to offer pharmaceutical services for their patients, as the
costs of the drugs were often beyond their reach. Thus, the health
centers wrote prescriptions for medically necessary drugs that patients
often could not afford to fill at commercial pharmacies. As small,
community-based providers, health centers lacked the market power to
negotiate significant discounts off the sticker price. And while
Patient Assistance Programs (PAPs) were available, the amount of
paperwork involved and the narrow scope of the programs significantly
limited the degree to which health centers could help their patients
access the drugs they needed.
This situation was compounded in 1991 upon creation of the Medicaid
Drug Rebate Program (MDRP). An unintended consequence of the MDRP
resulted in drug manufacturers becoming concerned that selling drugs to
non-Medicaid purchasers at discounted prices could increase their
exposure to higher Medicaid rebates. That fear caused them to pull back
on some of the discounts they had historically provided to safety net
providers. In response, Congress created the 340B program as part of
the Veterans Health Care Act of 1992, which also provided similar
relief to the VA.
The 340B program established maximum prices that manufacturers
could charge safety net providers for drugs. For those health centers
that had the resources to operate their own pharmacies, the creation of
340B was a critical moment in their ability to offer affordable
medications to their patients. As discussed below, the ability to
realize savings on 340B drugs provided to insured patients also
provided resources to expand access to other services for health
centers' low-income, medically underserved population.
NACHC Activities to Support Health Centers' 340B Operations and
Compliance
My interest in maintaining the scope and integrity of the 340B Drug
Pricing Program relates to my dual role as both a health center CEO and
a NACHC consultant. As President and CEO of Carolina Health Centers,
Inc. (CHC) I provide leadership and oversight for a comprehensive
health center program of which pharmacy services are an integral part.
CHC opened its first in-house pharmacy, Carolina Community Pharmacy
(CCP), in 2005. Our pharmacy program has grown to include two stand-
alone community pharmacy locations, daily delivery of prescriptions to
our 12 medical practice sites for our patients living in very rural
areas, and a new initiative to integrate clinical pharmacists into the
patient care teams at our medical practices. My health center made the
strategic decision to implement 340B using an in-house model, meaning
that we own and operate the pharmacy and manage it under the governance
of CHCs' community-based/patient majority Board of Directors. We
operate as an ``open'' pharmacy meaning that prescriptions are filled
for both health center patients and the general public, although only
prescriptions for CHC patients may be filled using 340B purchased
inventory. This ``open'' model serves as a gateway to engaging people
in a primary care medical home, reducing the use of urgent and
emergency care, and promoting chronic disease management. Of all
prescriptions dispensed through CHCs' sites in 2016, only 33 percent
were covered by a third-party payer and 17 percent were delivered to
outlying rural practice sites where patients have limited access to
retail pharmacies.
My individual health center's experience is offered as context for
my role as a NACHC consultant. Approximately 5 years ago, NACHC
convened a 340B Work Group, in recognition of the importance of
pharmacy to health centers' overall model of care, and the vital role
of the 340B Drug Pricing Program in enabling health centers to
implement pharmacy services. I was honored to be asked to chair the
Work Group, which meets face to face twice a year at major NACHC
conferences as well as by teleconference on an as needed basis. Since
that time, we have also convened a 340B Key Contacts group comprised of
at least one representative from each of the state and regional Primary
Care Associations (PCA). Together, these two groups provide tremendous
insight into how different health centers across the Nation
operationalize their 340B program as they work to increase access to
care and expand services in response to the needs of the communities
they serve. These groups have also helped NACHC to identify best
practice models and develop strategies for training and technical
assistance (TA) focused on 340B implementation and compliance, as well
as identifying challenges health centers encounter in their attempts to
optimize the value of the program for their patients.
In 2016, I became an official consultant for NACHC, and my
activities since that time have included the following:
Fourteen state-specific 340B Summits: These Summits,
which included health centers covering 16 states, last from 1-2
days at the discretion of the PCA, and are targeted to both the
C-Suite and pharmacy leadership. In advance, I research the
state-specific environment, including by surveying the health
center membership, to ensure that the material is reflective of
their specific situations. To date, we have provided this
training for health centers in 16 states, and three more are
scheduled for the near future.
NACHC conferences and trainings: NACHC has
incorporated 340B program elements throughout its training
curriculum. For example, later this week I will be speaking
about the 340B program at two different sessions as part of
NACHC's spring conference, and next week I will be presenting
on-line as part of NACHC training for Chief Financial Officers.
Also, we recently launched a monthly teleconference called
``340B Office Hours'' which allows the health center 340B
community to have a dialog around operational and compliance
questions.
Health-center-specific sessions at 340B Coalition
Conferences: Because of the unique issues that health centers
encounter when operating a 340B program, we collaborate with
340B Health--the organization that coordinates the twice-yearly
340B Coalition Conference--to include sessions that are
specific to health centers during their semi-annual
conferences.
340B technical assistance email: We have created an
email address for health centers seeking technical assistance
with 340B issues. To date, we have responded to hundreds of
individual questions and requests for assistance via this
email.
Note that NACHC consults with Apexus--the 340B Prime Vendor--to
ensure that all training and technical assistance activities are
aligned. I serve as faculty for the Apexus' in-person trainings (called
``340B University'') and serve on one of its Advisory Councils. Apexus
also serves as a first line of response when addressing individual TA
requests, and has recently created a special version of 340B University
to specifically address health centers' unique circumstances.
What follows are four observations related to health center
participation in the 340B Drug Pricing Program--notably, the value it
brings to patients and communities served.
Four Health Center Perspectives on the 340B Program
1. Health centers are good stewards of the 340B program.
The health center mission and model of care are consistent with the
congressional intent of the 340B Drug Pricing Program--``to stretch
scarce Federal resources as far as possible, reaching more eligible
patients and providing more comprehensive services.'' As such, since
its establishment in 1992, health centers have worked hard to ensure
that they are good stewards of the 340B program. To that end, health
centers ensure that vulnerable patients can afford their medications;
reinvest 340B savings toward purposes that advance health centers'
safety net mission of expanding access for underserved populations; and
adhere to extensive reporting and oversight requirements to demonstrate
that health centers are increasing access to affordable primary health
care.
Health centers work to ensure that low-income
uninsured and underinsured patients can afford to access their
medications purchased through 340B. As discussed above, a
fundamental characteristic shared by all health centers is the
commitment to ensure that patients can access appropriate
medical care, regardless of their insurance status or ability
to pay. As a result of this commitment, health centers use 340B
savings to ensure that low-income patients can afford their
medications. Specifically, health centers use 340B savings both
to offset the cost of providing prescriptions to uninsured and
underinsured patients on an income-based sliding fee scale, and
to finance the considerable resources necessary to leverage
PAPs on behalf of their patients.
Health centers must reinvest all 340B savings into
activities that advance their HHS-approved mission of expanding
access for underserved populations. As the Committee is aware,
the 340B statute does not specify how providers should use the
savings they accrue under 340B. However, the authorizing
statute for the health center program--Section 330 of the
Public Health Service Act requires in Subsection330(e)(5)(D)--
that health centers must reinvest all 340B savings into
activities that further the goals of the health center project
and enable the health center to provide high quality,
affordable care to medically underserved populations. Later, I
will discuss some of the many ways in which health centers use
340B savings to expand access and improve outcomes for their
patients.
Health centers are subject to extensive Federal
oversight and reporting requirements. Each of the more than
1,400 health center organizations are subject to extensive and
on-going oversight from the United States Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS) Health Resources and Services
Administration (HRSA).
The HRSA requirements with which health centers must
comply are spelled out in a 92-page manual and are grouped into
18 major categories, including--but not limited to--clinical
quality, governance structure, financial management and
accountability, ensuring access, and collaboration with other
local providers \1\.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ For a complete listing of all requirements, see the 92-page
Compliance Manual available at: https://bphc.hrsa.gov/
programrequirements/pdf/healthcentercompliancemanual.pdf.
HRSA consistently oversees and enforces compliance
with all of these requirements through a variety of mechanisms,
including: onsite compliance reviews, frequent interactions
with project officers, and regularly scheduled reporting
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
obligations.
HRSA also approves health centers' ``Scope of
Project'', meaning those primary care delivery sites, services,
and providers that are considered part of the health center's
program operations. Only those approved delivery sites and
services that have undergone HRSA scrutiny and are subject to
HRSA's ongoing oversight are eligible to participate in the
340B program--and 340B savings can only be used to support
activities which are consistent with and advance our health
center project.
Each year, health centers must submit extensive data
to HRSA on a wide range of measures, including but not limited
to: patient characteristics, payer mix, services, costs, and
clinical outcomes. The manual with instructions for how to
compile this data is 200 pages long, and each health center's
data is posted publicly on the HRSA website.
2. The 340B program is essential to each health centers' ability to
achieve their congressionally mandated mission of providing affordable
access to care for underserved populations.
Access to affordable prescription medications is recognized by most
medical providers as one of the primary drivers of improved health
outcomes. This point was made emphatically by the Chief Medical Officer
of my health center when he stated: ``To diagnose and not be able to
treat the patient effectively is always an exercise in futility and
sometimes a death sentence.'' Health centers serve as patient-centered
medical homes and are responsible for the overall management of the
health of their patients; however, if patients cannot afford their
prescriptions, health centers will be limited in their ability to treat
acute conditions, manage chronic disease, and optimize their patients'
health outcomes.
Beyond ensuring access to affordable pharmaceuticals, health
centers use 340B savings to support other activities that increase
access and improve outcomes. Here are some examples of ways in which
health centers use 340B savings to increase access to high-quality,
affordable care for their patients:
Implementing delivery systems and mail order pharmacy
programs to ensure access to affordable prescription medication
for health center patients in outlying rural communities with
limited or no access to affordable pharmacy resources. One such
service makes over 25,000 affordable prescriptions accessible
to low-income and underserved persons.
Establishing multidisciplinary Care Transition Teams
providing care management for patients at high risk for repeat
hospital admissions. The model for this program resulted in
savings to their local health care delivery system of over $1.4
million in the first year of the program.
Subsidizing the cost of behavioral health counseling
provided by a local partnering agency onsite at the health
center to low income, uninsured, and underinsured patients who
would either not qualify for, or have long delays in receiving
care from the local mental health agency.
Establishing a pharmacist led interdisciplinary
controlled substance review process with the goal of decreasing
inappropriate prescribing of opioids and the associated patient
morbidity and mortality. This initiative resulted in a 66.2
percent reduction of patients on chronic opioids and cut
premature deaths in half over a 3-year period.
Covering the cost of uncompensated care provided to
patients in communities with high rates of poverty for which
the health center's Section 330 grant funds are inadequate.
Maintaining health center operations in sites where
mitigating circumstances result in higher cost and subsequent
operational losses. Examples of mitigating circumstances are
disproportionate need for unfunded enabling services such as
social work, translation, transportation, and care coordination
or increased cost of provider staffing in difficult to recruit
to rural and frontier areas.
3. The contract pharmacy model enables health centers to expand
access to affordable prescription medications.
While most health centers likely would prefer to implement the 340B
program using an in-house pharmacy, operating an in-house pharmacy can
be daunting and sometimes presents insurmountable barriers. Health
centers might lack space, technology, ability to recruit professional
staff and availability of operating capital to sustain the in-house
pharmacy operation until it reaches a break-even point. Further,
providing access to medications after clinic hours and on weekends may
present an additional drain on limited health center resources.
The ability to contract with more than one pharmacy further
improves health centers' ability to provide for their patients and
ensure access to affordable medications. Health centers with in-house
pharmacies, often find contract pharmacies to be useful tools to expand
patient access, as patients have more pharmacies to choose from,
including those that are closer to their home or work, and have longer
hours than an in-house pharmacy can provide.
Based on my experience with health centers across the country,
there are three primary drivers of a health center decision to
implement 340B using a contract pharmacy arrangement:
Lack of capital and operational resources, as well as
the organizational capacity to support the implementation and
ramp-up to a financial viable pharmacy operation;
Geographic dispersion of the health center's patient
population in small rural areas unable to support a full-scale
pharmacy operation within the health center site; and
Potential disruption to small, locally owned
independent pharmacies, as it would pull away too many
customers for them to remain economically viable, especially in
rural areas.
It is worth noting that savings that health centers achieve though
a 340B contract pharmacy arrangement may provide the resources
necessary to implement an in-house pharmacy program moving forward,
which, in my experience, appears to be an evolving trend.
4. A ``one size fits all'' approach to program changes could have
unintended consequences.
At present, approximately 15 types of health care providers are
eligible to participate in 340B. From an administrative perspective, it
might seem simpler to implement a single set of rules that apply
equally to all 15 types of eligible providers. However, a ``one-size-
fits-all'' approach when making changes to the 340B program could
potentially have unintended consequences for one entity and even
further unintended consequences for another type of entity.
For example, health centers do not provide ``charity care'' in the
generally understood manner of a designated, and perhaps limited,
charity care fund. All FQHCs, by law and by mission, are required to
see all patients, regardless of ability to pay. If health centers were
required to report the amount of ``charity care'' provided, the broader
concept of community benefit would be a more appropriate measure,
though not likely comparable to other covered entity types.
For this reason, when considering any potential 340B changes, we
encourage policymakers to work with health centers to best understand
the responsibilities and requirements that are unique to health centers
and the patients we serve.
Conclusion
As my testimony demonstrates, the 340B program is vital to the
Nation's community health centers, our ability to provide our patients
with access to affordable prescriptions, as well as to support needed
services for our low income and underserved patients. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today and for recognizing the
importance of the 340B program for health centers and the patients we
serve.
______
[Summary Statement of Sue Veer]
A fundamental characteristic of all health centers is the
commitment to ensure access to affordable health care for all
individuals, regardless of ability to pay, with a focus on caring for
populations who would otherwise be underserved. By definition, all
health centers must be located in a medically underserved area and/or
in communities designated as having medically underserved populations.
An effective 340B program is a core element of achieving the goal of
ensuring affordable health care, as it supports the health center's
efforts to ensure that all patients have access to, and can afford, the
medications that they are prescribed. Without the 340B program, many
health centers patients would have no other access to affordable
medication, which plays an essential role in improving individual
patient outcomes as well as overall population health measures.
The relationship between 340B and financial viability is complex
and multidimensional. As mentioned above, access to affordable
medication is essential to the effective treatment and management of
chronic disease, which in turn reduces the need for costly specialty
and inpatient care; thereby reducing the financial burden on the health
care delivery system. The 340B program also enables health centers to
support key patient care services that would otherwise be unfunded, and
therefore unavailable to patients. Finally, access to affordable
prescription medication drives improved clinical outcomes which, in
turn, enable the health center to deliver the results necessary to
secure optimal reimbursement and remain financially viable in a value
based health care delivery system.
My testimony will support the following perspectives:
Health centers are good stewards of the 340B program,
ensuring that low-income uninsured and underinsured patients
can afford to access their medications purchased through 340B.
Health centers reinvest all remaining 340B savings
into activities that advance their HHS-approved mission of
expanding access for underserved populations.
Health centers are subject to extensive Federal
oversight and reporting requirements.
The 340B Drug Pricing Program is essential to health
center's ability to achieve their congressionally mandated
mission of providing affordable access to care for underserved
populations.
The contract pharmacy model enables health centers to
expand access to affordable prescription medication into
communities with limited or no affordable pharmacy resources.
To avoid unintended negative consequences, program
changes must be made with consideration of the responsibilities
and requirements unique to the health centers.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Veer.
Mr. Hill, welcome.
STATEMENT OF JOSEPH M. HILL, III, MA, DIRECTOR, GOVERNMENT
RELATIONS DIVISION, AMERICAN SOCIETY OF HEALTH-SYSTEM
PHARMACISTS, BETHESDA, MD
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member,
and distinguished Members of the Committee for the opportunity
to testify today.
My name is Joseph Hill, and I am the Director of Government
Relations at the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists.
I am here today to provide ASHP's perspective on the 340B Drug
Pricing Program.
ASHP represents pharmacists who serve as patient care
providers in acute and ambulatory settings. The organization's
45,000 members include pharmacists, student pharmacists, and
pharmacy technicians. For more than 75 years, ASHP has been at
the forefront of efforts to improve medication use and enhance
patient safety.
ASHP has a longstanding history of support for the 340B
Drug Pricing Program. Many of our members serve as patient care
providers in hospitals and health systems that are 340B
eligible and have seen, firsthand, the benefits of the Program
to the patients they serve.
Congress enacted the 340B Program 25 years ago with
bipartisan support. Since that time Congress, under control and
support of both parties, has expanded the Program beyond
hospitals to other safety net providers. Together, these
providers serve tens of millions of uninsured and underinsured
people every year.
The increasing shift throughout healthcare toward
ambulatory care and more outpatient pharmacy services has also
contributed to the growth of the 340B Program and has allowed
for better access to medications by low income and uninsured
patients.
It is important to note that the drugs subject to the 340B
Drug Pricing Program make up a fraction of the Nation's total
drug expenditures.
Further, the Program also reduces Government expenditures
and reduces taxpayer burden that would otherwise be responsible
for the indigent care financed through the 340B Program.
Today, the 340B Program continues to meet Congress'
original intent of enabling these entities to stretch scarce
Federal resources as far as possible, reaching more eligible
patients, and providing more comprehensive services.
Access to primary care, behavioral health services,
pharmacist-led substance abuse treatment, provision of naloxone
to law enforcement, discounted or free prescription
medications, and other services for many uninsured and
underinsured patients are made possible only by the savings
realized through the 340B Program. In some communities, there
would be limited or no access to healthcare services without
the 340B Program.
ASHP also recognizes the great importance of Program
compliance and we endorse programs that support both covered
entities and manufacturers. ASHP has partnered with Apexus,
HRSA's contracted 340B Prime Vendor, to improve compliance
through the use of educational training sessions such as the
340B University. This training is available at our midyear
clinical meeting, the largest meeting of pharmacists in the
world, our summer meetings, and our annual conference for
pharmacy leaders.
To date, around 30,000 individuals have participated in the
340B University. The goal of these sessions is to educate our
members and other stakeholders about the Program's
requirements, as well as to provide a forum to discuss
compliance challenges and solutions.
These educational sessions are typically done in panel
format, which allows the unique opportunity for covered
entities to interface with peers, faculty, and pharmaceutical
wholesaler and manufacturer representatives in live sessions.
ASHP believes these programs have had a positive influence
on improving compliance within the 340B Program.
ASHP remains supportive of the 340B Program. We believe it
is a critical component in providing care to uninsured and
underinsured patients, often our Nation's most vulnerable
population.
We also think the Program is especially critical in our
Nation's rural areas where access and ability to pay for care
are often compromised.
We remain committed to working with Congress, HRSA, and
other stakeholders to ensure that the requirements of the
Program are being met and that the Program functions as
intended.
As we have worked with the Committee in the past, on a
number of important public health issues, including drug
shortages and compounding, ASHP welcomes the opportunity to be
a resource for the Committee on this issue, as well as other
issues pertaining to the practice of pharmacy, or healthcare in
general.
Again, we thank the Committee for the opportunity to
provide input, and I look forward to answering any question you
may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hill follows:]
prepared statement of joseph m. hill iii
Good morning, and thank you, Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member
Murray, and distinguished Members of the Committee, for the opportunity
to testify today. My name is Joseph Hill, and I am the Director of the
Government Relations Division for ASHP, the American Society of Health-
System Pharmacists. I am here today to provide ASHP's perspective on
the 340B Drug Pricing Program.
ASHP represents pharmacists who serve as patient care providers in
acute and ambulatory settings. The organization's 45,000 members
include pharmacists, student pharmacists, and pharmacy technicians. For
more than 75 years, ASHP has been at the forefront of efforts to
improve medication use and enhance patient safety.
ASHP appreciates the opportunity to provide our views to the
Committee on the 340B Drug Pricing Program. ASHP has a longstanding
history of support for the 340B drug-pricing program, as many of our
members serve as patient care providers in hospitals and health systems
that are 340B-eligible and have seen, firsthand, the benefits of the
program to the patients they serve. \1\ At a time when Federal budgets
are stretched thin, the Federal 340B program helps maximize Federal
resources while providing access to lifesaving medications.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ASHP's full policy on the 340B Drug Pricing Program
Sustainability is as follows: (1) To affirm the intent of the Federal
drug pricing program (the ``340B program'') to stretch scarce Federal
resources as far as possible, reaching more eligible patients and
providing more comprehensive services; (2) further, to advocate
legislation or regulation that would optimize access to the 340B
program in accordance with the intent of the program; (3) further, to
advocate for clarification and simplification of the 340B program and
any future Federal discount drug pricing programs with respect to
program definitions, eligibility, and compliance measures to ensure the
integrity of the program; (4) further, to encourage pharmacy leaders to
provide appropriate stewardship of the 340B program by documenting the
expanded services and access created by the program; (5) further, to
educate pharmacy leaders and health-system administrators about the
internal partnerships and accountabilities and the patient-care
benefits of program participation; (6) further, to educate health-
system administrators, risk managers, and pharmacists about the
resources (e.g., information technology) required to support 340B
program compliance and documentation; (7) further, to encourage
communication and education concerning expanded services and access
provided by 340B participants to patients in fulfillment of its
mission.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress enacted the 340B drug-pricing program 25 years ago with
bipartisan support. \2\ The program requires pharmaceutical
manufacturers participating in the Medicaid or Medicare Part B programs
to enter into a pharmaceutical pricing agreement (PPA) with the Federal
Government. \3\ The terms of the PPA require manufacturers to provide
discounts on covered outpatient drugs purchased by specified safety net
providers, known as ``covered entities,'' that serve the Nation's most
vulnerable patient populations. On several occasions since that time,
Congress, under the control and support of both parties, has expanded
the program to other hospitals that are part of the Nation's safety
net. Covered entities include not only hospitals serving many low-
income patients (disproportionate share hospitals [DSHs], rural
referral centers, critical access hospitals [CAHs], children's
hospitals, and cancer hospitals), but also several other types of
safety net providers including federally qualified health centers
(FQHCs), state and local health departments, HIV clinics, and
hemophilia treatment centers. \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Veterans Health Care Act of 1992, Public Law No. 102-09585,
Sec.
602, 106 Stat. 4943, codified as Section 340B of the Public
Health Service Act at 42 U.S.C. Sec.
256b
\3\ HRSA, Pharmaceutical Pricing Agreement, available at http://
www.hrsa.gov/opa/manufacturers/pharmaceuticalpricingagreement.pdf.
\4\ 42 U.S.C. Sec.
256b(a)(4).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Together, these providers serve tens of millions of uninsured and
underinsured people every year.
The increasing shift throughout healthcare toward ambulatory care
including more outpatient pharmacy services has contributed to the
growth of the 340B program and has allowed for better access to
medications by low-income and uninsured patients. It is important to
note that drugs subject to the 340B drug-pricing program make up a
fraction of the Nation's total drug expenditures. Further, the Federal
340B program also reduces government expenditures and lessens the
burden on taxpayers who would otherwise be responsible for financing
the indigent care that Federal 340B-participating hospitals provide.
Today, the Federal 340B program continues to meet Congress'
original intent ``of enabling these entities to stretch scarce Federal
resources as far as possible, reaching more eligible patients and
providing more comprehensive services.'' Access to primary care;
behavioral health services; pharmacist-led substance abuse treatment;
expanded pharmacy services; provision of naloxone to law enforcement;
discounted or free prescription medications; pediatrics; and other
services for many uninsured and underinsured are made possible only by
the savings realized through the 340B program. In some communities,
there would be limited or no access to healthcare services without the
financial savings garnered through the 340B program.
In September 2011, the Government Accountability Office (GAO),
issued a study of the Federal 340B program and found that, in large
part, the program is operating as originally intended. \5\
Specifically, the GAO found that ``all covered entities reported using
the program in ways consistent with its purpose'' and that ``all
covered entities reported that program participation allowed them to
maintain services and lower medication costs for patients.'' GAO did
make several recommendations for improving program oversight and
specifically called on the Health Resources and Services Administration
(HRSA) to be more proactive in administering the program. As a result,
HRSA has significantly increased the number of audits of covered
entities to help ensure compliance with program requirements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ GAO-11-836: Published: Sep 23, 2011. Publicly Released: Sep 23,
2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASHP also recognizes the great importance of program compliance,
and we endorse programs that support the covered entities as well as
manufacturers. ASHP has partnered with Apexus, HRSA's contracted 340B
prime vendor, to improve compliance through the use of educational
training sessions. ASHP continues to collaborate with Apexus to provide
training programs, known as the 340B University, at our prominent and
widely attended Midyear Clinical Meeting, the largest gathering of
pharmacists in the world; our Summer Meetings; and our annual
Conference for Pharmacy Leaders. To date, about 30,000 individuals have
participated in the 340B University. The goal of these sessions is to
educate our members and other stakeholders about the program's
requirements as well as to provide a forum to discuss compliance
challenges and solutions. These are typically done in panel format,
which allows the unique opportunity for covered entities to interface
with peers, the faculty, and pharmaceutical wholesaler and manufacturer
representatives in live sessions. ASHP believes these programs have had
a positive influence on improving compliance within the 340B program.
ASHP remains supportive of the 340B program; we believe it is a
critical component for safety-net providers to provide care to
uninsured and underinsured patients. Safety net providers are
especially critical in our Nation's rural areas, where access and
ability to pay for care are often compromised. We remain committed to
working with HRSA and other 340B program stakeholders to ensure that
the requirements of the program are being met and that the program
functions as intended.
As we have worked with the Committee in the past on a number of
important public health issues including drug shortages and
compounding, ASHP welcomes the opportunity to be a resource for the
Committee on this issue, as well as other issues pertaining to the
practice of pharmacy or healthcare in general. Again, we thank the
Committee for the opportunity to provide input.
______
[Summary Statement of Joseph Hill III]
Good morning, and thank you, Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member
Murray, and distinguished Members of the Committee for the opportunity
to testify today. My name is Joseph Hill, and I am the Director of
Government Relations at the American Society of Health-System
Pharmacists. I am here today to provide ASHP's perspective on the 340B
Drug Pricing Program.
ASHP represents pharmacists who serve as patient care providers in
acute and ambulatory settings. The organization's 45,000 members
include pharmacists, student pharmacists, and pharmacy technicians. For
more than 75 years, ASHP has been at the forefront of efforts to
improve medication use and enhance patient safety.
ASHP has a longstanding history of support for the 340B drug-
pricing program. Many of our members serve as patient care providers in
hospitals and health systems that are 340B-eligible and have seen,
firsthand, the benefits of the program to the patients they serve.
Congress enacted the 340B program 25 years ago with bipartisan support.
Since that time, Congress, under the control and support of both
parties, has expanded the program beyond hospitals to other safety-net
providers. Together, these providers serve tens of millions of
uninsured and underinsured people every year.
The increasing shift throughout healthcare toward ambulatory care
including more outpatient pharmacy services has contributed to the
growth of the 340B program and has allowed for better access to
medications by low-income and uninsured patients. It is important to
note that drugs subject to the 340B drug-pricing program make up a
fraction of the Nation's total drug expenditures. Further, the program
also reduces government expenditures, and it reduces taxpayer burden
that would otherwise be responsible for the indigent care financed by
the 340B program.
Today, the 340B program continues to meet Congress's original
intent ``of enabling these entities to stretch scarce Federal resources
as far as possible, reaching more eligible patients and providing more
comprehensive services.'' Access to primary care; behavioral health
services; pharmacist-led substance abuse treatment; provision of
naloxone to law enforcement; discounted or free prescription
medications; pediatrics; and other services for many uninsured and
underinsured are made possible only by the savings realized through the
340B program. In some communities, there would be limited or no access
to healthcare services without the 340B program.
ASHP also recognizes the great importance of program compliance,
and we endorse programs that support both covered entities and
manufacturers. ASHP has partnered with Apexus, HRSA's contracted 340B
prime vendor, to improve compliance through the use of educational
training sessions, such as the 340B University. This training is
available at our Midyear Clinical Meeting, the largest gathering of
pharmacists in the world; our Summer Meetings; and our annual
conference for Pharmacy Leaders. To date, about 30,000 individuals have
participated in the 340B University. The goal of these sessions is to
educate our members and other stakeholders about the program's
requirements as well as to provide a forum to discuss compliance
challenges and solutions. These educational sessions are typically done
in panel format, which allows the unique opportunity for covered
entities to interface with peers, faculty, and pharmaceutical
wholesaler and manufacturer representatives in live sessions. ASHP
believes these programs have had a positive influence on improving
compliance within the 340B program.
ASHP remains supportive of the Federal 340B program. We believe it
is a critical component in providing care to uninsured and underinsured
patients--our nation's most vulnerable population. The program is
especially critical in our Nation's rural areas, where access and
ability to pay for care are often compromised. We remain committed to
working with Congress, HRSA, and other stakeholders to ensure that the
requirements of the program are being met and that the program
functions as intended.
As we have worked with the Committee in the past on a number of
important public health issues including drug shortages and
compounding, ASHP welcomes the opportunity to be a resource for the
Committee on this issue, as well as other issues pertaining to the
practice of pharmacy or healthcare in general. Again, we thank the
Committee for the opportunity to provide input, and I look forward to
answering any questions you may have.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Hill, and thanks to all four
of you for being here and for excellent testimony. We will read
the statements that you submitted.
We will now begin a 5 minute round of questions beginning
with Senator Cassidy.
Senator Cassidy. Thank you all for being here.
First, let me establish my street credentials. I worked in
a public hospital in Louisiana taking care of the uninsured for
25 years and still am nominally, at least, still go to clinic
every now and then. And so, I know the importance of what Ms.
Veer and Dr. Siegel speak of. And I actually think that is
common ground.
Everybody recognizes that there are patients, and community
health clinics, and safety net hospitals that appropriately
benefit from the 340B. I do not think that is the issue.
But it is important to move beyond, if you will, rhetoric
and anecdote and look at objective facts.
If I may, Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to issue a
few of the following studies, which are rigorous analyses,
nonpartisan, third party researchers regarding the problems
with 340B.
First, an NYU-Harvard research published in the ``New
England Journal of Medicine,'' of February this year found no
evidence that 340B revenue went to help lower income patients
in ways that reduce mortality, and that 340B eligibility
prompted hospitals to treat fewer Medicaid patients without
increasing quality; ``New England Journal of Medicine,''
Harvard, and NYU.
Secondly, a 2017 ``Journal of Oncology'' article showing
that physician practices being consolidated due to 340B
hospitals using the revenue to buy up their practices drives up
the cost of commercial insurance.
Next, the ``New England Journal of Medicine'' article from
the University of Chicago and Harvard from 2016 suggesting,
quote, ``Lawmakers could lower the price of prescription drugs
by reforming the Federal 340B Drug Pricing Program.''
Next, 2014, from a Memorial Sloan-Kettering ``Health
Affairs'' article, researchers from the University of Chicago
also, quote, ``Support the criticism that the 340B program is
being converted from one that serves vulnerable patient
populations to one that enriches hospitals and their affiliated
clinics.''
2014, the Office of Inspector General found that some
covered entities that dispense 340B-purchased drugs to Medicaid
beneficiaries through contract pharmacies did not report
methods to avoid duplicate discounts.
Next, GAO, ``Our work suggests 340B hospitals may be
responding to financial incentive associated with the Program
to maximize Medicare revenue.''
2011, the GAO concluded, quote, ``Program integrity issues
may take on greater significance unless effective mechanisms to
monitor and address Program violations are put into place.''
Finally, 2017, OIG testimony noting that a continued lack
of transparency that prevents accurate payments by 340B
providers, State Medicaid programs, and manufacturers; and two,
a lack of clarity regarding Program rules.
The Chairman. They will be included in the record.
Senator Cassidy. I will note that some of these 340B
hospitals are actually extending the Program benefit to
cosmetic clinics, and into clinics and hospitals that serve
wealthy clientele using the primary site; which may be 340B
buying hospitals in wealthy suburbs and then taking a program,
ostensibly for the poor, and making it a cash cow for the
system.
Now, Dr. Siegel, I admire the work your hospitals do.
Obviously, we have hospitals in Louisiana as part of your
coalition.
But when you say there should be no restrictions or changes
to the 340B Program, can you really defend a cosmetic clinic
benefiting from 340B?
Dr. Siegel. Thank you, Senator, and thank you for your
leadership, and also for the work you did at our member systems
and hospitals in Louisiana. Greatly appreciate that.
I cannot speak to the cosmetic clinic, although if a
cosmetic clinic were dealing with burn patients, many of whom--
--
Senator Cassidy. Usually, those would be in a burn unit. It
would not be a place doing blepharoplasty.
Dr. Siegel. But it might also be, sir, a place which has
post-discharge patients.
Senator Cassidy. Let us just take the theoretical. It is a
cosmetic clinic that does blepharoplasty. It is all cash. It is
340B.
Should they benefit from the 340B Program?
Dr. Siegel. They should benefit from the 340B Program if
they fall under the rules of the Program.
Senator Cassidy. You want no change in the rule, even
though I have this stack tumbling out of my hands showing that
there are abuses that are driving up the cost of drugs for
others, and the cost of commercial insurance for all.
There should be no change in the 340B?
Dr. Siegel. Those studies are deeply flawed studies. Let me
speak to a couple of them.
Senator Cassidy. Now hang on. Just so I may say.
Dr. Siegel. Yes.
Senator Cassidy. I think I did ten studies: NYU, Harvard,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering, the University of Chicago, OIG, GAO,
and each of these are deeply flawed?
Dr. Siegel. Yes.
The GAO study, for instance, talks about the increased Part
B spending for 340B hospitals. Does it account for the
difference in health status of the patients who go to 340B
hospitals rather than others? It does not.
Senator Cassidy. It did a regression analysis looking at
the difference in patient populations.
Dr. Siegel. Actually, HHS actually critiqued that study on
those same grounds, the ones I just noted.
Senator Cassidy. The one recently in the ``New England
Journal of Medicine''?
Dr. Siegel. Excluded many 340B hospitals from consideration
and also----
Senator Cassidy. No, I know. So I accept that there are----
I am sorry. I am out of time and I will yield back after
this point.
That is the trick. I do not want to offend you, but there
is a certain lack of forthrightness.
Your good work is presented as typical of all 340B's.
Clinics, safety net hospitals, this is the face of 340B, when
there is a whole stack of evidence that non-340B hospitals may
provide more charity care than many 340B hospitals.
Although you are the face, and you are a very good face;
nice face, Dr. Siegel.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Siegel. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Senator Cassidy. But we have to concede, or maybe you do
not have to concede, but the evidence concedes that there are
hospitals, which are not taking care of charity patients, and
which come upon your coattails, if you will, to justify that
which is an income stream, but not serving the original
purpose.
I may stay around for a second round, and I apologize to my
colleagues for going over.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cassidy.
Senator Hassan.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you and the Ranking Member for holding this hearing.
Dr. Siegel, because I do not want to use up too much of my
time, I may try to give you some opportunity to respond a
little bit more to Senator Cassidy's comments in just a minute.
First of all, I just want to note that in New Hampshire, we
have 13 340B hospitals that rely on the Program in order to
help them stretch Federal dollars, so that they can help
provide benefits to other communities.
Dartmouth-Hitchcock, for example, is one of the few rural
academic medical centers in the country, and 340B is vitally
important to them and the communities that they serve.
Because of 340B, Dartmouth-Hitchcock saves about $43
million each year. And in 2016, they provided more than $172
million in community benefits to help improve the health of the
Granite State. In New Hampshire, this includes helping to fight
the opioid epidemic.
In fact, just at the beginning of this month, Dartmouth-
Hitchcock made a contribution to a community organization in
Claremont, New Hampshire to assist with the opioid epidemic
after programs were forced to scale back because of a lack of
state funding.
Dr. Siegel, can you comment on the role of the 340B Program
specifically for rural hospitals like Dartmouth-Hitchcock and
how it impacts their ability to provide community benefits?
Dr. Siegel. Thank you, Senator. I appreciate the question.
A place like Dartmouth-Hitchcock, or other 340B hospitals,
has a really unique role to play in their community.
Unfortunately, opponents of the Program have continued to
characterize the Program as simply existing only to provide
charity care to people. If you look at a Dartmouth-Hitchcock,
it goes far beyond that.
Senator Hassan. Yes.
Dr. Siegel. These hospitals are providing not just charity
care. They are providing care, under-reimbursed care, to
Medicaid patients. They are suffering through bad debt, bills
that are not paid, for they provide that care readily and
happily.
They provide the burn unit, the trauma center. They are out
in the community dealing with food insecurity, dealing with
housing; just a whole range of things that make communities
better and more vibrant.
Senator Hassan. Yes.
Dr. Siegel. We need to keep that in mind when we talk about
the benefits of the 340B Program.
Charity care is one measure; just one.
Senator Hassan. Yes, and it is really important for people
to understand that charity care is often care for people who do
not have insurance, but there is a whole lot of under
reimbursed care like Medicaid. New Hampshire is one of the
lower Medicaid reimbursers in the country, for instance.
I also want to touch a little bit on some of the criticism
around transparency because I think it is really important that
we make sure that the 340B Program is operating as Congress
intended and helping support these safety net providers, so
that they can provide care, as you have just described.
We have heard about transparency as it relates to 340B, but
I have to say, I think the place we most need transparency is
in drug pricing. I wish stakeholders, with all due respect to
Ms. Reilly, like PhRMA, advocated as strongly for transparency
in the pricing of their own members' products as they have
advocated for transparency in 340B.
For example, the big drug makers claim to set their prices
to recoup research and development costs, but many think much
of the money goes to things like marketing campaigns and
profits.
But there is no transparency in their pricing. So they get
away with hiking up prices to reap profits without being held
accountable, all while everyday Americans struggle with drug
prices.
Dr. Siegel, I am interested in your thoughts about that.
Dr. Siegel. Thank you, Senator.
First, I want to just note that as we talk about prices,
and you mentioned marketing and those sorts of things, the top
ten drug makers in America spend about $100 billion a year on
marketing every year and advertising.
The discount of this Program is $6 billion. Let us just
make sure we compare those two.
We talk about transparency. Hospitals are leaders in
transparency. I mean, we really began the movement toward
transparency in the National Voluntary Hospital Reporting
Initiative 20 years ago. We are proud of that and we still
stick to that. When we look at the drug manufacturers, we do
not see that.
Just today, if you look at something like the average
manufacturer price, which is how we set this ceilings price for
the 340B programs, we do not know where that number comes from.
There are legal things that allow in law drug companies not to
disclose that data and the information is not even reviewed in
the few audits that HRSA has done of manufacturers. It is a
black box.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you. I want to just get your
thoughts.
If the 340B Program were restricted or rolled back in any
way, do you think manufacturers would reduce drug costs?
Dr. Siegel. No.
Senator Hassan. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Hassan.
Senator Smith.
Senator Smith. Thank you, Chairman Alexander.
Thank you all for being here today.
I appreciate hearing about the 340B Program today, which is
such an important strategy for lowering the cost of drugs,
especially for rural hospitals and community health plans. Ms.
Veer, I appreciate your comments about community health plans.
Just today, I had an opportunity to meet with a large group
of them from Minnesota and their message was loud and clear on
how important it is and also they are really providing a
foundation access to healthcare all over the state.
I wanted to just say, yesterday I heard from a woman from
Minnesota, her name was Rachel, who visited my office. She is a
military vet and a new mom. She was diagnosed with Stage IV
lung cancer at the age of 31.
Now last year, the price for just one of her drugs was
$16,000 every month. And this year, the cost of her drug
increased to $20,000 every month. So even with insurance, she
is paying over $15,000 out of pocket for her medicine, which is
just completely unconscionable, it seems to me.
Given that the huge burden of drug prices that have been
placed on families like Rachel's, it seems like we ought to be
doing everything we can to lower drug prices and bring those
prices down.
Yet, in the United States, spending adjusted after net
prices--that is the actual amount that the manufacturers get
back from selling their products--on prescription drugs reached
$323 billion in 2016 and it grew by almost 5 percent from the
previous year.
It seems like prices are just out of control and as I said,
it is the No. 1 thing I hear about in Minnesota, the No. 1
economic issue.
Last month it was reported by Axios, that the number of
leading pharmaceutical organizations, companies, are using a
large portion of the windfall from the tax bill, not to lower
drug prices, but to improve stock prices and to benefit their
investors.
My question to you, Ms. Reilly, is can you help me
understand why the American people like Rachel, like my
constituent, should not be outraged that they are paying so
much for prescription drugs when revenues for the big drug
companies are going up nearly 25 percent?
Over $55 million is being spent on lobbying, this is
according to a ``Politico'' article, and that the salaries of
your CEO's range from $2 million to $17 million a year. Help me
understand how that can make sense for Americans.
Ms. Reilly. First of all, thank you for your question and
also, thank you for raising an important issue.
In my mind, we do have an issue in terms of patients often
being able to afford and access their therapies. There is no
doubt about that.
We have been strongly on record to say that we believe that
the discounts and rebates that our companies provide--whether
it is to hospitals that participate in the 340B Program where
discounts range at 50 percent, or to commercial payers where
often the average rebate is 40 percent--actually make it back
to those patients who are in need of being helped.
Today, unfortunately, there is no requirement that those
rebates, whether they are in 340B or whether they are provided
to commercial payers, actually are passed back to patients who
need them. In fact, quite the opposite is happening.
In hospitals today, the average hospital mark-up on a
prescription medicine is 500 percent. They are then reimbursed
two-and-a-half times what the manufacturer receives. Patients'
co-insurance and co-pays are based off of that amount.
Patients' premiums are taken into account.
Yes, more does need to be done to ensure that patients can
access and afford their medicine. But today, unfortunately,
many policies that are in place by insurance companies,
hospitals, and others are not mandating that the discounts we
are providing make it to the patients that need them.
Senator Smith. But my question to you is when people are
just trying to figure out how to pay their bills, and they are
looking at the amount of money that your organization is
spending on lobbying and the amount of money.
The head of your organization, according to ``Politico,''
made somewhere in the neighborhood of $2.8 million last year.
How can we explain that to people?
Ms. Reilly. Again, I think for patients who cannot afford
their medicines, that is the purpose of insurance.
But today what we have going on is a perversity of
insurance where instead of healthy people subsidizing the sick,
we have turned our system into one where sick people are
subsidizing healthy with the incidence of high deductible
health plans, high co-insurance.
Many patients today with cancer, when they go to pick up
their medicine, they are asked to pay 40 percent of a list
price of a medicine that is not reflective of the rich
discounts and rebates that our companies provide. That needs to
change, because patients are struggling to afford their
medicines.
We are committed to helping them, whether it is through the
discounts we provide in 340B, to commercial payers, or the free
programs that our companies provide to patients that lack
insurance.
Senator Smith. Mr. Chairman, I know I am out of time, but I
want to just close by noting that the average Minnesotan makes
about $65,000 a year; half of them make less than that.
That means that the head of your organization is making as
much in a week as they are making in a year, and I think that
is what people are looking at as they are trying to understand
what is going on with prescription drug prices.
Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Smith.
Senator Kaine.
Senator Kaine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, to the witnesses.
Mr. Chairman, if I might. This panel is a very important
one because this Program is important and I appreciate the
Committee calling this hearing. It does strike me that the
first five questions I have had pop into my mind, as I have
heard the witnesses testify, are questions that I want to
direct to HRSA.
I hope we might consider having, at least, another hearing
where we could engage HRSA on the same discussion.
The Chairman. Well, thanks, Senator Kaine. We will have at
least one more hearing on 340B, and that is a very good
suggestion about inviting HRSA, and we will try to do that.
Senator Kaine. Excellent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This is a critical Program. Others have talked about its
importance in their own state. In Virginia, there are 22
hospitals that are participants in the 340B Program and a whole
range of other safety net providers, community health centers,
free clinics, and others.
One example, just to give you one, Riverside Hospital
Health System in Virginia receives about $36 million of
discounts a year under the 340B Program. They are very, very
active including in some really hard to reach parts of the
state. There is only one hospital on the Eastern Shore of
Virginia, for example. That is a Riverside hospital and the
340B Program is absolutely critical to them. We have had rural
hospitals in Virginia close. A lot of them are just on-the-
edge.
We have a community health center in Tangier, which is an
island in the middle of the Chesapeake Bay that is extremely
hard to get to. Riverside helps staff it. It is a community
health center; 340B is very, very important to that program.
I wanted to ask, this is a question probably for Dr. Siegel
and Ms. Veer and Mr. Hill, but Ms. Reilly, you may want to
address it as well.
HRSA announced, I guess, January 1 as the subject of
litigation that there is going to be a 28.5 percent reduction
in the reimbursement rate under the 340B. I know that is in
their litigation and going back and forth.
But if that were to go into effect today, talk about the
effect that would have upon the institutions and companies that
you are here to represent.
Dr. Siegel. Thank you, Senator.
First of all, I can say that cut, as unfortunate as it is,
is going to lead to individual hospitals, some of them losing
millions of dollars a year in payment for services they are
already providing. That cut boggles the mind.
It basically says, ``If you have more than your share of
Medicaid patients and poor people,'' and that is why you are in
the Program. The rules are pretty clear. ``We have decided as a
matter of policy, we are going to pay you less under Medicare.
We are going to punish you.''
They have made a rationale that the reason we are doing
this is because we are going to save beneficiaries money. Over
80 percent of beneficiaries will see no change because of
supplemental insurance that they have.
Senator Kaine. This is a cut in this program, which just
affects the safety net hospitals. That there is not an
equivalent cut, for example, that has been announced on
reimbursement rates to non-340B hospitals.
Dr. Siegel. That is correct. It is a targeted cut that
affects 340B hospitals.
By the way, drug companies will probably recoup because it
is about $70 million potentially. And that was a MedPAC
projection.
Let us be clear about what this is and how really
unconscionable it is.
Senator Kaine. I only have a minute left. Ms. Reilly, I
will have you next. Maybe I will just go in order.
Ms. Reilly, go ahead.
Ms. Reilly. I would say our discounts do not change under
this policy, so nothing about that policy impacts the discounts
that we have to provide.
I would also just say that while it is a cut to hospitals
in one sense, it only affects 13 percent of the profit margin
hospitals receive from 340B, and that money is redistributed to
hospitals.
I think 75 percent of all hospitals come out at the same,
if not slightly better, than what they do under the current
rule.
Senator Kaine. But the 25 percent that come out worse are
the ones that are the safety net hospitals.
Ms. Reilly. I do not know that is accurate. Twenty-five
percent of hospitals will receive less money than they did
under the current plan. But again, they still have 87 percent
of their profit coming from outside of that cut.
Senator Kaine. Ms. Veer.
Ms. Veer. Yes. This rule does not directly affect the
health centers, but I think what we are concerned about is the
signal that it sends regarding the concept of discriminatory
pricing from the payers.
Senator Kaine. Mr. Hill, how about from your perspective?
Mr. Hill. I think our view would be mainly around how the
program allows pharmacists to provide more advanced patient
care services. We could be talking about pharmacist-led opioid
stewardship program. In some cases, pharmacists actually make
house calls, involves other health professional too, but we
work for a pharmacy group, so I am going to focus on
pharmacists.
I think our concern is the ability of hospitals to utilize
clinical pharmacists and not have the proper funding to account
for this.
Senator Kaine. The cut may restrict their ability to use
pharmacy services.
Mr. Hill. Right.
Senator Kaine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Kaine, and we will follow-
up on your suggestion.
Senator Warren.
Senator Warren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The 340B Program helps hospitals and clinics providing care
to the most vulnerable patients--the uninsured, the
underinsured, people with HIV or AIDS, children with cancer--by
requiring drug companies to provide medications at a discounted
price. So, of course, the drug companies are fighting to limit
the program.
I get it. No one likes to be forced to handout a discount.
And I understand why drug companies want to make sure that
these discounts are only going to hospitals that treat people
in need.
But the drug companies have now started attacking the 340B
Program, a drug discount program. I started following the press
reports on this. The argument is that it is contributing to the
problem of high drug prices. That is, that the 340B Discount
Program contributes to the problem of high drug prices.
I just want to look at this for just a second.
Ms. Reilly, your organization called PhRMA, I think is how
it is pronounced, represents drug companies. According to HRSA,
the Government agency that administers the 340B Program--and I
think these were the same data that Senator Alexander just
quoted--drug companies were required to give roughly $6 billion
in 340B discounts in 2015.
Is that about right?
Ms. Reilly. There were $16 billion of sales in 2016 of
340B.
Senator Warren. No, I am not asking a question about sales.
I am asking the question about you were required to give about
$6 billion in discounts.
Ms. Reilly. That is 2015 data. It would be $8 billion in
2016.
Senator Warren. Okay.
Ms. Reilly. You are looking at just the discount, but not
the sales.
Senator Warren. Yes, but that is what I want to know. I
want to know how much you had to give up for this because that
is what creates, to me, the big problem with PhRMA's argument
that the 340B Program raises drug prices.
If 340B did not exist, drug companies would have an extra
$6 billion in their pocket. That is less than 1 percent of
global pharmaceutical sales revenue, which also in 2015 was
$775 billion. Or, if you do not like that comparison, we could
use the size of the U.S. drug market, about $457 billion in
2015. Here the discounts worked out, as Senator Alexander
pointed out, to a whopping 1.3 percent.
But no matter what denominator you use, it is clear that
the total loss to these drug companies, the loss that they are
kicking and screaming about right now, is a tiny fraction of
the many billions of dollars that they pull down every year in
profits.
Dr. Siegel, according to an analysis by the Government
Accountability Office, the average profit margin for drug
companies in 2015 was 17.1 percent.
You represent hospitals that serve a large share of
uninsured patients and patients receiving coverage through
Medicaid.
How do the profit margins of the drug companies compare to
the profit margins at your hospitals?
Dr. Siegel. Thank you, Senator Warren.
The drug companies' margins are about 6 times ours, on
average. Our average member is 3 percent. And let me be clear,
many of our members are, frankly, losing money sometimes
millions of dollars per year.
Senator Warren. Ms. Veer, if health centers lost access to
these discounted drugs, do you believe that patients would be
better off or worse off?
Ms. Veer. They would be far worse off. I can think back to
a time when my health center, we are very geographically
disbursed, our patients are, and we implemented a delivery
service to get affordable medication out in those areas.
I think back to before that happened and we had a very
difficult time managing the chronic disease of those patients.
I would also say as it goes to the margin issue, I operate
on anywhere from a 1 to 3 percent margin in my health center at
best. And without 340B, we would see that drop, probably, into
the negative double digits, which would, of course, mean the
resultant cut in services that we could provide.
Senator Warren. A 1 to 3 percent margin compared with a
17.1 percent margin----
Ms. Veer. Yes.
Senator Warren.----profit margin for the drug companies.
I think it is always fair to look for ways to improve a
program like 340B, to make sure it is supporting those who need
it the most. But that is not what the drug companies are doing
right now.
The drug companies are pulling out a trusted Washington
lobbying playbook. They shift the blame for the skyrocketing
cost of prescription drugs onto someone else, blame the
Pharmacy Benefit Managers, blame the insurers, blame the
hospitals, blame anyone else.
But whatever happens, make sure that no one focuses on the
out of control drug prices that the drug companies are
charging; charging, simply because they can.
I believe we should spend some time focusing on the high
cost of prescription drugs instead of chasing around wherever
the drug companies want us to go.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Warren.
Senator Jones.
Senator Jones. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to our panelists.
I have to be honest about this. I feel to some extent what
I am hearing today is just a small microcosm of some of the
biggest dysfunctions that we have in Washington, where we have
one side saying one thing, and another side saying almost
completely the opposite.
It is almost like you are not talking to each other. I
would encourage everybody to try to talk together a little bit
to each other.
But let me just ask a couple of specifics.
Dr. Siegel, we have seen the studies, and I am not sure I
agree with you that the studies that Senator Cassidy--which I
appreciate being put in the record--are all as deeply flawed as
you say.
Do you recognize that there needs to be some changes and
there needs to be some oversight of this Program to make it
more efficient? And if so, briefly, give me some ideas of what
you can do.
Dr. Siegel. I absolutely do recognize that there needs to
be oversight and we are truly stewards, good stewards of the
Program. We go through audits every year or frequently. We go
through annual recertification to be in the Program.
I mean, you do not just wander in to the 340B Program
randomly because somebody said you should be. You have to meet
some rules and meet those every year. And then when you are
audited, you are under potential penalty if you find a problem.
As a matter of fact, if you have three strikes against you
in an audit, you can be thrown out of the Program. So we have
to be stewards of this Program.
Senator Jones. Ms. Reilly, I noticed on several occasions
you shake your head. You did then and I am going to give you a
chance, but I would like for you to go back to Senator Smith's
question which, quite frankly, she gave you two times to answer
and you did not.
Both times, she asked you specifically about the amount of
money being spent on either advertising or other things that
are going to CEO executives, stock buybacks, stock prices,
those kinds of things. And each time, you kind of flipped it
back on the hospitals and the providers.
I would like for you to address what Dr. Siegel just said,
as well as the issue where I first noticed it, where you were
talking about the amount of advertising money that is being
spent, $100-something billion versus $6 billion.
Kind of reconcile that for me a little bit.
Ms. Reilly. Sure.
Senator Jones. Because I think Senator Warren adequately
pointed out, and rightly so, you make a ton of money. I mean,
it is a ton of money.
Complaining about the $6 or $8 billion dollars and the
global things just is not computing for the people of Alabama,
where 80 percent of the hospitals that are in the 340B Program
are underwater, and we are losing our hospitals every day. They
are trying to stretch those Medicaid dollars every day.
I want to give you a chance to respond to that.
Ms. Reilly. Sure. In terms of what our companies spend on
advertising, it is less than $5 billion a year. I would note
that many hospitals also advertise, so I am sure they are proud
of the advertising that they do as well.
I want to be clear, and I said it at the outset of my
testimony, that we do not want the 340B Program to go away. I
think often our position is characterized as one that we think
it is a terrible program and it should go away; far from the
truth.
This Program was started because our companies had
voluntarily provided large discounts to public hospitals,
community health centers, and others. Passage of the Medicaid
Rebate statute created unintended consequences. Congress
stepped in and created this Program. There is nothing wrong
with this Program.
I think what we are saying is there needs to be rules about
how this Program operates. Our goal in providing deep discounts
is also to ensure that the patients who need them can actually
afford them.
Us providing a 50 percent discount, and an uninsured
patient walking into a hospital and paying full list price for
the medicine rings wrong to me and, I think, to many patients.
Senator Jones. Would you expect if the reforms that you
want to see implemented are, in fact, implemented, would you
expect to see the dollars, not the percentages, but would you
expect to see the total dollars of discounts provided go from
$8 billion less, or stay the same, or more?
Ms. Reilly. They could go down, but quite honestly, if you
froze the Program today and said that this is the dollar
amounts that we have to live with, our companies could live
with this.
I think the problem is what we have seen is the paradoxical
nature of the fact that over the past few years, we have
dramatically increased insurance coverage for patients.
Hospitals are spending less as a percentage of total expenses
on compensated care than they were years ago. They are spending
less on charity care.
If these resources are needed, and for many institutions
they absolutely are needed, but one would assume that
uncompensated care costs, charity costs, would be increasing.
If they are not increasing, then I think we have to ask the
questions: where are those dollars going and are they actually
going to patients to reduce their out of pocket costs? Which we
believe is a strong goal of the Program: let us help patients.
I would be very remiss in not saying that the grantees,
like community health centers that live under this program, are
operating under very different rules. A patient walks into a
community health center. They are charged on a sliding fee
scale. They have an obligation under Federal law to reinvest
the resources that they get from this Program back to helping
uninsured and vulnerable patients.
Those same requirements do not apply in the hospital
setting and we think that is a change that makes sense. If we
are going to hold grantees accountable for using these
resources in a certain way, certainly we should be holding
hospitals accountable for use of this Program in a similar way.
Senator Jones. Dr. Siegel, I notice your hand, but my time
is up.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your indulgence.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Jones.
Senator Young.
Senator Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Siegel, I would like to discuss the 340B Program. It
allows many hospitals, in my State of Indiana, to help some of
our most vulnerable and complex patients.
In your testimony, you describe how hospitals use their
340B savings, including free clinics, comprehensive services,
and other things.
How do you obtain this information from your hospitals?
Dr. Siegel. We ask them and they are glad to provide it.
Senator Young. Do you survey the hospitals? Is that how?
Dr. Siegel. No. We literally go to them, ``Tell us how you
are using your savings. Tell us what you are doing in your
community,'' and they are proud to talk about it.
Senator Young. Is there a form you fill out? How rigorous
is this?
Dr. Siegel. Some organizations have had forms, but we just
ask them to, ``Tell us what you are doing.''
I will also note that recently when the Energy and Commerce
Committee had hearings on this, hospitals were happy to provide
this information, including detailed financial information.
Senator Young. Well, I am not going to linger on that
question for a period of time. It strikes me as a bit loosey-
goosey.
Why can hospitals not report directly to us about how they
use their 340B dollars? If they are reporting to you, however
formal or informal that process might be, why can they not just
report it to us?
Dr. Siegel. I hear your concern about loosey-goosey and
there was some loosey-goosey just now when somebody used an
advertising number that does not really talk about all the
marketing that drug companies do.
Senator Young. I have no idea----
Dr. Siegel. I will leave that be.
Senator Young. Please address my question, please.
Dr. Siegel. We totally support transparency. We are leaders
in transparency. But I will say one thing.
Senator Young. You would support direct reporting?
Dr. Siegel. If we are going to have transparency in the
hospital industry on these issues, we need to have transparency
on the drug industry as well.
Senator Young. That is fair to go down that line of
questioning. That is not my line of questioning.
It sounds like we are just taking your word for it with
respect to the 340B's. Maybe you can disabuse me of this
notion, but if there is not direct reporting, and you are going
around, I cannot even use the word ``surveying''.
You are having conversations with hospitals about 340B
usage, and the data, and so forth. We are taking your word for
it. Right?
Dr. Siegel. Take your hospitals' words for it. Take the
word of people who spend every day in their community and
caring for people who really need these services.
Senator Young. We could take our hospitals' word for it
through direct reporting. Right?
Dr. Siegel. Any kind of direct reporting, any kind of
increased transparency has to have two things. One, it has to
be on all players. This needs to be a two-way street. We have a
black box on one side of this equation right now, which we are
not addressing.
Second, we need to make sure that any reporting we do is
not a backdoor----
Senator Young. ``We,'' meaning who?
Dr. Siegel. Government, policymakers, whoever requires
anything is not a backdoor way to restrict the Program, which
exactly what opponents of the Program want.
Because when we restrict a program through some backdoor
form, we are going to stick it to local taxpayers. We are going
to stick it to state government. We are going to stick it to
the Federal Government.
Senator Young. You regard yourself as a guardian, as the
gatekeeper and guardian at once of the 340B Program.
Dr. Siegel. Our hospitals are excellent stewards of this
Program and are proud of it.
Senator Young. I am going to essentially mention the rest
of the panel a number of times. I am going to open this up to
the entire panel.
What do you feel are responsible reporting requirements, so
we can properly oversee this Program and ensure vulnerable
patients are benefiting from it, No. 1? And what can be done to
have more transparency in the Program?
Ms. Reilly. I am happy to.
Senator Young. Yes, Ms. Reilly.
Ms. Reilly. Sure. I think, for one, having access to the
insurance status of the patients that are being seen. Not just
at the hospital, but also for the numerous offsite clinics that
participate in this Program who often have a patient mix that
looks very different from the hospital that ultimately
qualifies for the Program.
Reporting on charity care; again, not just for the
hospitals as a whole, but also for the individual sites that
participate.
We think that there should be transparency into the
contracts that hospitals enter into. So nonpublic hospitals,
those private hospitals that are not-for-profit, have a
requirement under law that in order to participate, they need
to have a contract with a state or local government, or they
need to be performing governmental powers.
Today, there is a black box in terms of those contracts.
Senator Young. Okay, so that is a black box. Thank you, Ms.
Reilly.
Ms. Veer.
Ms. Veer. Yes. As you know, health centers are held
accountable to reporting to HRSA on a variety of metrics.
Currently, 340B is not one of those, but I do think we are held
accountable.
Senator Young. Should it be?
Ms. Veer. I think there are ways to do that, but keep in
mind that there are a number of things that are not taken into
account.
For example, the reference to payer mix does not take into
account the large percentage of our patients that are insured,
but have high deductibles, high co-pays and they actually have
a low enough income to quality for our sliding fee scale.
Senator Young. Perhaps direct reporting, but provide that
context.
Ms. Veer. Provide context.
Senator Young. All right. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hill.
Mr. Hill. I think it would be an opportunity, frankly, for
covered entities to be able to tell their story and how they
care for patients. I think thus far, we have not done as good
of a job of telling that story.
One of the misconceptions on this Program is, I think,
people focus solely on the drug, and what they fail to account
for are all the services that go into serving a patient.
You may have a patient that cannot get to the hospital or
has to take a drug with three meals a day, only they do not eat
three meals a day, so they have to seek out a social worker.
These things probably, I think, could help the Program in
the long run if we were able to tell that story of, ``How do
you touch these patients?'' And, ``What are the things you do
to improve their care?''
Senator Young. All right. I think I am out of time here.
The Chairman. Yes.
Senator Young. We could dialog later.
Thank you so much.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Young.
Senator Casey.
Senator Casey. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
I want to thank the panel for your testimony and for your
presence here today.
In my home State of Pennsylvania, we have a long, long list
of hospitals that depend upon the 340B Drug Pricing Program. It
is not just a long list; it is a diverse list. We have, of
course, big cities like Philadelphia that have institutions
that are dependent upon this Program, but also small population
communities.
I just was going through a list this morning and looking at
everywhere from, it must be by way of population as small a
population as Potter County about 17,000 people, all the way to
Philly which is, of course, well over 1 million-and-a-half
people. So it is a critically important program.
Dr. Siegel, I am going to start with you and I am not sure
if we will get through more than this, but I wanted to focus on
those safety net hospitals and charity care, and just a very
specific and precise question. Let's give you the predicate
first.
There is a lot of discussion, and of course, proposed
legislation, that focuses on comparing the 340B savings that
are accrued by these safety net hospitals to the charity care
that they provide.
As you know, and others have spoken to this, I guess,
charity care has both a specific and very narrow meaning. It is
care that is provided to a patient or qualifies under the
hospital's charity care policy for free or reduced care. There
is much that is not captured by that measure.
For example, bad debt expenses or other uncompensated care
that was not reduced to bad debt.
Third, are unreimbursed costs for Medicaid and children's
health insurance.
Fourth, are subsidies that many safety net hospitals
provide to physicians to compensate them for losses incurred on
Medicaid beneficiaries and care provided to the uninsured. So
it is a much broader list of challenges.
In developing greater transparency in the 340B Program, and
a meaningful assessment of the degree of economic challenge
faced by these safety net hospitals, should we look to all
forms of economic contribution and burden facing those
participants, those hospitals rather than one specific measure
that does not accurately reflect the circumstances?
Dr. Siegel. Yes, Senator, we need to look at the full array
of benefits that hospitals can provide, thankfully, with the
340B Program supporting that; two quick examples from your
state.
If you look at Einstein Medical Center in Philadelphia,
because of the 340B Program, they can fill prescriptions for
discharged patients regardless of their ability to pay, help
them with post-discharge counseling, and eliminate access to
care issues. Keep them out of the hospitals. That saves us all
money. Keep them out of the emergency rooms.
That would not be necessarily captured in a charity care
metric. If I go to Temple, right down the street, a big trauma
center, they have to spend money out of the hospital's pockets
to pay doctors to take care of their patients because nobody
else is going to pay them.
Nobody is fighting for our patients. They just left us with
the burden and these are great examples of that.
These are both benefits, that I just mentioned, which would
not be captured in this narrow definition of charity care that
the opponents of the Program want to put forth as the only
measure of whether or not you are doing good stuff.
Senator Casey. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Casey.
Senator Cassidy.
Senator Cassidy. I am glad for a second shot at this, Mr.
Chairman.
Again, as a physician, let me just start over.
The emphasis should not be upon a hospital. The emphasis
should be upon a patient. We need to think as Senator Smith
did, what does it mean to a patient paying $16,000 a year? So,
Dr. Siegel, would you----
By the way, and just to emphasize, if we are speaking about
patients, this is some of the data I quoted, ``340B eligibility
prompted hospitals to treat fewer Medicaid patients. The
consolidation of practices associated with this has increased
prices without ostensibly improving quality consolidation
driven by 340B.'' That is data. It is not anecdote. It is not
rhetoric.
The ``New England Journal of Medicine'' article from the
University of Chicago and Harvard, ``Lawmakers could lower the
price of prescription drugs by reforming the Federal 340B Drug
Pricing Program.''
Lastly, from the University of Chicago, Memorial Sloan-
Kettering, ``It supports the criticism that the 340B Program is
converted from one that serves vulnerable patient populations
to one that enriches hospitals and their affiliated clinics.''
As regards hospitals, are they unable to survive without
this Program?
There is an Axios analysis of the 84 largest not-for-profit
hospitals, which I suspect maybe 100 percent of those are 340B
hospitals, and they found that cumulatively, they had $535.5
billion in annual revenue. Taking all things into account,
there was a 6.7 percent total profit margin.
It is not like these hospitals cannot make it work. They
are making it work very nicely. If you focus upon the patient,
this is driving up the cost.
Mr. Hill, would you support a law that said that the
discount associated with 340B pricing had to be passed on to
the patient? So that Senator Smith's patient paying $16,000 a
year--whatever per month--would get the 340B price, which may
be $2,000 instead of the $16,000? Would you support such a law?
Mr. Hill. Senator, I think our potential concern with that
approach is that although we completely understand passing
along the discount to the patient, I think our concern is that
what has to be sacrificed on the care side in order to do that.
Senator Cassidy. Going back to it, ostensibly, 340B is
about lowering costs and making medicines more available, and
we have heard data that indeed 340B hospitals may be less
likely to treat Medicaid patients.
By the way, here is an article from the Office of the
Inspector General, that some 340B entities do not even offer
the discounted 340B price to uninsured patients and any of
their contract pharmacies. They make them pay the full list
price.
Now, if you are the patient, and as we heard, you are the
sick person supporting the system, you would not support them
being forced to pass that discount onto the patient, the
uninsured patient?
Mr. Hill. I think we would have to look at it closely to
make sure that the----
Senator Cassidy. Dr. Siegel, would you support just
allowing the uninsured patient to get the discount that the
hospital is currently reaping?
Dr. Siegel. Our hospitals often go beyond that discount.
Senator Cassidy. No, but would you support a law that would
require those hospitals to pass that discount on to the
uninsured patient who is paying thousands of dollars for a drug
the hospital is acquiring for a fraction of that cost?
Dr. Siegel. I am much more worried about drug prices. I am
much more worried----
Senator Cassidy. Yes or no. Somehow I am talking about----
Just a yes or no, would you support a law that would
require the hospitals to pass their 340B discount to the
uninsured patient?
Dr. Siegel. Cannot support or oppose it without knowing
more.
Senator Cassidy. That settles that.
Dr. Siegel. Cannot support or oppose it either way without
knowing more.
Senator Cassidy. Well, I had some other questions.
I think this is more about the hospitals than it is about
the patients. That is the crazy thing here. And everybody
speaks about----
Believe me, since the Affordable Care Act passed--and for
all of you who love the Affordable Care Act, I am not taking
shots--the market cap value of pharma, hospitals, and insurance
companies has skyrocketed. Just look it up.
Now that said, again, even not-for-profits are doing so
well that ``The Wall Street Journal'' says, ``They are behaving
like Fortune 500 companies.'' This is ``The Wall Street
Journal'' based on an Axios report, ``Not like nonprofit
hospitals.''
Last, Mr. Hill, Chuck Grassley asked, I think, the Carolina
Medical Center in Charlotte to report how they used their 340B,
transparency, and how they used their 340B revenue.
Do you think your members would report how they used 340B?
What percentage of their profit is related to 340B? How much
goes back to direct patient care and how much goes to just
profit margin of a contract pharmacy?
Mr. Hill. We are open to having this discussion. Again, it
goes back to being able to tell the story and to demonstrate
what you do with the discounts.
We do not have a formal position yet, but we are having, at
least, some internal discussions on how something like that
might work. So we are open to discussing it.
Senator Cassidy. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cassidy.
Senator Baldwin.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have long supported the 340B Program. It is critical for
about 71 hospitals in my home State of Wisconsin. They rely on
it to help provide affordable medications, as well as essential
services for their vulnerable, and often rural, communities.
One of our rural hospitals in Wisconsin told me that thanks
to their 340B savings, they have been able to expand a remote
dispensing site in Mountain, Wisconsin, which otherwise does
not have a pharmacy at all anywhere in the community.
It is important to strengthen and improve this Program to
ensure it continues to fulfill its purpose, which is why I am
concerned with recent actions by the Administration and
proposals that unfairly single out and target hospitals for
cuts under the 340B Program.
A hospital pharmacist in Madison, Wisconsin recently told
me that 340B is vital to the hospital's bottom line and lets
him focus on what is best for his patients.
Not long ago, his hospital treated a woman for anaphylactic
shock after she was exposed to an unknown chemical at work. She
said she had to get back to work or she would be fired. So he
wrote her a prescription for an EpiPen, in case she had another
exposure. But she could not afford the $400 price because she
was uninsured.
The 340B Program allowed her to receive this lifesaving
medication for free.
Dr. Siegel, can you discuss why the 340B Program is
financially critical in helping hospitals focus on delivering
quality care, while bearing the burden of high drug prices and
all the costs of treating low income and uninsured patients?
Dr. Siegel. Thank you, Senator.
The 340B Program, which includes only public and nonprofit
hospitals--I want to be clear about that--is a vital piece of
the fabric to allow our hospitals to perform exactly the
mission you talked about. And do that in an era when, in the
last 10 years, they have seen the price of the EpiPen
quadruple.
It was created initially, this Program, to deal with
exactly the issue of rising, surging drug prices and their
impact on hospitals.
This discount, which is a little over 1 percent of the
total national drug spend--that is what we are talking about
here today--is absolutely critical in these very targeted
approaches, and we have got to defend it.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you.
Ms. Reilly, I share your concern with high drug prices, and
agree with you that we need to do more to advance commonsense
reporting and accountability measures to better understand drug
spending.
You noted your support for legislation introduced by my
colleague, Senator Cassidy, requiring more hospital
transparency under the 340B Program. But my constituent, Diane,
who suffers from M.S., wants to know more about why drug
companies are raising the prices of prescription drugs.
As you know, I have championed bipartisan legislation with
Senator John McCain, the Fair Drug Pricing Act, that holds drug
companies accountable to basic transparency when they raise
their prices.
I ask you, do you support advancing my bipartisan bill to
help Diane better understand the rising prices and to enhance
accountability for drug companies as part of this larger
discussion about accountability and transparency?
Ms. Reilly. Well, I think the point about transparency is
an important one, and I think what we have been consistency
saying is we support transparency that is holistic across our
healthcare system.
Drugs are sold in many different forms. In the case of
hospitals, we know from recent data that hospitals are marking
up a drug--that they purchased for one price--500 percent, and
then getting reimbursed two-and-a-half times more than the
manufacturer.
We need transparency there as well.
Senator Baldwin. You are the representative for PhRMA, and
so I am really asking about transparency with the drug
corporations.
Would you support additional transparency, like the Fair
Drug Pricing Act?
Ms. Reilly. We are open to talking about different
transparency measures. Again, I think part of our ground rule
is if we are going to have transparency, we need to have it
holistically across the system. It does not make sense to focus
on one piece of a larger supply chain when it comes to
prescription drugs.
I would also say that, with regard to prescription drug
prices, last year they increased by 2.5 percent, well below
what they have been in recent years. I think oftentimes when
people look at price increases, they are looking at list or
sticker price increases, which are not net of the significant
rebates and discounts that we provide.
Senator Baldwin. But I look at the stories of my
constituents who come and tell me about their out of pocket
costs. And Diane, who I just mentioned, saw her M.S. drug go up
to $90,000 a year.
Ms. Reilly. Well, I would very much agree with you that out
of pocket costs for patients today need to be examined.
We have a perversity of insurance going on in this country
where patients who need drugs, like M.S., rheumatoid arthritis
drugs, are being asked to pay oftentimes 40 percent of a list
price of a medicine, which is not reflective of the rich
discounts that are provided on those medicines. And they also
face very high deductibles before they can get access, and that
is not our goal for a healthcare system.
We want patients to be able to afford and access our
medicine.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Baldwin.
Ms. Reilly, is it correct that the savings, the discounted
savings that is available to the hospitals and the clinics
amounted to about $6 billion in 2015 and you said about $8
billion in 2017?
Ms. Reilly. Yes, in 2016, correct, $8 billion in discounts.
The Chairman. Just so I can keep all of this in
perspective, so that would be about 1 or 1.3 percent of the
$457 billion figure from 2015 of what Americans spent on
prescription drugs in this country.
Ms. Reilly. Well, I would say the problem with that number
is a couple of things.
The Chairman. Is that right? Well, what is wrong with it?
Ms. Reilly. Yes, let me explain.
The $457 billion that is often used was a projected number.
It was not actual spend.
The Chairman. All right. What was the number?
Ms. Reilly. It was in the $390 billion range, I believe. It
was projected.
The Chairman. The total amount spent on prescription drugs
in the United States in 2015 was three?
Ms. Reilly. Three. I will get you the exact number.
The Chairman. Well, I would like to know.
Ms. Reilly. But it is a high three.
The Chairman. Well, what was it last year?
Ms. Reilly. In 2016, it was $323 billion.
The Chairman. Three hundred.
Ms. Reilly. It was $323 billion in 2016.
The Chairman. Okay. Who is the source for that?
Ms. Reilly. That is a report from IQVIA, which is an IMS
subsidiary that tracks data.
The Chairman. What are all those numbers?
Ms. Reilly. $323 billion in actual sales in 2016. That
includes all sales, brand and generic.
The Chairman. All sales within the United States?
Ms. Reilly. Correct. All sales within the United States.
The 1 percent number, again, not only is the number that
was used an estimated number, it also does not include all of
the sales that are sold, the discounted number that you
mentioned, the $6 billion. It does not exclude direct sales
that pharmaceutical companies make to hospitals, about 10
percent of all fills is 340B.
The Chairman. But that is not 340B, is it?
Ms. Reilly. Yes.
The Chairman. What is the number that you would like us to
use?
Ms. Reilly. Well, we believe 8 percent is the right number
for 2016 and let me explain why we believe that is the case.
The Chairman. Well, just give me the numbers, not the
percent.
Ms. Reilly. Okay. If you look at apples to apples
comparison, we use a $28 billion figure for 2016 and that is at
the WAC price or the list price.
The Chairman. That is the total sales----
Ms. Reilly. Sales.
The Chairman.----of drugs subject to a discount, subject to
a 340B discount.
Ms. Reilly. Subject to a 340B discount, and that is an
important point. As you know, inpatient drugs are not subject
to 340B.
The Chairman. Of that $28 billion, how much was the actual
savings?
Ms. Reilly. It would be about half of that because the
discounts are, on average, 50 percent. Sometimes they are 99
percent and sometimes they are 30 percent.
The Chairman. Half of $28 billion; so $14 billion.
Ms. Reilly. Correct, at the WAC price or list price, but
yes.
The Chairman. Those are public sources from the
pharmaceutical companies?
Ms. Reilly. They are estimates based on HRSA data.
The Chairman. Those are based on HRSA data.
Ms. Reilly. Correct.
The Chairman. Dr. Siegel, do you disagree with the $14
billion discounted number?
Dr. Siegel. I do, sir.
The Chairman. What is your evidence for disagreement?
Dr. Siegel. Yes, so this sort of sounds like the new math
that my kids were learning.
The Chairman. No, no. Do not give me a joke. Tell me what
your evidence is for disagreement.
Dr. Siegel. We use numbers that come from HRSA. We use
numbers that were reported to GAO.
The Chairman. Well, give me the numbers.
Dr. Siegel. 1.3 percent. The $6 billion discount on a $457
billion spent nationally, 1.3 percent. That is the number that
has been used again, and again, and again.
The Chairman. She said that is an estimate, not a fact.
Ms. Reilly. It is projected sales.
Dr. Siegel. This is, much of this is news to me, sir. I
have not reviewed her numbers.
The Chairman. You do not know. So you do not know what the
number is and you are representing the hospitals.
Dr. Siegel. Oh, I do know. I go----
The Chairman. Well, but you do not know whether it is an
estimate or whether it is a fact.
Dr. Siegel. I cannot question numbers which I have just
seen here for the first time.
The Chairman. Yes, but do you know whether the number you
just used is an estimate or a fact?
Dr. Siegel. I believe it is a fact.
The Chairman. Yes. She says it is an estimate.
Dr. Siegel. I disagree with her.
The Chairman. But you said you did not know.
Ms. Reilly. It is from ASPE. It is an estimate based on
spending.
The Chairman. May I ask you each to provide me with? I
would like to know what percent of the amount Americans spend
on prescription drugs is available to safety net hospitals and
to clinics for the purposes of 340B, whether it is $6 billion,
whether it is $8 billion, whether it is $14 billion, and what
percent it is of the total amount we spend.
If it is 1 or 2 percent, you could think of that either
way. You could say, ``Well, that is just a tax on the
pharmaceutical companies that we are spending for a good
purpose.'' If it is 6 or 8 percent, you would have to say,
``That is a pretty big tax on a pharmaceutical or on any
business,'' particularly on revenues for that purpose.
I would like to get those figures right.
Do either of you have any more concrete evidence on those?
Or are those the two people I should ask about that?
Ms. Veer. I would say I actually have questions about the
numbers, but I will follow-up with my fellow panelists on that.
The Chairman. Yes.
Ms. Veer. Just because I am not sure I understand clearly,
for example, the $28 billion. Is that accounting for wholesaler
volume points and that type of thing?
The Chairman. Well, we will get into that.
Ms. Veer. Yes.
The Chairman. But if you would provide us the evidence. I
mean, one of the things that this hearing would like to do is
to establish some facts upon which we can make some decisions.
Now, the second question would be, Ms. Veer, I gather
because of the various rules that apply to community health
centers--in fact, I met with a whole bunch of them in my office
this morning before I came here--I asked them the question
about, ``How much of the discount money available to you goes
directly to the patient who is buying a prescription drug?''
The guess was about 80 percent. They said, ``We guess about
80 percent of the savings available goes directly to the
patient and the rest we use for other expenses at the community
health center.''
Does that sound right or do you know of some evidence that
would show what that number would be?
Ms. Veer. I do not know that we could point to an exact
number. I guess my philosophical response would be: all of it
goes to the patients because, quite frankly, when you----
The Chairman. No. I am talking about going to the patient
when the prescription drug is filled, does it reduce the cost
of the drug to X amount?
If 100 percent of it goes to that, what percent of the
money goes to that and what percent goes to, say, paying
salaries at the community health center or for other functions?
Ms. Veer. That is a great question and I think it differs
from health center to health center. I can give you the example
at my health center.
The Chairman. Sure.
Ms. Veer. We operate on a net margin idea with regard to
how we use our savings. So last year, 2016, the end of year our
savings were $561,620. Previous to that, we have discounted the
drug to the patient on a cost-plus basis.
For example, we pass on the savings of the ingredient cost
of the drug and charge a highly discounted dispensing fee.
Out of that $561,000 the majority of that goes to things
like affordable prescription programs, some of the things Mr.
Hill mentioned about the clinical services that are available
to help promote----
The Chairman. Well, I understand, but what I am getting at
is when Congress passed the law in 1992, it did not say that
the money has to be used solely to reduce the price of a
prescription drug when a patient comes in and buys one.
Correct?
Ms. Veer. Correct.
The Chairman. Most of what this hearing is about is what
the hospitals, and to a lesser extent, I think, the clinics do
with the other money. I mean, that is what people are asking
questions about.
My sense is that because of the variety of regulations on
clinics, probably most of the money you get goes back directly
to the patient for the cost of prescription drugs. Not to say
that the other services you provide are not beneficial to that
patient.
But I think one thing that I would like to have more
information on is: how much of the discounted savings goes
directly to the patient who walks in the door with a
prescription?
Now, what would you estimate, Dr. Siegel, that would be at
hospitals, at safety net hospitals?
Dr. Siegel. I do not have an estimate for that.
The Chairman. Would anybody have an estimate for that?
Dr. Siegel. I do not know.
The Chairman. We do not have any idea? So we do not know
how much of the money goes directly to patients or how much is
spent for other services that, presumably, benefit patients?
Would that not be something we should know?
Dr. Siegel. I think that is something we should know along
with many other things we should know about this program, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. Well, what are the other things?
Dr. Siegel. As I noted before, if we want to have more
transparency, let us make sure that all of us who are partners
in this Program, I hope, live to that same level.
The Chairman. Yes, but that is called passing the buck. I
think what we need to understand is how much? What I want to
know is----
I am very sympathetic to the 340B Program and the role of
safety net hospitals. I think our community health clinics do a
magnificent job of primary healthcare in our state and, I
suspect, all over the country.
I suspect that the so-called tax we put on prescription
drugs--in order to provide some extra funds for safety net
hospitals and clinics--is something that I would approve of,
but I think it is a reasonable question to ask.
If the money is not going directly to lower the cost of the
specific prescription that is filled, where is it going or what
categories of things is it paying for?
That could lead to the question of whether we should
restrict that to some extent or another, which most hospitals
and clinics would not like for us to do. But I would think one
way to avoid the restrictions would be to help us know better
what the money is going for.
If it is $6 or $8 billion in discounted savings, surely at
the clinics more than half of it is going directly to the
prescriptions to the patients. I am just guessing that.
That only leaves $2, or $3, or $4 billion throughout this
whole huge system that would go to things other than lowering
the cost of the prescription that is being purchased at the
moment.
Do you think it is reasonable, Dr. Siegel, to explore
legislation, if necessary, that would ask hospitals and
clinics, who receive 340B discounts, to tell us what they are
using the money for?
Dr. Siegel. I would be concerned about legislation that
only singles out hospitals and clinics----
The Chairman. Well, who would you single out?
Dr. Siegel.----rather than the full range of the Program
including our partners in the drug manufacturing industry.
I am concerned about legislation that would serve to
intentionally, or unintentionally, begin to restrict the
Program.
The Chairman. Yes. I think you are passing the buck. That
is not a very good answer to me, and you are talking to
somebody who is very sympathetic to you.
Why should I not want to know why a discounted program,
that benefits hospitals and clinics, what the money is going
for? I can ask the pharmaceutical companies all the questions I
want to ask them, and I ask the pharmacists questions, and I
can ask other people questions too, but I can ask you questions
as well.
Why should I not know that and other Senators, especially
those of us who are sympathetic to what you are doing?
Dr. Siegel. As I support transparency, we think we embrace
it. We want to make sure that any transparency is some way
respecting the Program, which we care deeply about.
The Chairman. Well, first, we would like to know what you
are spending the money for, then we can decide if there is any
need or any rationale for restricting the spending for.
The hospital heads I have talked to very vehemently say,
``We are using the money to help people.''
Dr. Siegel. Yes.
The Chairman. ``And we lose a lot more in uncompensated
care.'' Well, if that is true, that is a good story to tell.
But if you come up here and say, ``Well, we cannot tell you
because we do not know, and we do not really want to tell you
until you ask everybody else a whole bunch of questions.'' That
is not a very good answer for me.
What I would appreciate asking you in follow-up questions
is if you could consider, please, both for the hospitals and
for the clinics, giving whatever information you think already
is available about how much money, how much of the savings, how
much of the discount goes for something other than reducing the
price of the specific prescription when the patient shows up at
the hospital or clinic. How much is that?
Then, the second question would be, what are the uses of
the money that does not go for the specific prescription, to
the extent you know what that is?
Ms. Reilly, I would like to have a good, clear
understanding of what the size of the discount is.
Dr. Siegel, if you would like to give your version of that
too, I would welcome it so that I would be able to operate on
if that it is 1 percent, or 2 percent, or 8 percent, or 4
percent of the total revenues of prescription drugs.
This has been very helpful to me, and I thank you for
reasonable questions, and lots of support for safety net
hospitals, and community mental health clinics, and the work
that you do. We want to make sure that we are good stewards of
this money and having that information would help us do it.
The hearing record will remain open for 10 days. Members
may submit additional information for the record within the
time, if they would like.
The Chairman. Thank you for being here.
The Committee will stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:47 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[all]